566
C H A P T E R  12	 The Heart
cardiomyopathy can be elicited in mouse models 
by increased levels of circulating antiangiogenic media-
tors including vascular endothelial growth factor inhibi-
tors (e.g., sFLT1, as occurs with preeclampsia) or 
antiangiogenic cleavage products of the hormone pro-
lactin (which rises late in pregnancy). Proangiogenic 
approaches, including the blockade of prolactin secre-
tion by bromocriptine, represent new therapeutic strate-
gies for treating this disease.
•	 Iron overload in the heart can result from either heredi-
tary hemochromatosis (Chapter 18) or from multiple 
transfusions. DCM is the most common manifestation 
of such iron excess, and may be caused by interference 
with metal-dependent enzyme systems or to injury 
from iron-mediated production of reactive oxygen 
species.
•	 Supraphysiologic stress can also result in DCM. This can 
happen with persistent tachycardia, hyperthyroidism, 
or even during development, as in the fetuses of insulin-
dependent diabetic mothers. Excess catecholamines, in 
particular, may result in multifocal myocardial con­
traction band necrosis that can eventually progress to 
DCM. This can happen in individuals with pheochromo-
cytomas, tumors that elaborate epinephrine (Chapter 24); 
use of cocaine or vasopressor agents such as dopamine 
can have similar consequences. Such “catecholamine 
effect” also occurs in the setting of intense autonomic 
stimulation, for example, secondary to intracranial 
possibility that ethanol toxicity (Chapter 9) or a second-
ary nutritional disturbance can underlie myocardial 
injury. Alcohol or its metabolites (especially acet­
aldehyde) have a direct toxic effect on the myocar­
dium. Moreover, chronic alcoholism may be associated 
with thiamine deficiency, which can lead to beriberi 
heart disease (also indistinguishable from DCM). 
Neverthe­less, no morphologic features serve to distin-
guish alcoholic cardiomyopathy from DCM of other causes.
In other cases, some other toxic insult can progress 
to eventual myocardial failure. Particularly important is 
myocardial injury caused by certain chemotherapeutic 
agents, including doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and even 
targeted cancer therapeutics (e.g., tyrosine kinase inhib-
itors). Cobalt is an example of a heavy metal with car-
diotoxicity and has caused DCM in the setting of 
inadvertent tainting (e.g., in beer production).
•	 Childbirth. A special form of DCM, termed peripartum 
cardiomyopathy, can occur late in pregnancy or up 
to months postpartum. The mechanism underlying 
this entity is poorly understood but is probably multi­
factorial. Pregnancy-associated hypertension, volume 
overload, 
nutritional 
deficiency, 
other 
metabolic 
de­rangements, or an as yet poorly characterized immu­
nological reaction have been proposed as causes. Recent 
work suggests that the primary defect is a microvascu-
lar angiogenic imbalance within the myo­cardium 
leading to functional ischemic injury. Thus, peripartum 
Figure 12-30  Schematic of a myocyte, showing key proteins mutated in dilated cardiomyopathy (red labels), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (blue labels), or both 
(green labels). Mutations in titin (the largest known human protein at approximately 30,000 amino acids) account for approximately 20% of all dilated cardio-
myopathy. Titin spans the sarcomere and connects the Z and M bands thereby limiting the passive range of motion of the sarcomere as it is stretched. Titin 
also functions like a molecular spring, with domains that unfold when the protein is stretched and refold when the tension is removed, thereby impacting the 
passive elasticity of striated muscle. 
δ
δ
Laminin α-2
Dystroglycans
Dystrophin
Z-disc
Dystrophin-associated
glycoproteins
Extracellular matrix
Plasma membrane
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
Chromatin
Emerin
δ-Sarcoglycan
Actin
Desmin
Mitochondrial
proteins
Titin
Myosin
binding
protein C
Myosin light
chains
α-Tropomyosin
Troponin I/T
β-Myosin
heavy chain
Lamin A/C
567
Cardiomyopathies
Figure 12-31  Causes and consequences of dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Some dilated cardiomyopathies and virtually all hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathies are genetic in origin. The genetic causes of dilated cardiomyopathy involve mutations in any of a wide range of genes. They encode proteins pre-
dominantly of the cytoskeleton, but also the sarcomere, mitochondria, and nuclear envelope. In contrast, all of the mutated genes that cause hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy encode proteins of the sarcomere. Although these two forms of cardiomyopathy differ greatly in subcellular basis and morphologic phenotypes, 
they share a common set of clinical complications. LV, left ventricle. 
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
20-50% genetic causes
Non-genetic causes
 • Myocarditis
 • Peri partum
 • Toxic (e.g., alcohol)
 • Idiopathic
Various proteins,
predominantly related
to cytoskeleton (from
nucleus to sarcomere
to cell membrane to
adjacent myocytes)
or mitochondria
• Hypertrophy
• Dilation
• Fibrosis, interstitial
• Intracardiac thrombi
Dilated cardiomyopathy
phenotype
• Heart failure
• Sudden death
• Atrial fibrilation
• Stroke
Clinical
Defect in force generation,
force transmission, and/or
myocyte signaling
100% genetic causes
Sarcomeric proteins
• Hypertrophy, marked
• Asymmetrical septal hypertrophy
• Myofiber disarray
• Fibrosis, interstitial and
     replacement
• LV outflow tract plaque
• Thickened septal vessels
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
phenotype
Defect in energy transfer from
mitochondria to sarcomere and/or
direct sarcomeric dysfunction
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
lesions or emotional duress. Thus, takotsubo cardiomyopa-
thy is an entity characterized by left ventricular contrac-
tile dysfunction following extreme psychological stress; 
affected myocardium may be stunned or show multi­
focal contraction band necrosis. For unclear reasons, 
the left ventricular apex is most often affected leading 
to “apical ballooning” that resembles a “takotsubo,” 
Japanese for “fishing pot for trapping octopus” (hence, 
the name).
The mechanism of catecholamine cardiotoxicity is 
uncertain, but likely relates either to direct myocyte 
toxicity due to calcium overload or to focal vasoconstric-
tion in the coronary arterial macro- or microcirculation 
in the face of an increased heart rate. Similar changes 
may be encountered in individuals who have recovered 
from hypotensive episodes or have been resuscitated 
from a cardiac arrest; in such cases, the damage is a 
result of ischemia-reperfusion (see earlier) with subse-
quent inflammation.
  MORPHOLOGY
In DCM the heart is usually enlarged, heavy (often weighing two 
to three times normal), and flabby, due to dilation of all cham-
bers (Fig. 12-32). Mural thrombi are common and may be a 
source of thromboemboli. There are no primary valvular altera-
tions; if mitral (or tricuspid) regurgitation is present, it results 
from left (or right) ventricular chamber dilation (functional 
regurgitation). Either the coronary arteries are free of significant 
narrowing or the obstructions present are insufficient to explain 
the degree of cardiac dysfunction.
The histologic abnormalities in DCM are nonspecific 
and usually do not point to a specific etiology. Most 
muscle cells are hypertrophied with enlarged nuclei, but some 
are attenuated, stretched, and irregular. Interstitial and endo-
cardial fibrosis of variable degree is present, and small suben-
docardial scars may replace individual cells or groups of cells, 
probably reflecting healing of previous ischemic necrosis of 
myocytes caused by hypertrophy-induced imbalance between 
perfusion and demand. Moreover, the severity of morphologic 
changes may not reflect either the degree of dysfunction or the 
patient’s prognosis.
Clinical Features.  DCM can occur at any age, including 
in childhood, but it most commonly affects individuals 
between the ages of 20 and 50. It presents with slowly 
progressive signs and symptoms of CHF including 
dyspnea, easy fatigability, and poor exertional capacity. 
At the end stage, ejection fractions are typically less than 
25% (normal = 50% to 65%). Secondary mitral regurgitation 
and abnormal cardiac rhythms are common, and embolism 
from intracardiac thrombi can occur. Death usually results 
from progressive cardiac failure or arrhythmia, and can 
occur suddenly. Although the annual mortality is high 
(10% to 50%), some severely affected patients respond well 
to pharmacologic therapy. Cardiac transplantation is also 
568
C H A P T E R  12	 The Heart
Figure 12-33  Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. A, Gross photograph, showing dilation of the right ventricle and near-transmural replacement 
of the right ventricular free-wall by fat and fibrosis. The left ventricle has a virtually normal configuration in this case, but can also be involved by the disease 
process. B, Histologic section of the right ventricular free wall, demonstrating replacement of myocardium (red) by fibrosis (blue, arrow) and fat (Masson tri-
chrome stain). 
B
A
fatty infiltration and fibrosis (Fig. 12-33). Although myo-
cardial inflammation may be present, ARVC is not consid-
ered an inflammatory cardiomyopathy. Classical ARVC 
has autosomal dominant inheritance with a variable pen-
etrance. The disease has been attributed to defective cell 
adhesion proteins in the desmosomes that link adjacent 
cardiac myocytes. Naxos syndrome is a disorder character-
ized by arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy 
and hyperkeratosis of plantar palmar skin surfaces specifi-
cally associated with mutations in the gene encoding the 
desmosome-associated protein plakoglobin.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common 
(incidence, 1 in 500), clinically heterogeneous, genetic 
increasingly performed, and long-term ventricular assist 
can be beneficial. Interestingly, in some patients, relatively 
short-term mechanical cardiac support can induce durable 
improvement of cardiac function.
Arrhythmogenic Right  
Ventricular Cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is 
an inherited disease of myocardium causing right ventricu-
lar failure and rhythm disturbances (particularly ventricu-
lar tachycardia or fibrillation) with sudden death. Left-sided 
involvement with left-sided heart failure may also occur. 
Morphologically, the right ventricular wall is severely 
thinned due to loss of myocytes, accompanied by extensive 
Figure 12-32  Dilated cardiomyopathy. A, Four-chamber dilatation and hypertrophy are evident. There is a mural thrombus (arrow) at the apex of the left ventricle 
(on the right in this apical four-chamber view). The coronary arteries were patent. B, Histologic section demonstrating variable myocyte hypertrophy and 
interstitial fibrosis (collagen is highlighted as blue in this Masson trichrome stain). 
A
B
569
Cardiomyopathies
disorder characterized by myocardial hypertrophy, 
poorly compliant left ventricular myocardium leading to 
abnormal diastolic filling, and (in about one third of 
cases) intermittent ventricular outflow obstruction. It is 
the leading cause of left ventricular hypertrophy unex-
plained by other clinical or pathologic causes. The heart is 
thick-walled, heavy, and hypercontracting, in striking con-
trast to the flabby, hypocontracting heart of DCM. HCM 
causes primarily diastolic dysfunction; systolic function is 
usually preserved. The two most common diseases that 
must be distinguished clinically from HCM are deposition 
diseases (e.g., amyloidosis, Fabry disease) and hyperten-
sive heart disease coupled with age-related subaortic septal 
hypertrophy (see earlier discussion under Hypertensive 
Heart Disease). Occasionally, valvular or congenital sub-
valvular aortic stenosis can also mimic HCM.
Pathogenesis.  In most cases, the pattern of transmission is 
autosomal dominant with variable penetrance. HCM is 
caused by mutations in any one of several genes that 
encode sarcomeric proteins; there are more than 400 differ-
ent known mutations in nine different genes, most being 
missense mutations. Mutations causing HCM are found 
most commonly in the gene encoding β-myosin heavy 
chain (β-MHC), followed by the genes coding for cardiac 
TnT, α-tropomyosin, and myosin-binding protein C 
(MYBP-C); overall, these account for 70% to 80% of all 
cases. Different affected families may have distinct muta-
tions involving the same protein. For example, approxi-
mately 50 different mutations of β-MHC are known to 
cause HCM. The prognosis of HCM varies widely and cor-
relates strongly with specific mutations. Although it is 
clear that these genetic defects are critical to the etiology of 
HCM, the sequence of events leading from mutations to 
disease is still poorly understood. 
As discussed above, HCM is a disease caused by muta-
tions in proteins of the sarcomere. Although such sarco-
meric alterations have been thought to be pathologic on the 
basis of abnormal cardiac contraction causing a secondary 
compensatory hypertrophy, newer evidence suggests that 
HCM may instead arise from defective energy transfer 
  MORPHOLOGY
The essential feature of HCM is massive myocardial hyper­
trophy, usually without ventricular dilation (Fig. 12-34). The 
classic pattern involves disproportionate thickening of the ven-
tricular septum relative to the left ventricle free wall (with a ratio 
of septum to free wall greater than 3 : 1), termed asymmetric 
septal hypertrophy. In about 10% of cases, the hypertrophy 
is concentric and symmetrical. On longitudinal sectioning, the 
normally round-to-ovoid left ventricular cavity may be com-
pressed into a “banana-like” configuration by bulging of the 
ventricular septum into the lumen (Fig. 12-34A). Although 
marked hypertrophy can involve the entire septum, it is usually 
most prominent in the subaortic region. The left ventricular 
outflow tract often exhibits a fibrous endocardial plaque associ-
ated with thickening of the anterior mitral leaflet. Both findings 
result from contact of the anterior mitral leaflet with the septum 
during ventricular systole; they correlate with the echocardio-
graphic “systolic anterior motion” of the anterior leaflet, with 
functional left ventricular outflow tract obstruction during 
mid-systole.
The most important histologic features of HCM myocardium 
are (1) massive myocyte hypertrophy, with transverse myocyte 
diameters frequently greater than 40 µm (normal, approximately 
15 µm); (2) haphazard disarray of bundles of myocytes, indi-
vidual myocytes, and contractile elements in sarcomeres within 
cells (termed myofiber disarray); and (3) interstitial and 
replacement fibrosis (Fig. 12-34B).
from its source of generation (mitochondria) to its site of 
use (sarcomeres). In addition, the interstitial fibrosis in 
HCM probably occurs secondary to exaggerated responses 
of the myocardial fibroblasts to the primary myocardial 
dysfunction. In contrast, DCM is mostly associated with 
abnormalities of cytoskeletal proteins (Fig. 12-30), and can 
be conceptualized as a disease of abnormal force genera-
tion, force transmission, or myocyte signaling. To compli-
cate matters, mutations in certain genes, depicted in Figure 
12-30, can give rise to either HCM or DCM, depending on 
the site and nature of the mutation.
A
B
Figure 12-34  Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with 
asymmetric septal hypertrophy. A, The septal 
muscle bulges into the left ventricular outflow 
tract, and the left atrium is enlarged. The anterior 
mitral leaflet has been reflected away from the 
septum to reveal a fibrous endocardial plaque 
(arrow) (see text). B, Histologic appearance dem-
onstrating myocyte disarray, extreme hypertro-
phy, and exaggerated myocyte branching, as 
well as the characteristic interstitial fibrosis (col-
lagen is blue in this Masson trichrome stain). 
570
C H A P T E R  12	 The Heart
causes a restrictive functional defect. Ventricular mural 
thrombi sometimes develop, and indeed the endocar-
dial fibrosis may result from thrombus organization. 
The etiology is unknown.
•	 Loeffler endomyocarditis also results in endomyocardial 
fibrosis, typically with large mural thrombi, with an 
overall morphology similar to the tropical disease. 
However, in addition to the cardiac changes, there is 
often a peripheral eosinophilia and eosinophilic infil-
trates in multiple organs, including the heart. The 
release of toxic products of eosinophils, especially major 
basic protein, is postulated to initiate endomyocardial 
necrosis, followed by scarring of the necrotic area, layer-
ing of the endocardium by thrombus, and finally orga-
nization of the thrombus. Many patients with Loeffler 
endomyocarditis have a myeloproliferative disorder 
associated with chromosomal rearrangements involv-
ing either the platelet-derived growth factor receptor 
(PDGFR)-α or -β genes (Chapter 13). These rearrange-
ments produce fusion genes that encode constitutively 
active PDGFR tyrosine kinases. Treatment of such 
patients with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib has 
resulted in hematologic remissions associated with 
reversal of the endomyocarditis, which is otherwise 
often rapidly fatal.
•	 Endocardial fibroelastosis is an uncommon heart disease 
characterized by fibroelastic thickening that typically 
involves the left ventricular endocardium. It is most 
common in the first 2 years of life; in a third of cases, it 
is accompanied by aortic valve obstruction or other con-
genital cardiac anomalies. Endocardial fibroelastosis 
may actually represent a common morphologic end-
point of several different insults including viral infec-
tions (e.g., intrauterine exposure to mumps) or mutations 
in the gene for tafazzin, which affects mitochondrial 
inner membrane integrity. Diffuse involvement may be 
responsible for rapid and progressive cardiac decom-
pensation and death.
Myocarditis
Myocarditis is a diverse group of pathologic entities 
in which infectious microorganisms and/or a primary 
inflammatory process cause myocardial injury. Myocarditis 
should be distinguished from conditions such as ischemic 
heart disease, where myocardial inflammation is second-
ary to other causes.
Pathogenesis.  In the United States, viral infections are the 
most common cause of myocarditis. Coxsackie viruses A 
and B and other enteroviruses probably account for most 
of the cases. Other less common etiologic agents include 
cytomegalovirus, HIV, and influenza (Table 12-13). In 
some (but not all) cases, the responsible virus can be ascer-
tained by serologic studies or by identifying viral nucleic 
acid sequences in myocardial biopsies. Depending on 
the pathogen and the host, viruses can potentially cause 
myocardial injury either as a direct cytopathic effect, or 
by eliciting a destructive immune response. Inflammatory 
cytokines produced in response to myocardial injury can 
also cause myocardial dysfunction that is out of proportion 
to the degree of actual myocyte damage.
Clinical Features.  The central abnormality in HCM is 
reduced stroke volume due to impaired diastolic filling. 
This is a consequence of a reduced chamber size, as well 
as the reduced compliance of the massively hypertrophied 
left ventricle. In addition, approximately 25% of patients 
with HCM have dynamic obstruction to the left ventricular 
outflow. The compromised cardiac output in conjunction 
with a secondary increase in pulmonary venous pressure 
explains the exertional dyspnea seen in these patients. 
Auscultation discloses a harsh systolic ejection murmur, 
caused by the ventricular outflow obstruction as the ante-
rior mitral leaflet moves toward the ventricular septum 
during systole. Because of the massive hypertrophy, high 
left ventricular chamber pressure, and frequently thick-
walled intramural arteries, focal myocardial ischemia com-
monly results, even in the absence of concomitant coronary 
artery disease. Major clinical problems in HCM are atrial 
fibrillation, mural thrombus formation leading to emboli-
zation and possible stroke, intractable cardiac failure, ven-
tricular arrhythmias, and, not infrequently, sudden death, 
especially with certain specific mutations. Indeed, HCM is 
one of the most common causes of sudden, otherwise 
unexplained death in young athletes.
The natural history of HCM is highly variable. Most 
patients can be helped by pharmacologic intervention (e.g., 
β-adrenergic blockade) to decrease heart rate and contrac-
tility. Some benefit can also be gained by reducing the 
septal myocardial mass, thus relieving the outflow tract 
obstruction. This can be achieved either by surgical exci-
sion of muscle or by carefully controlled septal infarction 
through a catheter-based infusion of alcohol.
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is characterized by a primary 
decrease in ventricular compliance, resulting in impaired 
ventricular filling during diastole. Because the contractile 
(systolic) function of the left ventricle is usually unaffected, 
the functional abnormality can be confused with that of 
constrictive pericarditis or HCM. Restrictive cardiomyopa-
thy can be idiopathic or associated with distinct diseases 
or processes that affect the myocardium, principally radia-
tion fibrosis, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, metastatic tumors, 
or the deposition of metabolites that accumulate due to 
inborn errors of metabolism.
The morphologic features are not distinctive. The ven-
tricles are of approximately normal size or slightly enlarged, 
the cavities are not dilated, and the myocardium is firm 
and noncompliant. Biatrial dilation is commonly observed. 
Microscopically, there may be only patchy or diffuse inter-
stitial fibrosis, which can vary from minimal to extensive. 
Endomyocardial biopsy can often reveal a specific etiology. 
An important specific subgroup is amyloidosis (described 
later).
Several other restrictive conditions merit brief mention.
•	 Endomyocardial fibrosis is principally a disease of chil-
dren and young adults in Africa and other tropical 
areas, characterized by fibrosis of the ventricular endo-
cardium and subendocardium that extends from the 
apex upward, often involving the tricuspid and mitral 
valves. The fibrous tissue markedly diminishes the 
volume and compliance of affected chambers and so 
571
Cardiomyopathies
Nonviral agents are also important causes of infectious 
myocarditis, particularly the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi, 
the agent of Chagas disease. Chagas disease is endemic in 
some regions of South America, with myocardial involve-
ment in most infected individuals. About 10% of patients 
die during an acute attack; others develop a chronic 
immune-mediated myocarditis that may progress to 
cardiac insufficiency in 10 to 20 years. Trichinosis (Trichinella 
spiralis) is the most common helminthic disease associated 
with myocarditis. Parasitic diseases, including toxoplas-
mosis, and bacterial infections such as Lyme disease 
and diphtheria, can also cause myocarditis. In the case of 
diphtheritic myocarditis, the myocardial injury is a conse-
quence of diphtheria toxin release by the causal organism, 
Corynebacterium diphtheriae (Chapter 8). Myocarditis occurs 
in approximately 5% of patients with Lyme disease, a sys-
temic illness caused by the bacterial spirochete Borrelia 
burgdorferi (Chapter 8); it manifests primarily as a self-
limited conduction system disorder that may require a 
temporary pacemaker. AIDS-associated myocarditis may 
reflect inflammation and myocyte damage without a clear 
etiologic agent, or a myocarditis attributable directly to 
HIV or to an opportunistic pathogen.
There are also noninfectious causes of myocarditis. Broadly 
speaking they are either immunologically mediated (hyper-
sensitivity myocarditis) or idiopathic conditions with distinc-
tive morphology (giant cell myocarditis) suspected to be of 
immunologic origin (Table 12-13).
Table 12-13  Major Causes of Myocarditis
Infections
Viruses (e.g., coxsackievirus, ECHO, influenza, HIV, cytomegalovirus)
Chlamydiae (e.g., Chlamydophyla psittaci)
Rickettsiae (e.g., Rickettsia typhi, typhus fever)
Bacteria (e.g., Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Neisseria meningococcus, 
Borrelia (Lyme disease)
Fungi (e.g., Candida)
Protozoa (e.g., Trypanosoma cruzi [Chagas disease], toxoplasmosis)
Helminths (e.g., trichinosis)
Immune-Mediated Reactions
Postviral
Poststreptococcal (rheumatic fever)
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Drug hypersensitivity (e.g., methyldopa, sulfonamides)
Transplant rejection
Unknown
Sarcoidosis
Giant cell myocarditis
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus.
  MORPHOLOGY
Grossly, the heart in myocarditis may appear normal or dilated; 
some hypertrophy may be present depending on disease dura-
tion. In advanced stages the ventricular myocardium is flabby 
and often mottled by either pale foci or minute hemorrhagic 
lesions. Mural thrombi may be present.
Active myocarditis is characterized by an interstitial inflamma-
tory infiltrate associated with focal myocyte necrosis (Fig. 
12-35). A diffuse, mononuclear, predominantly lymphocytic infil-
trate is most common (Fig. 12-35A). Although endomyocardial 
Clinical Features.  The clinical spectrum of myocarditis is 
broad. At one end, the disease is entirely asymptomatic, 
and patients can expect a complete recovery without 
sequelae; at the other extreme is the precipitous onset 
of heart failure or arrhythmias, occasionally with sudden 
death. Between these extremes are the many levels of 
involvement associated with symptoms such as fatigue, 
dyspnea, palpitations, precordial discomfort, and fever. 
The clinical features of myocarditis can mimic those of 
acute MI. As noted previously, patients can develop dilated 
cardiomyopathy as a late complication of myocarditis.
Other Causes of Myocardial Disease
Cardiotoxic Drugs.  Cardiac complications of cancer 
therapy are an important clinical problem; cardiotoxicity 
has been associated with conventional chemotherapeutic 
agents, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and certain forms of 
immunotherapy. The anthracyclines doxorubicin and dau-
norubicin are the chemotherapeutic agents most often 
associated with toxic myocardial injury; they cause dilated 
cardiomyopathy with heart failure attributed primarily 
to peroxidation of lipids in myocyte membranes. Anthra­ 
cycline toxicity is dose-dependent, with the cardiotoxicity 
risk increasing when cumulative life-time doses exceed 
500 mg/m2.
Many other therapeutic agents, including lithium, 
phenothiazines, and chloroquine can idiosyncratically 
induce myocardial injury and sometimes sudden death. 
Common findings in affected myocardium include myofi-
ber swelling, cytoplasmic vacuolization, and fatty change. 
Discontinuing the offending agent often leads to prompt 
resolution, without apparent sequelae. Occasionally, how­
ever, more extensive damage produces myocyte necrosis 
that can evolve to a dilated cardiomyopathy.
Amyloidosis.  Amyloidosis results from the extracellular 
accumulation of protein fibrils that are prone to 
forming insoluble β-pleated sheets (Chapter 6). Cardiac 
biopsies are diagnostic in some cases, they can be spuriously 
negative because inflammatory involvement of the myocardium 
may be focal or patchy. If the patient survives the acute phase 
of myocarditis, the inflammatory lesions either resolve, leaving 
no residual changes, or heal by progressive fibrosis.
Hypersensitivity myocarditis has interstitial infiltrates, prin-
cipally perivascular, composed of lymphocytes, macrophages, 
and a high proportion of eosinophils (Fig. 12-35B). A morpho-
logically distinctive form of myocarditis, called giant-cell myo­
carditis, is characterized by a widespread inflammatory cellular 
infiltrate containing multinucleate giant cells (fused macro-
phages) interspersed with lymphocytes, eosinophils, plasma 
cells, and macrophages. Focal to frequently extensive necrosis 
is present (Fig. 12-35C). This variant likely represents the fulmi-
nant end of the myocarditis spectrum and carries a poor 
prognosis.
The myocarditis of Chagas disease is distinctive by virtue 
of the parasitization of scattered myofibers by trypanosomes 
accompanied by a mixed inflammatory infiltrate of neutrophils, 
lymphocytes, macrophages, and occasional eosinophils  
(Fig. 12-35D).
572
C H A P T E R  12	 The Heart
amyloidosis can appear as a consequence of systemic amy-
loidosis (e.g., due to myeloma or inflammation-associated 
amyloid) or can be restricted to the heart, particularly in 
the aged (senile cardiac amyloidosis). Senile cardiac amyloi-
dosis characteristically occurs in individuals 70 years and 
older, and has a far better prognosis than systemic amyloi-
dosis. Senile cardiac amyloid deposits are largely com-
posed of transthyretin, a normal serum protein synthesized 
in the liver that transports thyroxine and retinol-binding 
protein. Mutant forms of transthyretin can accelerate the 
cardiac (and associated systemic) amyloid deposition; 4% 
of African-Americans have a transthyretin mutation sub-
stituting isoleucine for valine at position 122 that produces 
a particularly amyloidogenic protein, responsible for 
autosomal dominant familial transthyretin amyloidosis. 
Isolated atrial amyloidosis can also occur secondary to 
deposition of atrial natriuretic peptide, but its clinical sig-
nificance is uncertain.
Cardiac amyloidosis most frequently produces a restric-
tive cardiomyopathy, but it can also be asymptomatic, 
manifest as dilation or arrhythmias, or mimic ischemic or 
valvular disease. The varied presentations depend on the 
predominant location of the deposits, for example, intersti-
tium, conduction system, vasculature, or valves.
Figure 12-35  Myocarditis. A, Lymphocytic myocarditis, associated with myocyte injury. B, Hypersensitivity myocarditis, characterized by interstitial inflammatory 
infiltrate composed largely of eosinophils and mononuclear inflammatory cells, predominantly localized to perivascular and expanded interstitial spaces.  
C, Giant-cell myocarditis, with mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate containing lymphocytes and macrophages, extensive loss of muscle, and multinucleated 
giant cells (fused macrophages). D, The myocarditis of Chagas disease. A myofiber distended with trypanosomes (arrow) is present along with individual 
myofiber necrosis, and modest amounts of inflammation. 
A
B
D
C
  MORPHOLOGY
In cardiac amyloidosis the heart varies in consistency from 
normal to firm and rubbery. The chambers are usually of  
normal size, but can be dilated and have thickened walls.  
Small, semitranslucent nodules resembling drips of wax may  
be seen on the atrial endocardial surface, particularly on the  
left. Histologically, hyaline eosinophilic deposits of amyloid  
may be found in the interstitium, conduction tissue, valves,  
endocardium, pericardium, and small intramural coronary arter-
ies (Fig. 12-36); they can be distinguished from other deposits 
by special stains such as Congo red, which produces classic 
apple-green birefringence when viewed under polarized light 
(Fig. 12-36B). Intramural arteries and arterioles may have suf-
ficient amyloid in their walls to compress and occlude their 
lumens, inducing myocardial ischemia (“small-vessel disease”).
  KEY CONCEPTS
Cardiomyopathy
■ Cardiomyopathy is intrinsic cardiac muscle disease; there 
may be specific causes, or it can be idiopathic.
573
Pericardial disease
Figure 12-36  Cardiac amyloidosis. A, Hematoxylin and eosin stain, showing amyloid appearing as amorphous pink material around myocytes. B, Congo red 
stain viewed under polarized light, in which amyloid shows characteristic apple-green birefringence (compared with collagen, which appears white). 
B
A
or pus (purulent pericarditis). With long-standing cardiac 
enlargement or with slowly accumulating fluid, the peri-
cardium has time to dilate. This permits a slowly accumu-
lating pericardial effusion to become quite large without 
interfering with cardiac function. Thus, with chronic effu-
sions of less than 500 mL in volume, the only clinical sig-
nificance is a characteristic globular enlargement of the 
heart shadow on chest radiographs. In contrast, rapidly 
developing fluid collections of as little as 200 to 300 mL—e.g., 
due to hemopericardium caused by a ruptured MI or aortic 
dissection—can produce clinically devastating compres-
sion of the thin-walled atria and venae cavae, or the ven-
tricles themselves; cardiac filling is thereby restricted, 
producing potentially fatal cardiac tamponade.
Pericarditis
Pericardial inflammation can occur secondary to a variety 
of cardiac, thoracic, or systemic disorders, metastases from 
remote neoplasms, or cardiac surgical procedures. Primary 
pericarditis is unusual and almost always of viral origin. 
The major causes of pericarditis are listed in Table 12-14. 
Most evoke an acute pericarditis, but a few, such as tuber-
culosis and fungi, produce chronic reactions.
Acute Pericarditis
Serous pericarditis is characteristically produced by non-
infectious inflammatory diseases, including rheumatic 
fever, SLE, and scleroderma, as well as tumors and uremia. 
An infection in the tissues contiguous to the pericardium—
for example, a bacterial pleuritis—may incite sufficient 
irritation of the parietal pericardial serosa to cause a sterile 
serous effusion that can progress to serofibrinous pericar-
ditis and ultimately to a frank suppurative reaction. In 
some instances a well-defined viral infection elsewhere—
upper respiratory tract infection, pneumonia, parotitis—
antedates the pericarditis and serves as the primary focus 
of infection. Infrequently, usually in young adults, a viral 
pericarditis occurs as an apparent primary infection 
that may be accompanied by myocarditis (myopericardi-
tis). Tumors can cause a serous pericarditis by lymphatic 
■ There are three general pathophysiologic categories of 
cardiomyopathy: dilated (90%), hypertrophic, and restric-
tive (least common).
■ Dilated cardiomyopathy results in systolic (contractile) dys-
function. Causes include myocarditis, toxic exposures 
(e.g., alcohol), and pregnancy. In 20% to 50% of cases, 
genetic cytoskeletal protein defects are causal, with titin 
mutations representing up to 20% of cases of dilated 
cardiomyopathy.
■ Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy results in diastolic (relax-
ation) dysfunction. Virtually all cases are due to autosomal 
dominant mutations in the proteins comprising the con-
tractile apparatus, in particular β-myosin heavy chain.
■ Restrictive cardiomyopathy results in a stiff, noncompliant 
myocardium and can be due to deposition (e.g., amyloid), 
increased interstitial fibrosis (e.g., due to radiation), or 
endomyocardial scarring.
■ Myocarditis is myocardial damage caused by inflammatory 
infiltrates secondary to infections or immune reactions. 
Coxsackie A and B viruses are the most common causes 
in the United States. Clinically, myocarditis can be asymp-
tomatic, give rise to acute heart failure, or evolve into 
dilated cardiomyopathy.
Pericardial Disease
The most important pericardial disorders cause fluid accu-
mulation, inflammation, fibrous constriction, or some com-
bination of these processes, usually in association with 
other cardiac pathology or a systemic disease; isolated 
pericardial disease is unusual.
Pericardial Effusion and Hemopericardium
Normally, the pericardial sac contains less than 50 mL of 
thin, clear, straw-colored fluid. Under various circum-
stances the parietal pericardium may be distended by 
serous fluid (pericardial effusion), blood (hemopericardium), 
574
C H A P T E R  12	 The Heart
invasion or direct contiguous extension into the pericar-
dium. Histologically, serous pericarditis elicits a mild 
inflammatory infiltrate in the epipericardial fat consisting 
predominantly of lymphocytes; tumor-associated pericar-
ditis may also exhibit neoplastic cells. Organization into 
fibrous adhesions rarely occurs.
Fibrinous and serofibrinous pericarditis are the most 
frequent types of pericarditis; these are composed of serous 
fluid variably admixed with a fibrinous exudate. Common 
causes include acute MI (Fig. 12-18D), postinfarction 
(Dressler) syndrome (an autoimmune response appearing 
days-weeks after an MI), uremia, chest radiation, rheu-
matic fever, SLE, and trauma. A fibrinous reaction also 
follows routine cardiac surgery.
•	 Seeding from the blood
•	 Lymphatic extension
•	 Direct introduction during cardiotomy
The exudate ranges from a thin cloudy fluid to frank pus 
up to 400 to 500 mL in volume. The serosal surfaces are 
reddened, granular, and coated with the exudate (Fig. 
12-37). Microscopically there is an acute inflammatory 
reaction, which sometimes extends into surrounding struc-
tures to induce mediastinopericarditis. Complete resolution 
is infrequent, and organization by scarring is the usual 
outcome. The intense inflammatory response and the sub-
sequent scarring frequently produce constrictive pericarditis, 
a serious consequence (see later). Clinical findings in the 
active phase resemble those seen in fibrinous pericarditis, 
although the frank infection leads to more marked sys-
temic symptoms including spiking fevers and rigors.
Hemorrhagic pericarditis has an exudate composed of 
blood mixed with a fibrinous or suppurative effusion; it is 
most commonly caused by the spread of a malignant neo-
plasm to the pericardial space. In such cases, cytologic 
examination of fluid removed through a pericardial tap 
often reveals neoplastic cells. Hemorrhagic pericarditis 
can also be found in bacterial infections, in persons with 
an underlying bleeding diathesis, and in tuberculosis. 
Hemorrhagic pericarditis often follows cardiac surgery 
and is occasionally responsible for significant blood loss or 
even tamponade, requiring re-operation. The clinical sig-
nificance is similar to that of fibrinous or suppurative 
pericarditis.
Caseous pericarditis is, until proved otherwise, tuber-
culous in origin; infrequently, fungal infections evoke a 
similar reaction. Pericardial involvement occurs by direct 
spread from tuberculous foci within the tracheobronchial 
nodes. Caseous pericarditis is a common antecedent of 
disabling, fibrocalcific, chronic constrictive pericarditis.
  MORPHOLOGY
In fibrinous pericarditis the surface is dry, with a fine granular 
roughening. In serofibrinous pericarditis a more intense inflam-
matory process induces the accumulation of larger amounts of 
yellow to brown turbid fluid, containing leukocytes, erythro-
cytes, and fibrin. As with all inflammatory exudates, fibrin may 
be lysed with resolution of the exudate, or can become orga-
nized (Chapter 3).
Table 12-14  Causes of Pericarditis
Infectious Agents
Viruses
Pyogenic bacteria
Tuberculosis
Fungi
Other parasites
Presumably Immunologically Mediated
Rheumatic fever
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Scleroderma
Postcardiotomy
Postmyocardial infarction (Dressler) syndrome
Drug hypersensitivity reaction
Miscellaneous
Myocardial infarction
Uremia
Following cardiac surgery
Neoplasia
Trauma
Radiation
Figure 12-37  Acute suppurative pericarditis arising from direct extension of 
an adjacent pneumonia. Extensive purulent exudate is evident. 
Symptoms of fibrinous pericarditis characteristically 
include pain (sharp, pleuritic, and position dependent) 
and fever; congestive failure may also be present. A loud 
pericardial friction rub is the most striking clinical finding. 
However, the collection of serous fluid can actually prevent 
rubbing by separating the two layers of the pericardium.
Purulent or suppurative pericarditis reflects an active 
infection caused by microbial invasion of the pericardial 
space; this can occur through:
•	 Direct extension from neighboring infections, such as an 
empyema of the pleural cavity, lobar pneumonia, medi-
astinal infections, or extension of a ring abscess through 
the myocardium or aortic root
575
Tumors of the heart
resembling those of chronic rheumatic valvular disease. 
The Libman-Sacks valvular lesions associated with SLE 
were discussed previously.
Tumors of the Heart
Primary tumors of the heart are rare; in contrast, metastatic 
tumors to the heart occur in about 5% of persons dying of 
cancer. The most common primary cardiac tumors, in 
descending order of frequency (overall, including adults 
and children) are myxomas, fibromas, lipomas, papillary 
fibroelastomas, rhabdomyomas, and angiosarcomas. The 
five most common tumors are all benign and collectively 
account for 80% to 90% of primary tumors of the heart.
Primary Cardiac Tumors
Myxomas are the most common primary tumor of the 
adult heart (Fig. 12-38). These are benign neoplasms 
thought to arise from primitive multipotent mesenchymal 
cells. Although sporadic myxomas do not show consistent 
genetic alterations, familial syndromes associated with 
myxomas have activating mutations in the GNAS1 gene, 
encoding a subunit of G protein (Gsα) (in association 
with McCune-Albright syndrome) or null mutations in 
PRKAR1A, encoding a regulatory subunit of a cyclic-AMP-
dependent protein kinase (Carney complex). About 90% of 
myxomas arise in the atria, with a left-to-right ratio of 
approximately 4 : 1.
Chronic or Healed Pericarditis.  In some cases organiza-
tion merely produces plaque-like fibrous thickenings of 
the serosal membranes (“soldier’s plaque”) or thin, delicate 
adhesions that rarely cause impairment of cardiac function. 
In other cases, fibrosis in the form of mesh-like stringy 
adhesions completely obliterates the pericardial sac. In 
most instances, this adhesive pericarditis has no effect on 
cardiac function.
Adhesive mediastinopericarditis may follow infectious 
pericarditis, previous cardiac surgery, or mediastinal irra-
diation. The pericardial sac is obliterated, and adherence 
of the external aspect of the parietal layer to surrounding 
structures strains cardiac function. With each systolic 
contraction, the heart pulls not only against the parietal 
pericardium but also against the attached surrounding 
structures. Systolic retraction of the rib cage and dia-
phragm, pulsus paradoxus, and a variety of other charac-
teristic clinical findings may be observed. The increased 
workload causes occasionally severe cardiac hypertrophy 
and dilation.
In constrictive pericarditis the heart is encased in a dense, 
fibrous or fibrocalcific scar that limits diastolic expansion 
and cardiac output, features that mimic a restrictive car-
diomyopathy. A prior history of pericarditis may or may 
not be present. The fibrous scar can be up to a centimeter 
in thickness, obliterating the pericardial space and some-
times calcifying; in extreme cases it can resemble a plaster 
mold (concretio cordis). Because of the dense enclosing scar, 
cardiac hypertrophy and dilation cannot occur. Cardiac 
output may be reduced at rest, but more importantly the 
heart has little if any capacity to increase its output in 
response to increased systemic demands. Signs of constric-
tive pericarditis include distant or muffled heart sounds, 
elevated jugular venous pressure, and peripheral edema. 
Treatment consists of surgical resection of the shell of con-
stricting fibrous tissue (pericardiectomy).
Heart Disease Associated with 
Rheumatologic Disorders
The heart (vessels, myocardium, valves, or pericardium) 
can be significantly impacted by chronic rheumatologic 
diseases (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, systemic sclerosis, 
ankylosing spondylitis, and psoriatic arthritis). Indeed, as 
improved therapies lead to longer life expectancies, the 
cardiovascular manifestations of such systemic inflamma-
tion are increasingly recognized. In addition, ischemic 
heart disease can be accelerated in the setting of systemic 
inflammation.
Although rheumatoid arthritis is primarily a joint dis-
order, it also has several extra-articular manifestations, 
including subcutaneous rheumatoid nodules, vasculitis, 
and neutropenia (Chapter 26). The heart is also involved 
in 20-40% of severe cases. The most common finding is a 
fibrinous pericarditis that may progress to fibrous thickening 
of the visceral and parietal pericardium and dense adhe-
sions. Granulomatous rheumatoid nodules resembling the 
subcutaneous nodules may also occur in the myocardium, 
endocardium, valves, and aortic root. Rheumatoid valvulitis 
can lead to marked fibrous thickening and secondary cal-
cification of the aortic valve cusps, producing changes 
Figure 12-38  Atrial myxoma. A, A large pedunculated lesion arises from the 
region of the fossa ovalis and extends into the mitral valve orifice. B, Abundant 
amorphous extracellular matrix contains scattered multinucleate myxoma 
cells (arrowheads) in various groupings, including abnormal vessel-like forma-
tions (arrow). 
A
B
  MORPHOLOGY
The tumors are usually single, but can rarely be multiple. The 
region of the fossa ovalis in the atrial septum is the favored site 
of origin. Myxomas range from small (<1 cm) to large (≥10 cm), 
and can be sessile or pedunculated lesions (Fig. 12-38A). They 
vary from globular hard masses mottled with hemorrhage  
to soft, translucent, papillary, or villous lesions having a gelati-
nous appearance. The pedunculated form is often sufficiently 
mobile to move during systole into the atrioventricular valve 
576
C H A P T E R  12	 The Heart
  MORPHOLOGY
Papillary fibroelastomas are usually (>80%) located on valves, 
particularly the ventricular surfaces of semilunar valves and the 
atrial surfaces of atrioventricular valves. Each lesion, typically 1 
to 2 cm in diameter, consists of a distinctive cluster of hairlike 
projections up to 1 cm in length. Histologically, the projections 
are covered by a surface endothelium surrounding a core of 
myxoid connective tissue with abundant mucopolysaccharide 
matrix and elastic fibers.
The major clinical manifestations are due to valvular 
“ball-valve” obstruction, embolization, or a syndrome 
of constitutional symptoms, such as fever and malaise. 
Sometimes fragmentation and systemic embolization calls 
attention to these lesions. Constitutional symptoms are 
probably due to the elaboration by some myxomas of the 
cytokine interleukin-6, a major mediator of the acute-phase 
response. Echocardiography provides the opportunity to 
identify these masses noninvasively. Surgical removal is 
usually curative; rarely, presumably with incomplete exci-
sion, the neoplasm can recurs months to years later.
Lipoma.  Lipomas 
are 
localized, 
well-circumscribed, 
benign tumors composed of mature fat cells that can occur 
in the subendocardium, subepicardium, or myocardium. 
They may be asymptomatic, or produce ball-valve obstruc-
tions or arrhythmias. Lipomas are most often located in the 
left ventricle, right atrium, or atrial septum. In the atrial 
septum, nonneoplastic depositions of fat sometimes occur 
that are called “lipomatous hypertrophy.” These lesions 
include white and brown adipose tissue, as well as small 
interspersed areas of myocardium.
Papillary 
Fibroelastoma.  Papillary 
fibroelastomas 
are 
curious, usually incidental, sea-anemone-like lesions, most 
often identified at autopsy. They may embolize and thereby 
become clinically important. Clonal cytogenetic abnormali-
ties have been reported, suggesting that fibroelastomas 
are unusual benign neoplasms. They resemble the much 
smaller, usually trivial, Lambl excrescences that may repre-
sent remotely organized thrombus on the aortic valves of 
older individuals.
  MORPHOLOGY
Rhabdomyomas are gray-white myocardial masses that can be 
small or up to several centimeters in diameter. They are usually 
multiple and involve the ventricles preferentially, protruding into 
the lumen. Microscopically, they are composed of bizarre, 
markedly enlarged myocytes. Routine histologic processing 
often artifactually reduces the abundant cytoplasm to thin 
strands that stretch from the nucleus to the surface membrane, 
an appearance referred to as “spider” cells.
Table 12-15  Cardiovascular Effects of Noncardiac Neoplasms
Direct Consequences of Tumor
Pericardial and myocardial metastases
Large vessel obstruction
Pulmonary tumor emboli
Indirect Consequences of Tumor (Complications of Circulating 
Mediators)
Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis
Carcinoid heart disease
Pheochromocytoma-associated heart disease
Myeloma-associated amyloidosis
Effects of Tumor Therapy
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy
Modified from Schoen FJ, et al: Cardiac effects of non-cardiac neoplasms. Cardiol Clin 2:657, 
1984.
(hamartin and tuberin, respectively) function in a complex 
that inhibits the activity of the mammalian target of rapa-
mycin (mTOR), a kinase that stimulates cell growth and 
regulates cell size. TSC1 or TSC2 expression is often absent 
in tuberous sclerosis-associated rhabdomyomas, providing 
a mechanism for myocyte overgrowth. Because rhabdo-
myomas often regress spontaneously, they may be consid-
ered as hamartomas rather than true neoplasms.
Sarcoma.  Cardiac angiosarcomas and other sarcomas are 
not clinically or morphologically distinctive from their 
counterparts in other locations, and so require no further 
comment here.
Cardiac Effects of Noncardiac Neoplasms
With enhanced patient survival due to diagnostic and ther-
apeutic advances, significant cardiovascular effects of non-
cardiac neoplasms and their therapy are increasingly 
encountered (Table 12-15). The pathologic consequences 
include direct tumor infiltration, effects of circulating 
mediators, and therapeutic complications.
The most frequent metastatic tumors involving the heart 
are carcinomas of the lung and breast, melanomas, leuke-
mias, and lymphomas. Metastases can reach the heart 
and pericardium by retrograde lymphatic extension (most 
carcinomas), by hematogenous seeding (many tumors), by 
direct contiguous extension (primary carcinoma of the 
lung, breast, or esophagus), or by venous extension (tumors 
of the kidney or liver). Clinical symptoms are most often 
associated with pericardial spread, which can cause 
opening, causing intermittent obstruction that may be position-
dependent. Sometimes mobile tumors exert a “wrecking-ball” 
effect, causing damage to the valve leaflets.
Histologically, myxomas are composed of stellate or globular 
myxoma cells embedded within an abundant acid mucopoly-
saccharide ground substance (Fig. 12-38B). Peculiar vessel-like 
or gland-like structures are characteristic. Hemorrhage and 
mononuclear inflammation are usually present.
Rhabdomyoma.  Rhabdomyomas are the most frequent 
primary tumor of the pediatric heart, and are commonly 
discovered in the first years of life because of obstruction 
of a valvular orifice or cardiac chamber. Approximately 
half of cardiac rhabdomyomas are due to sporadic muta-
tions; the other 50% of cases are associated with tuberous 
sclerosis (Chapter 28), with mutations in the TSC1 or TSC2 
tumor suppressor gene. The TSC1 and TSC2 proteins 
577
Cardiac transplantation
Of the major complications, allograft rejection is the 
primary problem requiring surveillance; routine endomyo-
cardial biopsy is the only reliable means of diagnosing 
acute cardiac rejection before substantial myocardial 
damage has occurred and at a stage that is reversible in the 
majority of instances. Classic cellular rejection is character-
ized by interstitial lymphocytic inflammation with associ-
ated myocyte damage; the histology resembles myocarditis 
(Fig. 12-39A). There may also be interstitial edema due to 
vascular injury, and local cytokine elaboration can impact 
myocardial contractility without necessarily eliciting 
myocyte damage. Increasingly, antibody-mediated rejection is 
also recognized as a pathologic mechanism of injury; 
donor-specific antibodies directed against major histocom-
patibility complex proteins lead to complement activation 
and the recruitment of Fc-receptor-bearing cells. Mild rejec-
tion may resolve spontaneously, while prompt recognition 
of more severe episodes allows successful treatment by 
augmenting baseline levels of immunosuppression; occa-
sionally aggressive anti-T cell or anti-B cell immu­notherapy, 
with or without plasmapheresis may be necessary.
Allograft arteriopathy is the single most important long-
term limitation for cardiac transplantation. It is a late, pro-
gressive, diffusely stenosing intimal proliferation in the 
coronary arteries (Fig. 12-39B), leading to ischemic injury. 
Within 5 years of transplantation, 50% of patients develop 
significant allograft arteriopathy, and virtually all patients 
have lesions within 10 years. The pathogenesis of allograft 
arteriopathy involves immunologic responses that induce 
local production of growth factors that promote intimal 
smooth muscle cell recruitment and proliferation with 
ECM synthesis. Allograft arteriopathy is a particularly 
vexing problem because it can lead to silent MI (transplant 
patients have denervated hearts and do not experience 
angina), progressive CHF, or sudden cardiac death.
Other postoperative problems include infection and 
malignancies, particularly Epstein-Barr virus-associated 
B-cell lymphomas that arise in the setting of chronic T-cell 
immunosuppression. Despite these problems, the overall 
outlook is good; the 1-year survival is 90% and 5-year sur-
vival is greater than 60%.
Figure 12-39  Complications of heart transplantation. A, Cardiac allograft rejection typified by lymphocytic infiltrate associated with cardiac myocyte damage. 
B, Allograft arteriopathy, with severe diffuse concentric intimal thickening producing critical stenosis. The internal elastic lamina (arrow) and media are intact 
(Movat pentachrome stain, elastin black). (B, Reproduced with permission from Salomon RN, et al: Human coronary transplantation-associated arteriosclerosis. 
Evidence for chronic immune reaction to activated graft endothelial cells. Am J Pathol 138:791, 1991.)
A
B
symptomatic pericardial effusions or a mass-effect that is 
sufficient to restrict cardiac filling. Myocardial metastases 
are usually clinically silent or have nonspecific features, 
such as a generalized defect in ventricular contractility or 
compliance. Bronchogenic carcinoma or malignant lym-
phoma may infiltrate the mediastinum extensively, causing 
encasement, compression, or invasion of the superior vena 
cava with resultant obstruction to blood coming from the 
head and upper extremities (superior vena cava syndrome). 
Renal cell carcinoma often invades the renal vein, and may 
grow as a continuous column of tumor up the inferior vena 
cava and into the right atrium, blocking venous return to 
the heart.
Noncardiac tumors may also affect cardiac function 
indirectly, sometimes via circulating tumor-derived sub-
stances. The consequences include nonbacterial thrombotic 
endocarditis, carcinoid heart disease, pheochromocytoma-
associated myocardial damage and myeloma-associated 
AL-type amyloidosis.
Complications of chemotherapy were discussed earlier 
in this chapter. Radiation used to treat breast, lung, or 
mediastinal neoplasms can cause pericarditis, pericardial 
effusion, myocardial fibrosis, and chronic pericardial dis-
orders. Other cardiac effects of radiation therapy include 
accelerated coronary artery disease and mural and valvu-
lar endocardial fibrosis.
Cardiac Transplantation
Transplantation of cardiac allografts is now frequently per-
formed (approximately 3000 per year worldwide) for 
severe, intractable heart failure of diverse causes—most 
commonly DCM and IHD. Three major factors have con-
tributed to the improved outcome of cardiac transplanta-
tion since the first human to human transplant in 1967: (1) 
more effective immunosuppressive therapy (including the 
use of cyclosporin A, glucocorticoids, and other agents), (2) 
careful selection of candidates, and (3) early histopatho-
logic diagnosis of acute allograft rejection by endomyocar-
dial biopsy.
578
C H A P T E R  12	 The Heart
Valvular Heart Disease
Bhattacharyya S, Davar J, Dreyfus G, et al: Carcinoid heart disease. 
Circulation 116:2860, 2007. [Good review of the current thinking on 
pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of this entity.]
Guilherme L, Köhler KF, Kalil J: Rheumatic heart disease: mediation 
by complex immune events. Adv Clin Chem 53:31, 2011. [A well-
written and scholarly discussion of the pathogenic mechanisms regarding 
rheumatic heart disease.]
Hill EE, Herijgers P, Herregods MC, et al: Evolving trends in infective 
endocarditis. Clin Microbiol Infect 12:5, 2006. [Good, clinically-
oriented overview of the developments in microorganisms, diagnosis, and 
therapies for infective endocarditis.]
Li C, Xu S, Gotlieb AI, et al: The response to valve injury. A paradigm 
to understand the pathogenesis of heart valve disease. Cardiovasc 
Pathol 20:183, 2011. [Nice overview of pathologic concepts in valvular 
disease.]
New SE, Aikawa E: Molecular imaging insights into early inflamma-
tory stages of arterial and aortic valve calcification. Circ Res 
108:1381, 2011. [A good overview of the mechanisms leading to degen-
erative calcification on valves and vessels.]
Schoen FJ: Cardiac valves and valvular pathology. Update on func-
tion, disease, repair, and replacement. Cardiovasc Pathol 14:189, 
2005. [Excellent review on mechanisms of valve disease and therapeutic 
approaches.]
Cardiomyopathies
Azaouagh A, Churzidse S, Konorza T, et al: Arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia: a review and update. Clin 
Res Cardiol 100:383, 2011. [Excellent up-to-date look at this entity and 
its genetic causes.]
Cooper LT Jr: Myocarditis. N Engl J Med 360:1526, 2009. [A nice review 
of etiology, pathogenesis, and clinical features.]
Herman DS, Lam L, Taylor MR, et al: Truncations of titin causing 
dilated cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 366:619, 2012. [Elucida­
tion of the common association of titin mutations with dilated 
cardiomyopathy.]
Maron BJ, Towbin JA, Thiene G, et al: Contemporary definitions 
and classification of the cardiomyopathies: an American Heart 
Association Scientific Statement from the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology, Heart Failure and Transplantation Committee; Quality 
of Care and Outcomes Research and Functional Genomics and 
Translational Biology Interdisciplinary Working Groups; and 
Council on Epidemiology and Prevention. Circulation 113:1807, 
2006. [Consensus document regarding an updated classification of car-
diomyopathies, heavily weighted to genetic etiologies rather than patho-
physiologic manifestations.]
Patten IS, Rana S, Shahul S, et al: Cardiac angiogenic imbalance 
leads to peripartum cardiomyopathy. Nature 485:333, 2012. 
[New perspective on the mechanisms underlying pregnancy-associated 
cardiomyopathy.]
Seidman CE, Seidman JG: Identifying sarcomere gene mutations in 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a personal history. Circ Res 108:743, 
2011. [A well-written and authoritative overview of the genetics and 
pathophysiology of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy from one of the leading 
groups in the world.]
Tumors of the Heart
Cheng H, Force T: Molecular mechanisms of cardiovascular toxicity 
of targeted cancer therapeutics. Circ Res 106:21, 2010. [Excellent and 
thoughtful review of the common pathways involved in tumorigenesis 
and cardiac development and homeostasis.]
Sawyer DB: Anthracyclines and heart failure. New Engl J Med 38:1154, 
2013. [Succinct overview of chemotherapeutic cardiotoxicity.]
Cardiac Transplantation
Kittleson MM, Kobashigawa JA: Antibody-mediated rejection. 
Curr Opin Organ Transplant 17:551, 2012. [Good succinct review of 
the mechanisms, diagnosis, and therapeutic interventions in antibody-
mediated rejection.]
Mitchell RN: Graft vascular disease: immune response meets the 
vessel wall. Annu Rev Pathol 4:19, 2009. [Comprehensive overview of 
allograft arteriopathy, including animal models, pathogenic mechanisms, 
clinical diagnosis, and therapy.]
SUGGESTED READINGS
General
Zipe DP, et al, editors: Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A Textbook of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, ed 9, Philadelphia, 2011, Elsevier Saunders. 
[An outstanding and authoritative text, with excellent sections on heart 
failure and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.]
Cardiac Structure and Specializations
Rasmussen TL, Raveendran G, Zhang J, et al: Getting to the heart of 
myocardial stem cells and cell therapy. Circulation 123:1771, 2011. 
[A well-written overview of the challenges and current state of the art 
regarding stem cell therapies in heart disease.]
Heart Failure
Ashrafian H, Frenneaux MP, Opie LH, et al: Metabolic mechanisms 
in heart failure. Circulation 116:434, 2007. [Good review of the molecu-
lar pathways underlying myocardial decompensation.]
Neubauer S: The failing heart—an engine out of fuel. N Engl J Med 
356:1140, 2007. [Well-written overview of the mechanisms and thera-
peutic approaches in congestive failure.]
Congenital Heart Disease
Bruneau BG: The developmental genetics of congenital heart disease. 
Nature 451:943, 2008. [Succinct overview of the relationships between 
cardiac development and congenital heart disease.]
Dinardo JA: Heart failure associated with adult congenital heart 
disease. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 17:44, 2013. [Well-written 
summary of the consequences of congenital heart disorders seen in the 
adult population.]
Huang JB, Liu YL, Sun PW, et al: Molecular mechanisms of con­
genital heart disease. Cardiovasc Pathol 19:e183, 2010. [Compre­
hensive review of the genes and pathways underlying congenital heart 
disease.]
MacGrogan D, Nus M, de la Pompa JL: Notch signaling in cardiac 
development and disease. Curr Top Dev Biol 92:333, 2010. [A schol-
arly review of the role of Notch in cardiac development.]
Ischemic Heart Disease
Hausenloy DJ, Yellon DM: Myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury: a 
neglected therapeutic target. J Clin Invest 123:92, 2013. [Nice discus-
sion of the mechanisms and possible therapeutic approaches in ischemia-
reperfusion injury.]
Libby P, Theroux P: Pathophysiology of coronary artery disease. 
Circulation 111:3481, 2005. [A well-written review of the pathways, 
as well as the diagnostic and therapeutic implications of atherosclerotic 
coronary disease.]
Nabel EG, Braunwald E: A tale of coronary artery disease and myo-
cardial infarction. N Engl J Med 366:54, 2012. [A terrific overview 
of the history of our understanding of the pathophysiology of coronary 
artery disease, and the successes of informed therapeutic interventions.]
Ovize M, Baxter GF, Di Lisa F, et al: Postconditioning and protection 
from reperfusion injury: where do we stand? Position paper from 
the Working Group of Cellular Biology of the Heart of the 
European Society of Cardiology. Cardiovasc Res 87:406, 2010. 
[A good overview of the mechanisms and potential therapeutic interven-
tions for ischemia-reperfusion injury and for ischemic pre-conditioning 
in limiting infarct size.]
Yellon DM, Hausenloy DJ: Myocardial reperfusion injury. N Engl J 
Med 357:1121, 2007. [Great review of the mechanisms and potential 
therapeutic approaches to limiting reperfusion injury after MI.]
Arrhythmias
Cerrone M, Priori SG: Genetics of sudden death: focus on inherited 
channelopathies. Eur Heart J 32:2109, 2011. [Up-to-date, well-
organized description of the known ion channel disorders that cause 
sudden cardiac death.]
Hypertensive Heart Disease
Farber HW, Loscalzo J: Pulmonary arterial hypertension. N Engl J Med 
351:1655, 2004. [Although a little older, this remains an excellent review 
of right-sided hypertension-associated pathology.]
579
Development and Maintenance  
of Hematopoietic  
Tissues  579
DISORDERS OF WHITE 
CELLS  582
Leukopenia  582
Neutropenia, Agranulocytosis  582
Reactive Proliferations of White Cells 
and Lymph Nodes  583
Leukocytosis  583
Lymphadenitis  584
Acute Nonspecific Lymphadenitis  584
Chronic Nonspecific Lymphadenitis  585
Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis  585
Neoplastic Proliferations of White 
Cells  586
Etiologic and Pathogenetic Factors in White 
Cell Neoplasia: Overview  586
Lymphoid Neoplasms  588
Definitions and Classifications  588
Precursor B- and T-Cell Neoplasms  590
Peripheral B-Cell Neoplasms  593
Peripheral T-Cell and NK-Cell Neoplasms  604
Hodgkin Lymphoma  606
Myeloid Neoplasms  611
Acute Myeloid Leukemia  611
Myelodysplastic Syndromes  614
Myeloproliferative Disorders  616
Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis  621
SPLEEN  623
Splenomegaly  624
Nonspecific Acute Splenitis  624
Congestive Splenomegaly  624
Splenic Infarcts  625
Neoplasms  625
Congenital Anomalies  625
Rupture  625
THYMUS  625
Developmental Disorders  626
Thymic Hyperplasia  626
Thymomas  626
C H A P T E R 
13 
Diseases of White Blood Cells, 
Lymph Nodes, Spleen, 
and Thymus
CHAPTER CONTENTS
See TARGETED THERAPY available online at 
www.studentconsult.com 
The components of the hematopoietic system have been 
traditionally divided into the myeloid tissues, which include 
the bone marrow and the cells derived from it (e.g., 
red cells, platelets, granulocytes, and monocytes), and the 
lymphoid tissues, consisting of the thymus, lymph nodes, 
and spleen. It is important to recognize, however, that this 
subdivision is artificial with respect to both the normal 
physiology of hematopoietic cells and the diseases affect-
ing them. For example, although bone marrow contains 
relatively few lymphocytes, it is the source of all lymphoid 
progenitors, and the home of long-lived plasma cells and 
memory lymphocytes. Similarly, neoplastic disorders of 
myeloid progenitor cells (myeloid leukemias) originate in 
the bone marrow but secondarily involve the spleen and 
(to a lesser degree) the lymph nodes. Some red cell disor-
ders (e.g., immunohemolytic anemia, discussed in Chapter 
14) result from the formation of autoantibodies, indicating 
a primary disorder of lymphocytes. Thus, it is not possible 
to draw neat lines between diseases involving the myeloid 
and lymphoid tissues.
Recognizing this difficulty, we somewhat arbitrarily 
divide diseases of the hematopoietic tissues into two chap-
ters. In this chapter we discuss white cell diseases and 
disorders affecting the spleen and thymus. In Chapter 14 
we consider diseases of red cells and those affecting hemo-
stasis. Before delving into specific diseases, we will briefly 
discuss the origins of hematopoietic cells, since many dis-
orders of white cells and red cells involve disturbances of 
their normal development and maturation.
Development and Maintenance  
of Hematopoietic Tissues
Blood cell progenitors first appear during the third week 
of embryonic development in the yolk sac. Cells derived 
from the yolk sac are the source of long-lived tissue mac-
rophages, such as microglial cells in the brain and Kupffer 
cells in the liver (Chapter 3), but the contribution of the 
yolk sac to blood formation, mainly in the form of embry-
onic red blood cells, is only transient. Definitive hematopoi-
etic stem cells (HSCs) arise several weeks later in the 
mesoderm of the intraembryonic aorta/gonad/mesoneph-
ros region. During the third month of embryogenesis, 
HSCs migrate to the liver, which becomes the chief site of 
blood cell formation until shortly before birth. HSCs also 
take up residence in the fetal placenta; this pool of HSCs 
is of uncertain physiologic relevance, but has taken on 
580
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
substantial clinical importance, as HSCs harvested at birth 
from umbilical cord blood are being used increasingly in 
therapeutic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. By the 
fourth month of development, HSCs shift in location yet 
again, taking up residence in the bone marrow. By birth, 
marrow throughout the skeleton is hematopoietically 
active and hepatic hematopoiesis dwindles to a trickle, 
persisting only in widely scattered foci that become inac-
tive soon after birth. Until puberty, hematopoietically 
active marrow is found throughout the skeleton, but soon 
thereafter it becomes restricted to the axial skeleton. Thus, 
in normal adults, only about half of the marrow space is 
hematopoietically active.
The formed elements of blood—red cells, granulo-
cytes, monocytes, platelets, and lymphocytes—have a 
common origin from HSCs, pluripotent cells that sit at 
the apex of a hierarchy of bone marrow progenitors 
(Fig. 13-1). Most evidence supporting this scheme comes 
from studies in mice, but human hematopoiesis is believed 
to proceed in a similar way. HSCs give rise to several kinds 
of early progenitor cells with a restricted differentiation 
potential, such that they ultimately produce mainly 
myeloid cells or lymphoid cells. The origins of lymphoid 
cells are revisited when tumors derived from these cells are 
discussed. These early progenitors in turn give “birth” to 
progenitors that are further constrained to differentiation 
Figure 13-1  Differentiation of blood cells. CFU, Colony forming unit; LIN−, negative for lineage-specific markers. 
Early progenitor with
myeloid potential
Hematopoietic stem cell
Early progenitor with
lymphoid potential
CFU-eo
Pro-
NK-cell
CFU-M
CFU-Mix
Lymphopoiesis
CFU-b/M/E
CFU-G
Pre-
T cell
Pre-
B cell
T cell
B cell
Pre-
NK cell
NK cell
Pro-
T-cell
Pro-
B-cell
Basophil
Neutrophil
Monocyte
Eosinophil
Eosinophilo-
blast
Platelets
Erythrocyte
STEM CELLS
COMMITTED PRECURSORS
LATE PRECURSORS
AND MATURE FORMS
Self-
renewal
Cell division
Lineage-specific markers
Lineage-specific growth factor receptors (e.g., erythropoietin receptor)
Lineage-independent growth factor receptors
cKIT+
Sca-1+
LIN–
CFU-Mg
CFU-E
Monoblast
CFU-b
Basophilo-
blast
Myeloblast
Megakary-
oblast
Erythroblast
Multipotent progenitor
581
Development and maintenance of hematopoietic tissues 
hematopoietic cells are among the most important diseases 
that interfere with marrow function, but certain genetic 
diseases, infections, toxins, and nutritional deficiencies, as 
well as chronic inflammation from any cause, can also 
decrease the production of blood cells by the marrow.
Tumors of hematopoietic origin are often associated 
with mutations that block progenitor cell maturation or 
abrogate their growth factor dependence. The net effect 
of such derangements is an unregulated clonal expansion 
of hematopoietic elements, which replace normal marrow 
progenitors and often spread to other hematopoietic 
tissues. In some instances, these tumors originate from 
transformed HSCs that retain the ability to differentiate 
along multiple lineages, whereas in other instances the 
origin is a more differentiated progenitor that has acquired 
an abnormal capacity for self-renewal (Chapter 7).
along particular lineages. Some of these cells are referred 
to as colony-forming units (CFUs) (Fig. 13-1), because they 
produce colonies composed of specific kinds of mature 
cells when grown in culture. From the various committed 
progenitors are derived the morphologically recognizable 
precursors, such as myeloblasts, proerythroblasts, and 
megakaryoblasts, which are the immediate progenitors of 
mature granulocytes, red cells, and platelets.
HSCs have two essential properties that are required 
for the maintenance of hematopoiesis: pluripotency and 
the capacity for self-renewal. Pluripotency refers to the 
ability of a single HSC to generate all mature blood cells. 
When an HSC divides, at least one daughter cell must self-
renew to avoid stem cell depletion. Self-renewing divisions 
occur within a specialized marrow niche, in which stromal 
cells and secreted factors nurture and protect the HSCs. As 
one might surmise from their ability to migrate during 
embryonic development, HSCs are not sessile. Particularly 
under conditions of marked stress, such as severe anemia 
or acute inflammation, HSCs are mobilized from the bone 
marrow and appear in the peripheral blood. In fact, HSCs 
used in transplantation are now mainly collected from the 
peripheral blood of donors treated with granulocyte colony 
stimulating factor (G-CSF), one of the factors that can 
mobilize a fraction of marrow HSCs from their stem cell 
niches.
The marrow response to short-term physiologic needs 
is regulated by hematopoietic growth factors through 
effects on the committed progenitors. Because mature 
blood elements are terminally differentiated cells with 
finite life spans, their numbers must be constantly replen-
ished. In current models of hematopoiesis, some divisions 
of HSCs give rise to cells referred to as multipotent pro­
genitors, which are more proliferative than HSCs but have 
a lesser capacity for self-renewal (Fig. 13-1). Division of 
multipotent progenitors gives rise to at least one daughter 
cell that leaves the stem cell pool and begins to differenti-
ate. Once past this threshold, these newly committed 
cells lose the capacity for self-renewal and commence an 
inexorable journey down a road that leads to terminal dif-
ferentiation and death. However, as these progenitors dif-
ferentiate, they also begin to proliferate more rapidly in 
response to growth factors, expanding their numbers. 
Some growth factors, such as stem cell factor (also called 
KIT ligand) and FLT3-ligand, act through receptors that are 
expressed on very early committed progenitors. Others, 
such as erythropoietin, granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF), G-CSF, and thrombopoietin, 
act through receptors that are only expressed on com­
mitted progenitors with more restricted differentiation 
potentials. Feedback loops involving these lineage-specific 
growth factors tune the marrow output, allowing the 
numbers of formed blood elements (red cells, white cells, 
and platelets) to be maintained within appropriate ranges 
(Table 13-1).
Many diseases alter the production of blood cells. The 
marrow is the ultimate source of most cells of the innate 
and adaptive immune system and responds to infectious 
or inflammatory challenges by increasing its output of 
granulocytes under the direction of specific growth factors 
and cytokines. By contrast, many other disorders are asso-
ciated with defects in hematopoiesis that lead to deficien-
cies of one or more types of blood cells. Primary tumors of 
Table 13-1  Adult Reference Ranges for Blood Cells*
Cell Type
White cells (×103/µL)
4.8-10.8
Granulocytes (%)
40-70
Neutrophils (×103/µL)
1.4-6.5
Lymphocytes (×103/µL)
1.2-3.4
Monocytes (×103/µL)
0.1-0.6
Eosinophils (×103/µL)
0-0.5
Basophils (×103/µL)
0-0.2
Red cells (×103/µL)
4.3-5, men; 3.5-5, women
Platelets (×103/µL)
150-450
*Reference ranges vary among laboratories. The reference ranges for the laboratory providing 
the result should always be used.
  MORPHOLOGY
The bone marrow is a unique microenvironment that supports 
the orderly proliferation, differentiation, and release of blood 
cells. It is filled with a network of thin-walled sinusoids lined by 
a single layer of endothelial cells, which are underlaid by a 
discontinuous basement membrane and adventitial cells. Within 
the interstitium lie clusters of hematopoietic cells and fat cells. 
Differentiated blood cells enter the circulation by transcellular 
migration through the endothelial cells.
The normal marrow is organized in subtle, but important, 
ways. For example, normal megakaryocytes lie next to sinu-
soids and extend cytoplasmic processes that bud off into the 
bloodstream to produce platelets, while red cell precursors 
often surround macrophages (so-called nurse cells) that provide 
some of the iron needed for the synthesis of hemoglobin. 
Processes that distort the marrow architecture, such as depos-
its of metastatic cancer or granulomatous disorders, can cause 
the abnormal release of immature precursors into the peripheral 
blood, a finding that is referred to as leukoerythroblastosis.
Marrow aspirate smears provide the best assessment of  
the morphology of hematopoietic cells. The most mature 
marrow precursors can be identified based on their morphology 
alone. Immature precursors (“blast” forms) of different types  
are morphologically similar and must be identified definitively 
using lineage-specific antibodies and histochemical markers 
(described later under white cell neoplasms). Biopsies are a 
582
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
good means for estimating marrow activity. In normal adults, 
the ratio of fat cells to hematopoietic elements is about 1 : 1. In 
hypoplastic states (e.g., aplastic anemia) the proportion of fat 
cells is greatly increased; conversely, fat cells often disappear 
when the marrow is involved by hematopoietic tumors and in 
diseases characterized by compensatory hyperplasias (e.g., 
hemolytic anemias), and neoplastic proliferations such as leu-
kemias. Other disorders (e.g., metastatic cancers and granulo-
matous diseases) induce local marrow fibrosis. Such lesions are 
usually inaspirable and best seen in biopsies.
DISORDERS OF WHITE CELLS
Disorders of white blood cells can be classified into two 
broad categories: proliferative disorders, in which there is 
an expansion of leukocytes, and leukopenias, which are 
defined as a deficiency of leukocytes. Proliferations of 
white cells can be reactive or neoplastic. Reactive prolifera-
tions in the setting of infections or inflammatory processes, 
when leukocytes are needed for an effective host response, 
are fairly common. Neoplastic disorders, though less fre-
quent, are much more important clinically. In the following 
discussion we will first describe the leukopenic states and 
summarize the common reactive disorders, and then con-
sider in some detail the malignant proliferations of white 
cells.
Leukopenia
The number of circulating white cells may be markedly 
decreased in a variety of disorders. An abnormally low 
white cell count (leukopenia) usually results from reduced 
numbers of neutrophils (neutropenia, granulocytopenia). 
Lymphopenia is less common; in addition to congenital immu-
nodeficiency diseases (Chapter 6), it is most commonly 
observed in advanced human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
infection, following therapy with glucocorticoids or cyto-
toxic drugs, autoimmune disorders, malnutrition, and 
certain acute viral infections. In the latter setting lymphope-
nia actually stems from lymphocyte redistribution rather 
than a decrease in the number of lymphocytes in the body. 
Acute viral infections induce production of type I interfer-
ons, which activate T lymphocytes and change the expres-
sion of surface proteins that regulate T cell migration. These 
changes result in the sequestration of activated T cells in 
lymph nodes and increased adherence to endothelial cells, 
both of which contribute to lymphopenia. Granulo­cytopenia 
is more common and is often associated with diminished 
granulocyte function, and thus merits further discussion.
Neutropenia, Agranulocytosis
Neutropenia, a reduction in the number of neutrophils in 
the blood, occurs in a wide variety of circumstances. 
Agranulocytosis, a clinically significant reduction in neutro-
phils, has the serious consequence of making individuals 
susceptible to bacterial and fungal infections.
Pathogenesis.  Neutropenia can be caused by (1) inade-
quate or ineffective granulopoiesis, or (2) increased 
destruction or sequestration of neutrophils in the periph-
ery. Inadequate or ineffective granulopoiesis is observed 
in the setting of:
•	 Suppression of hematopoietic stem cells, as occurs in aplas-
tic anemia (Chapter 14) and a variety of infiltrative 
marrow disorders (e.g., tumors, granulomatous disease); 
in these conditions granulocytopenia is accompanied by 
anemia and thrombocytopenia
•	 Suppression of committed granulocytic precursors by expo-
sure to certain drugs (discussed later)
•	 Disease states associated with ineffective hematopoiesis, 
such as megaloblastic anemias (Chapter 14) and myelo-
dysplastic syndromes, in which defective precursors die 
in the marrow
•	 Rare congenital conditions (e.g., Kostmann syndrome) in 
which inherited defects in specific genes impair granu-
locytic differentiation
Accelerated destruction or sequestration of neutrophils 
occurs with
•	 Immunologically mediated injury to neutrophils, which 
can be idiopathic, associated with a well-defined immu-
nologic disorder (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus), 
or caused by exposure to drugs
•	 Splenomegaly, in which splenic enlargement leads to 
sequestration of neutrophils and modest neutropenia, 
sometimes associated with anemia and often with 
thrombocytopenia
•	 Increased peripheral utilization, which can occur in over-
whelming bacterial, fungal, or rickettsial infections
The most common cause of agranulocytosis is drug 
toxicity. Certain drugs, such as alkylating agents and anti-
metabolites used in cancer treatment, produce agranulocy-
tosis in a predictable, dose-related fashion. Because such 
drugs cause a generalized suppression of hematopoiesis, 
production of red cells and platelets is also affected. 
Agranulocytosis can also occur as an idiosyncratic reaction 
to a large variety of agents. The roster of implicated drugs 
includes aminopyrine, chloramphenicol, sulfonamides, 
chlorpromazine, thiouracil, and phenylbutazone. The neu-
tropenia induced by chlorpromazine and related phenothi-
azines results from a toxic effect on granulocytic precursors 
in the bone marrow. In contrast, agranulocytosis following 
administration of other drugs, such as sulfonamides, prob-
ably stems from antibody-mediated destruction of mature 
neutrophils through mechanisms similar to those involved 
in drug-induced immunohemolytic anemias (Chapter 14).
In some patients with acquired idiopathic neutropenia, 
autoantibodies directed against neutrophil-specific anti-
gens are detected. Severe neutropenia can also occur in 
association with monoclonal proliferations of large granu-
lar lymphocytes (so-called LGL leukemia). The mechanism 
583
Disorders of white cells
•	 The rate of release of cells from the storage pools into 
the circulation
•	 The proportion of cells that are adherent to blood vessel 
walls at any time (the marginal pool)
•	 The rate of extravasation of cells from the blood into 
tissues
As discussed in Chapter 3, leukocyte homeostasis is 
maintained by cytokines, growth factors, and adhesion 
molecules through their effects on the commitment, prolif-
eration, differentiation, and extravasation of leukocytes 
and their progenitors. Table 13-2 summarizes the major 
mechanisms of neutrophilic leukocytosis and its causes, 
the most important of which is infection. In acute infection 
there is a rapid increase in the egress of mature granulo-
cytes from the bone marrow pool, an alteration that may 
be mediated through the effects of tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) and interleukin-1 (IL-1). If the infection or an inflam-
matory process is prolonged, IL-1, TNF, and other inflam-
matory mediators stimulate macrophages, bone marrow 
stromal cells and T cells to produce increased amounts of 
hematopoietic growth factors. These factors enhance the 
proliferation and differentiation of committed granulocytic 
progenitors and, over several days, cause a sustained 
increase in neutrophil production.
Some growth factors preferentially stimulate the produc-
tion of a single type of leukocyte. For example, IL-5 mainly 
stimulates eosinophil production, while G-CSF induces 
neutrophilia. Such factors are differentially produced in 
response to various pathogenic stimuli and, as a result, the 
five principal types of leukocytosis (neutrophilia, eosino-
philia, basophilia, monocytosis, and lymphocytosis) tend to 
be observed in different clinical settings (Table 13-3).
In sepsis or severe inflammatory disorders (e.g., 
Kawasaki disease), leukocytosis is often accompanied by 
morphologic changes in the neutrophils, such as toxic 
granulations, Döhle bodies, and cytoplasmic vacuoles (Fig. 
13-2). Toxic granules, which are coarser and darker than the 
normal neutrophilic granules, represent abnormal azuro-
philic (primary) granules. Döhle bodies are patches of dilated 
endoplasmic reticulum that appear as sky-blue cytoplas-
mic “puddles.”
In most instances it is not difficult to distinguish reactive 
and neoplastic leukocytoses, but uncertainties may arise 
in two settings. Acute viral infections, particularly in 
Clinical Features.  The symptoms and signs of neutropenia 
are related to infection, and include malaise, chills, and 
fever, often followed by marked weakness and fatigability. 
With agranulocytosis, infections are often overwhelming 
and may cause death within hours to days.
Serious infections are most likely when the neutrophil 
count falls below 500 per mm3. Because infections are 
often fulminant, broad-spectrum antibiotics must be given 
expeditiously whenever signs or symptoms appear. In 
some instances, such as following myelosuppressive che-
motherapy, neutropenia is treated with G-CSF, a growth 
factor that stimulates the production of granulocytes from 
marrow precursors.
Reactive Proliferations of White Cells  
and Lymph Nodes
Leukocytosis
Leukocytosis refers to an increase in the number of white 
cells in the blood. It is a common reaction to a variety of 
inflammatory states.
Pathogenesis.  The peripheral blood leukocyte count is 
influenced by several factors, including:
•	 The size of the myeloid and lymphoid precursor and 
storage cell pools in the bone marrow, thymus, circula-
tion, and peripheral tissues
Table 13-2  Mechanisms and Causes of Leukocytosis
Increased Production in the Marrow
Chronic infection or inflammation (growth factor-dependent)
Paraneoplastic (e.g., Hodgkin lymphoma; growth factor-dependent)
Myeloproliferative disorders (e.g., chronic myeloid leukemia; growth 
factor-independent)
Increased Release from Marrow Stores
Endotoxemia
Infection
Hypoxia
Decreased Margination
Exercise
Catecholamines
Decreased Extravasation into Tissues
Glucocorticoids
  MORPHOLOGY
The alterations in the bone marrow vary with cause. With 
excessive destruction of neutrophils in the periphery, the 
marrow is usually hypercellular due to a compensatory increase 
in granulocytic precursors. Hypercellularity is also the rule with 
neutropenias caused by ineffective granulopoiesis, as occurs  
in megaloblastic anemias and myelodysplastic syndromes. 
Agranulocytosis caused by agents that suppress or destroy 
granulocytic precursors is understandably associated with 
marrow hypocellularity.
Infections are a common consequence of agranulocytosis. 
Ulcerating necrotizing lesions of the gingiva, floor of the mouth, 
buccal mucosa, pharynx, or elsewhere in the oral cavity (agran-
ulocytic angina) are quite characteristic. These are typically 
deep, undermined, and covered by gray to green-black necrotic 
membranes from which numerous bacteria or fungi can be 
isolated. Less frequently, similar ulcerative lesions occur in  
the skin, vagina, anus, or gastrointestinal tract. Severe life-
threatening invasive bacterial or fungal infections may occur in 
the lungs, urinary tract, and kidneys. The neutropenic patient is 
at particularly high risk for deep fungal infections caused by 
Candida and Aspergillus. Sites of infection often show a massive 
growth of organisms with little leukocytic response. In the most 
dramatic instances, bacteria grow in colonies (botryomycosis) 
resembling those seen on agar plates.
of this neutropenia is not clear; suppression of granulocytic 
progenitors by products of the neoplastic cell (usually a 
CD8+ cytotoxic T cell) is considered most likely.
584
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
structures in which B cells acquire the capacity to make 
high-affinity 
antibodies 
against 
specific 
antigens. 
Paracortical T-cell zones may also undergo hyperplasia. 
The degree and pattern of the morphologic changes are 
dependent on the inciting stimulus and the intensity of 
the response. Trivial injuries and infections induce subtle 
changes, while more significant infections inevitably 
produce nodal enlargement and sometimes leave residual 
scarring. For this reason, lymph nodes in adults are almost 
never “normal” or “resting,” and it is often necessary to 
distinguish morphologic changes secondary to past experi-
ence from those related to present disease. Infections and 
inflammatory stimuli often elicit regional or systemic 
immune reactions within lymph nodes. Some that produce 
distinctive morphologic patterns are described in other 
chapters. Most, however, cause stereotypical patterns of 
lymph node reaction designated acute and chronic nonspe-
cific lymphadenitis.
Acute Nonspecific Lymphadenitis
Acute lymphadenitis in the cervical region is most often 
due to drainage of microbes or microbial products from 
infections of the teeth or tonsils, while in the axillary or 
inguinal regions it is most often caused by infections in the 
extremities. Acute lymphadenitis also occurs in mesenteric 
lymph nodes draining acute appendicitis. Other self-
limited infections may also cause acute mesenteric adenitis 
and induce symptoms mimicking acute appendicitis, a dif-
ferential diagnosis that plagues the surgeon. Systemic viral 
infections (particularly in children) and bacteremia often 
produce acute generalized lymphadenopathy.
Nodes involved by acute lymphadenitis are enlarged 
and painful. When abscess formation is extensive the nodes 
become fluctuant. The overlying skin is red. Sometimes, 
suppurative infections penetrate through the capsule of the 
children, can cause the appearance of large numbers of 
activated lymphocytes that resemble neoplastic lymphoid 
cells. At other times, particularly in severe infections, many 
immature granulocytes appear in the blood, mimicking a 
myeloid leukemia (leukemoid reaction). Special laboratory 
studies (discussed later) are helpful in distinguishing reac-
tive and neoplastic leukocytoses.
Lymphadenitis
Following their initial development from precursors in the 
central (also called primary) lymphoid organs,—the bone 
marrow for B cells and the thymus for T cells—, lympho-
cytes circulate through the blood and, under the influence 
of specific cytokines and chemokines, home to lymph 
nodes, spleen, tonsils, adenoids, and Peyer’s patches, 
which constitute the peripheral (secondary) lymphoid 
tissues. Lymph nodes, the most widely distributed and 
easily accessible lymphoid tissue, are frequently examined 
for diagnostic purposes. They are discrete encapsulated 
structures that contain well-organized B-cell and T-cell 
zones, which are richly invested with phagocytes and 
antigen-presenting cells (see Fig. 6-8, Chapter 6).
The activation of resident immune cells leads to mor-
phologic changes in lymph nodes. Within several days of 
antigenic stimulation, the primary follicles enlarge and 
develop pale-staining germinal centers, highly dynamic 
Table 13-3  Causes of Leukocytosis
Type of Leukocytosis
Causes
Neutrophilic leukocytosis
Acute bacterial infections, especially those caused by pyogenic organisms; sterile inflammation caused by, for 
example, tissue necrosis (myocardial infarction, burns)
Eosinophilic leukocytosis (eosinophilia)
Allergic disorders such as asthma, hay fever, parasitic infestations; drug reactions; certain malignancies (e.g., 
Hodgkin and some non-Hodgkin lymphomas); automimmune disorders (e.g., pemphigus, dermatitis 
herpetiformis) and some vasculitides; atheroembolic disease (transient)
Basophilic leukocytosis (basophilia)
Rare, often indicative of a myeloproliferative disease (e.g., chronic myelogenous leukemia)
Monocytosis
Chronic infections (e.g., tuberculosis), bacterial endocarditis, rickettsiosis, and malaria; autoimmune disorders (e.g., 
systemic lupus erythematosus); inflammatory bowel diseases (e.g., ulcerative colitis)
Lymphocytosis
Accompanies monocytosis in many disorders associated with chronic immunologic stimulation (e.g., tuberculosis, 
brucellosis); viral infections (e.g., hepatitis A, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus); Bordetella pertussis infection
Figure 13-2  Reactive changes in neutrophils. Neutrophils containing coarse 
purple cytoplasmic granules (toxic granulations) and blue cytoplasmic 
patches of dilated endoplasmic reticulum (Döhle bodies, arrow) are observed 
in this peripheral blood smear prepared from a patient with bacterial sepsis. 
  MORPHOLOGY
The nodes are swollen, gray-red, and engorged. Microscopically, 
there is prominence of large reactive germinal centers contain-
ing numerous mitotic figures. Macrophages often contain par-
ticulate debris derived from dead bacteria or necrotic cells. 
When pyogenic organisms are the cause, neutrophils are prom-
inent and the centers of the follicles may undergo necrosis; 
sometimes the entire node is converted to a bag of pus. With 
less severe reactions, scattered neutrophils infiltrate about the 
follicles and accumulate within the lymphoid sinuses. The endo-
thelial cells lining the sinuses undergo hyperplasia.
585
Disorders of white cells
Furthermore, chronic immune reactions can promote 
the appearance of organized collections of immune cells in 
nonlymphoid tissues. These collections are sometimes 
called tertiary lymphoid organs. A classic example is that 
of chronic gastritis caused by Helicobacter pylori, in which 
aggregates of mucosal lymphocytes are seen that simulate 
the appearance of Peyer patches. A similar phenomenon 
occurs in rheumatoid arthritis, in which B-cell follicles 
often appear in the inflamed synovium. Lymphotoxin, a 
cytokine required for the formation of normal Peyer 
patches, is probably involved in the establishment of these 
“extranodal” inflammation-induced collections of lym-
phoid cells.
Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a reactive con-
dition marked by cytopenias and signs and symptoms of 
systemic inflammation related to macrophage activation. 
For this reason, it is also sometimes referred to as macro-
phage activation syndrome. Some forms are familial and may 
appear early in life, even in infants, while other forms are 
sporadic and may affect people of any age.
Pathogenesis.  The common feature of all forms of HLH is 
systemic activation of macrophages and CD8+ cytotoxic 
node and track to the skin to produce draining sinuses. 
Healing of such lesions is associated with scarring.
Chronic Nonspecific Lymphadenitis
Chronic immunologic stimuli produce several different 
patterns of lymph node reaction, as described later.
  MORPHOLOGY
Follicular hyperplasia is caused by stimuli that activate 
humoral immune responses. It is defined by the presence of 
large oblong germinal centers (secondary follicles), which are 
surrounded by a collar of small resting naive B cells (the mantle 
zone) (Fig. 13-3). Germinal centers are normally polarized, con-
sisting of two distinct regions: (1) a dark zone containing pro-
liferating blastlike B cells (centroblasts) and (2) a light zone 
composed of B cells with irregular or cleaved nuclear contours 
(centrocytes). Interspersed between the germinal B centers is 
an incon­spicuous network of antigen-presenting follicular den-
dritic 
cells  
and macrophages (often referred to as tingible-body macro-
phages) containing the nuclear debris of B cells, which undergo 
apoptosis if they fail to produce an antibody with a high affinity 
for antigen.
Causes of follicular hyperplasia include rheumatoid arthritis, 
toxoplasmosis, and early stages of infection with HIV. This form 
of hyperplasia is morphologically similar to follicular lymphoma 
(discussed later). Features favoring a reactive (nonneoplastic) 
hyperplasia include (1) preservation of the lymph node architec-
ture, including the interfollicular T-cell zones and the sinusoids; 
(2) marked variation in the shape and size of the follicles; and 
(3) the presence of frequent mitotic figures, phagocytic macro-
phages, and recognizable light and dark zones, all of which tend 
to be absent from neoplastic follicles.
Paracortical hyperplasia is caused by stimuli that trigger 
T-cell–mediated immune responses, such as acute viral infec-
tions (e.g., infectious mononucleosis). The T-cell regions typi-
cally contain immunoblasts, activated T cells three to four times 
the size of resting lymphocytes that have round nuclei, open 
chromatin, several prominent nucleoli, and moderate amounts 
of pale cytoplasm. The expanded T-cell zones encroach on 
and, in particularly exuberant reactions, efface the B-cell folli-
cles. In such cases immunoblasts may be so numerous that 
special studies are needed to exclude a lymphoid neoplasm. In 
addition, there is often a hypertrophy of sinusoidal and vascular 
endothelial cells, sometimes accompanied by infiltrating mac-
rophages and eosinophils.
Sinus histiocytosis (also called reticular hyperplasia) refers 
to an increase in the number and size of the cells that line 
lymphatic sinusoids. Although nonspecific, this form of hyper-
plasia may be particularly prominent in lymph nodes draining 
cancers such as carcinoma of the breast. The lining lymphatic 
endothelial cells are markedly hypertrophied and macrophages 
are greatly increased in numbers, resulting in the expansion and 
distension of the sinuses.
Figure 13-3  Follicular hyperplasia. A, Low-power view showing a reactive 
follicle and surrounding mantle zone. The dark-staining mantle zone is more 
prominent adjacent to the germinal-center light zone in the left  
half of the follicle. The right half of the follicle consists of the dark zone.  
B, High-power view of the dark zone shows several mitotic figures and 
numerous macrophages containing phagocytosed apoptotic cells (tingible 
bodies). 
Characteristically, lymph nodes in chronic reactions are 
nontender, as nodal enlargement occurs slowly over time 
and acute inflammation with associated tissue damage is 
absent. Chronic lymphadenitis is particularly common in 
inguinal and axillary nodes, which drain relatively large 
areas of the body and are frequently stimulated by immune 
reactions to trivial injuries and infections of the extremities.
586
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
T cells. The activated macrophages phagocytose blood cell 
progenitors in the marrow and formed elements in the 
peripheral tissues, while the “stew” of mediators released 
from macrophages and lymphocytes suppress hematopoi-
esis and produce symptoms of systemic inflammation. 
These effects lead to cytopenias and a shock-like picture, 
sometimes referred to as “cytokine storm” or the systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome (Chapter 4). 
Familial forms of HLH are associated with several dif-
ferent mutations, all of which impact the ability of cyto-
toxic T cells and NK to properly form or deploy cytotoxic 
granules. How these defects lead to HLH is not known. One 
idea with some experimental support is based on the 
premise that cytotoxic T cells keep immune responses in 
check by lysing antigen-bearing dendritic cells or activated 
macrophages; if this regulatory mechanism fails, hyperacti-
vation of the immune system and the clinical syndrome of 
HLH ensue. Unbridled HLH is associated with extremely 
high levels of inflammatory mediators such as interferon-γ, 
TNFα, IL-6, and IL-12, as well as soluble IL-2 receptor. Some 
“sporadic” cases in adults also prove to have mutations in 
the same set of genes, while in other adult-onset patients the 
cause is unknown. The most common trigger for HLH is 
infection, particularly with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV).
Clinical Features.  Most patients present with an acute 
febrile illness associated with splenomegaly and hepato-
megaly. Hemophagocytosis is usually seen on bone 
marrow examination, but is neither sufficient nor required 
to make the diagnosis. Laboratory studies typically reveal 
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and very high levels of plasma 
ferritin and soluble IL-2 receptor, both indicative of severe 
inflammation, as well as elevated liver function tests and 
triglyceride levels, both related to hepatitis. Coagulation 
studies may show evidence of disseminated intravascular 
coagulation. If untreated, this picture can progress rapidly 
to multiorgan failure, shock, and death.
Treatment involves the use of immunosuppressive 
drugs and “mild” chemotherapy. Patients with germline 
mutations that cause HLH or who have persistent/resis-
tant disease are candidates for hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation. Without treatment, the prognosis is grim, 
particularly in those with familial forms of the disease, 
who typically survive for less than 2 months. With prompt 
treatment, with or without subsequent hematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation, roughly half of patients survive, 
though many do so with significant sequelae, such as renal 
damage in adults and growth and mental retardation in 
children.
Neoplastic Proliferations of White Cells
Malignancies are clinically the most important disorders 
of white cells. These diseases fall into several broad 
categories:
•	 Lymphoid neoplasms include a diverse group of tumors 
of B-cell, T-cell, and NK-cell origin. In many instances 
the phenotype of the neoplastic cell closely resembles 
that of a particular stage of normal lymphocyte matura-
tion, a feature that is used in the diagnosis and classifica-
tion of these disorders.
•	 Myeloid neoplasms arise from early hematopoietic pro-
genitors. Three categories of myeloid neoplasia are rec-
ognized: acute myeloid leukemias, in which immature 
progenitor cells accumulate in the bone marrow; myelo-
dysplastic syndromes, which are associated with inef­
fective hematopoiesis and resultant peripheral blood 
cytopenias; and chronic myeloproliferative disorders, in 
which increased production of one or more terminally 
differentiated myeloid elements (e.g., granulocytes) 
usually leads to elevated peripheral blood counts.
•	 The histiocytoses are uncommon proliferative lesions of 
macrophages and dendritic cells. Although “histiocyte” 
(literally, “tissue cell”) is an archaic morphologic term, 
it is still often used. A special type of immature dendritic 
cell, the Langerhans cell, gives rise to a spectrum of 
neoplastic disorders referred to as the Langerhans cell 
histiocytoses.
Etiologic and Pathogenetic Factors in White  
Cell Neoplasia: Overview
As discussed see in the following sections, the neoplastic 
disorders of white cells are extremely varied. Before 
we delve into this complexity, it is worth considering a 
few themes of general relevance to their etiology and 
pathogenesis.
Chromosomal Translocations and Other Acquired Muta­
tions.  Nonrandom chromosomal abnormalities, most 
commonly translocations, are present in the majority of 
white cell neoplasms. Many specific rearrangements are 
associated with particular neoplasms, suggesting a critical 
role in their genesis (Chapter 7).
•	 The genes that are mutated or otherwise altered often 
play crucial roles in the development, growth, or sur-
vival of the normal counterpart of the malignant cell. 
As a consequence, certain mutations are strongly associ-
ated with specific tumor types, so much so that is some 
instances they are required for particular diagnoses. In 
some instances, the mutation produces a “dominant-
negative” protein that interferes with a normal function 
(a loss of function); in others the result is an inappro­
priate increase in some normal activity (a gain of 
function). 
•	 Oncoproteins created by genomic aberrations often 
block normal maturation, turn on pro-growth signal-
ing pathways, or protect cells from apoptotic cell 
death. Figure 13-4 highlights some of the more common 
or better characterized oncogenic events that serve as 
oncogenic driver mutations in particular kinds of white 
cell malignancies.
•	 Many oncoproteins cause an arrest in differentiation, 
often at a stage when cells are proliferating rapidly. 
The importance of this block in maturation is most 
evident in the acute leukemias, in which dominant-
negative oncogenic mutations involving transcrip-
tion factors are often present that interfere with early 
stages of lymphoid or myeloid cell differentiation.
•	 Other mutations in transcriptional regulators seem to 
directly enhance the self-renewal of tumors cells, 
587
Disorders of white cells
within the Ig and T-cell receptor loci, respectively. This 
process is essential for the assembly of productive 
antigen receptor genes, but sometimes goes awry, 
leading to the joining of portions of other genes to 
antigen receptor gene regulatory elements. Particularly 
in tumors of precursor T cells, proto-oncogenes are 
often deregulated by their involvement in such aber-
rant recombination events.
Inherited Genetic Factors.  As discussed in Chapter 7, indi-
viduals with genetic diseases that promote genomic insta-
bility, such as Bloom syndrome, Fanconi anemia, and 
ataxia telangiectasia, are at increased risk of acute leuke-
mia. In addition, both Down syndrome (trisomy 21) and 
type I neurofibromatosis are associated with an increased 
incidence of childhood leukemia.
Viruses.  Three lymphotropic viruses—human T-cell leu-
kemia virus-1 (HTLV-1), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 
and Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus/human herpesvirus-8 
(KSHV/HHV-8)—have been implicated as causative 
agents in particular lymphomas. The possible mechanisms 
of transformation by viruses are discussed in Chapter 
7. HTLV-1 is associated with adult T-cell leukemia/
lymphoma. EBV is found in a subset of Burkitt lymphoma, 
30% to 40% of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), many B-cell lym-
phomas arising in the setting of T-cell immunodeficiency, 
and rare NK-cell lymphomas. In addition to Kaposi 
sarcoma (Chapter 11), KSHV is associated with an unusual 
B-cell lymphoma that presents as a malignant effusion, 
often in the pleural cavity.
Chronic Inflammation.  Several agents that cause localized 
chronic inflammation predispose to lymphoid neoplasia, 
which almost always arises within the inflamed tissue. 
Examples include the associations between H. pylori infec-
tion and gastric B-cell lymphomas (Chapter 17), gluten-
sensitive enteropathy and intestinal T-cell lymphomas, and 
even breast implants, which are associated with an unusual 
subtype of T cell lymphoma. This can be contrasted with 
HIV infection, which is associated with an increased risk 
of B-cell lymphomas that may arise within virtually any 
organ. Early in the course, T-cell dysregulation by HIV 
infection causes a systemic hyperplasia of germinal center 
B cells that is associated with an increased incidence of 
germinal center B-cell lymphomas. In advanced infection 
(acquired immunodeficiency syndrome), severe T-cell 
immunodeficiency further elevates the risk for B-cell lym-
phomas, particularly those associated with EBV and 
KSHV/HHV-8. These relationships are discussed in more 
detail in Chapter 6.
Iatrogenic Factors.  Ironically, radiation therapy and 
certain forms of chemotherapy used to treat cancer increase 
the risk of subsequent myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms. 
This association stems from the mutagenic effects of ion-
izing radiation and chemotherapeutic drugs on hemato-
lymphoid progenitor cells.
Smoking.  The incidence of acute myeloid leukemia is 
increased 1.3- to 2-fold in smokers, presumably because of 
exposure to carcinogens, such as benzene, in tobacco 
smoke.
Figure 13-4  Pathogenesis of white cell malignancies. Various tumors harbor 
mutations that principally effect maturation or enhance self-renewal, drive 
growth, or prevent apoptosis. Exemplary examples of each type of mutation 
are listed; details are provided later under specific tumor types. 
Pro-growth mutations
(tyrosine kinase mutations,
MYC translocation)
Mutations in transcription
factors that influence
self-renewal
(MLL translocation,
PML-RARA fusion gene)
Pro-survival
mutations
(BCL2 translocation)
Increased cell division
Warburg metabolism
Increased
self-renewal
Decreased
apoptosis
giving such cells stem-cell–like properties. These 
types of mutations often collaborate with mutations 
that produce a constitutively active tyrosine kinase; 
oncogenic tyrosine kinases activate RAS and its two 
downstream signaling arms, the PI3K/AKT and 
MAPK pathways (Chapter 7), and thereby drive cell 
growth and Warburg metabolism.
•	 Finally, mutations that inhibit apoptosis are preva-
lent in certain hematologic malignancies.
•	 Proto-oncogenes are often activated in lymphoid cells 
by errors that occur during antigen receptor gene rear-
rangement and diversification. Among lymphoid cells, 
potentially oncogenic mutations occur most frequently 
in germinal center B cells during attempted antibody 
diversification. After antigen stimulation, B cells enter 
germinal centers and upregulate the expression of 
activation-induced cytosine deaminase (AID), a spe-
cialized DNA-modifying enzyme that is essential for 
two types of immunoglobulin (Ig) gene modifications: 
class switching, an intragenic recombination event in 
which the IgM heavy-chain constant gene segment is 
replaced with a different constant segment (e.g., IgG3), 
leading to a switch in the class (isotype) of antibody 
produced; and somatic hypermutation, which creates 
point mutations within Ig genes that may increase anti-
body affinity for antigen (Chapter 6). Certain proto-
oncogenes, such as MYC, are activated in germinal 
center B-cell lymphomas by translocations to the tran-
scriptionally active Ig locus. Remarkably, AID expres-
sion is sufficient to induce MYC/Ig translocations in 
normal germinal center B cells, apparently because AID 
creates lesions in DNA that lead to chromosomal 
breaks. Other proto-oncogenes, such as BCL6, a tran-
scription factor that has an important role in many B 
cell malignancies, are frequently activated in germinal 
center B-cell lymphomas by point mutations that also 
seem to stem from “mistargeted” DNA breaks induced 
by AID. A different type of regulated genomic instabil-
ity is unique to precursor B and T cells, which express 
a V(D)J recombinase that cuts DNA at specific sites 
588
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
clinical features to sort the lymphoid neoplasms into five 
broad categories, which are separated according to the cell 
of origin:
1.	 Precursor B-cell neoplasms (neoplasms of immature B 
cells)
2.	 Peripheral B-cell neoplasms (neoplasms of mature B 
cells)
3.	 Precursor T-cell neoplasms (neoplasms of immature T 
cells)
4.	 Peripheral T-cell and NK-cell neoplasms (neoplasms of 
mature T cells and NK cells)
5.	 Hodgkin lymphoma (neoplasms of Reed-Sternberg cells 
and variants)
Before discussing the specific entities of the WHO clas-
sification, some important principles relevant to the lym-
phoid neoplasms should be emphasized.
•	 Lymphoid neoplasia can be suspected from the clinical 
features, but histologic examination of lymph nodes or 
other involved tissues is required for diagnosis.
Lymphoid Neoplasms
Definitions and Classifications
One confusing aspect of the lymphoid neoplasms concerns 
the use of the terms lymphocytic leukemia and lymphoma. 
Leukemia is used for neoplasms that present with wide-
spread involvement of the bone marrow and (usually, but 
not always) the peripheral blood. Lymphoma is used for 
proliferations that arise as discrete tissue masses. Origi­
nally these terms were attached to what were considered 
distinct entities, but with time and increased understand-
ing these divisions have blurred. Many entities called 
“lymphoma” occasionally have leukemic presentations, 
and evolution to “leukemia” is not unusual during 
the progression of incurable “lymphomas.” Conversely, 
tumors identical to “leukemias” sometimes arise as soft-
tissue masses without detectable bone marrow disease. 
Hence, when applied to particular neoplasms, the terms 
leukemia and lymphoma merely reflect the usual tissue dis-
tribution of each disease at presentation.
Within the large group of lymphomas, Hodgkin lym-
phoma is segregated from all other forms, which constitute 
the non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs). Hodgkin lymphoma 
has distinctive pathologic features and is treated in a 
unique fashion. Another special group of B cell tumors, 
which differs from most lymphomas, is the plasma cell neo-
plasms. These most often arise in the bone marrow and only 
infrequently involve lymph nodes or the peripheral blood. 
Taken together, the diverse lymphoid neoplasms consti-
tute a complex, clinically important group of cancers, with 
about 100,000 new cases being diagnosed each year in the 
United States.
The clinical presentation of the various lymphoid neo-
plasms is most often determined by the anatomic distribu-
tion of disease. Two thirds of NHLs and virtually all 
Hodgkin lymphomas present as enlarged nontender lymph 
nodes (often > 2 cm). The remaining one third of NHLs 
present with symptoms related to the involvement of 
extranodal sites (e.g., skin, stomach, or brain). The lympho-
cytic leukemias most often come to attention because of 
signs and symptoms related to the suppression of normal 
hematopoiesis by tumor cells in the bone marrow. Finally, 
the most common plasma cell neoplasm, multiple myeloma, 
causes bony destruction of the skeleton and often presents 
with pain due to pathologic fractures. Other symptoms 
related to lymphoid tumors are frequently caused by pro-
teins secreted from the tumor cells or from immune cells 
that are responding to the tumor. Specific examples include 
the plasma cell tumors, in which much of the pathophysiol-
ogy is related to the secretion of whole antibodies or 
Ig fragments; Hodgkin lymphoma, which is often associ-
ated with fever related to the release of cytokines from 
inflammatory cells responding to the tumor cells; and 
peripheral T-cell lymphomas, tumors of functional T cells 
that often release a number of inflammatory cytokines and 
chemokines.
Historically, few areas of pathology evoked as much 
controversy as the classification of lymphoid neoplasms, 
but consensus has been reached through use of objective 
molecular diagnostic tools. The current World Health 
Organization (WHO) classification scheme (Table 13-4) 
uses morphologic, immunophenotypic, genotypic, and 
Table 13-4  World Health Organization Classification of 
Lymphoid Neoplasms
I.  Precursor B-Cell Neoplasms
B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (B-ALL)
II.  Peripheral B-Cell Neoplasms
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma
B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia
Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
Splenic and nodal marginal zone lymphomas
Extranodal marginal zone lymphoma
Mantle cell lymphoma
Follicular lymphoma
Marginal zone lymphoma
Hairy cell leukemia
Plasmacytoma/plasma cell myeloma
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Burkitt lymphoma
III.  Precursor T-Cell Neoplasms
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL)
IV.  Peripheral T-Cell and NK-Cell Neoplasms
T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia
Large granular lymphocytic leukemia
Mycosis fungoides/Sézary syndrome
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified
Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma
Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma
Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma
Panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma
Hepatosplenic γδT-cell lymphoma
Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma
NK-cell leukemia
V.  Hodgkin Lymphoma
Classical subtypes
Nodular sclerosis
Mixed cellularity
Lymphocyte-rich
Lymphocyte depletion
Lymphocyte predominance
NK, Natural killer.
589
Disorders of white cells
encountered. Markers recognized by antibodies that are 
helpful in the characterization of lymphomas and leu-
kemias are listed in Table 13-5.
•	 Lymphoid neoplasms are often associated with 
immune abnormalities. Both a loss of protective immu-
nity (susceptibility to infection) and a breakdown of 
tolerance (autoimmunity) can be seen, sometimes in 
the same patient. In a further ironic twist, individuals 
with inherited or acquired immunodeficiency are them-
selves at high risk of developing certain lymphoid neo-
plasms, particularly those caused by oncogenic viruses 
(e.g., EBV).
•	 Neoplastic B and T cells tend to recapitulate the 
behavior of their normal counterparts. Like normal 
lymphocytes, neoplastic B and T cells home to certain 
tissue sites, leading to characteristic patterns of involve-
ment. For example, follicular lymphomas home to ger-
minal centers in lymph nodes, whereas cutaneous 
T-cell lymphomas home to the skin. Like their normal 
counterparts, particular adhesion molecules and chemo-
kine receptors govern the homing of the neoplastic lym-
phoid cells. Variable numbers of neoplastic B and T 
•	 Antigen receptor gene rearrangement generally pre-
cedes transformation of lymphoid cells; hence, all 
daughter cells derived from the malignant progenitor 
share the same antigen receptor gene configuration 
and sequence, and synthesize identical antigen recep-
tor proteins (either Igs or T-cell receptors). In contrast, 
normal immune responses are comprised of polyclonal 
populations of lymphocytes that express many different 
antigen receptors. Thus, analyses of antigen receptor 
genes and their protein products can be used to distin-
guish reactive (polyclonal) and malignant (monoclonal) 
lymphoid proliferations. In addition, each antigen 
receptor gene rearrangement produces a unique DNA 
sequence that constitutes a highly specific clonal marker, 
which can be used to detect small numbers of residual 
malignant lymphoid cells after therapy.
•	 Most lymphoid neoplasms resemble some recogniz-
able stage of B- or T-cell differentiation (Fig. 13-5), a 
feature that is used in their classification. The vast 
majority (85% to 90%) of lymphoid neoplasms are of 
B-cell origin, with most of the remainder being T-cell 
tumors; only rarely are tumors of NK cell origin 
Figure 13-5  Origin of lymphoid neoplasms. Stages of B- and T-cell differentiation from which specific lymphoid tumors emerge are shown. CLP, Common 
lymphoid precursor; BLB, pre-B lymphoblast; DN, CD4/CD8 double-negative pro-T cell; DP, CD4/CD8 double-positive pre-T cell; GC, germinal-center  
B cell; MC, mantle B cell; MZ, marginal zone B cell; NBC, naive B cell; PTC, peripheral T cell. 
BONE MARROW
B cell neoplasms
T cell neoplasms
Precursor B
lymphoblastic
lymphoma/
leukemias
Precursor T
lymphoblastic
lymphoma/
leukemias
Peripheral
T cell
lymphomas
Small lymphocytic
lymphoma
Chronic
lymphocytic
leukemia
Multiple myeloma
Mantle cell lymphoma
Follicular lymphoma
Burkitt lymphoma
Diffuse large B cell
    lymphoma
Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Diffuse large B cell lymphoma
Marginal zone lymphoma
Small lymphocytic lymphoma
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
CLP
THYMUS
LYMPH NODE
BLB
NBC
PC
MC
MZ
GC
DN
DP
CD4
CD8
PTC
590
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
We now turn to the specific entities of the WHO clas-
sification. We will begin with neoplasms of immature 
lymphoid cells, and then discuss the more common Non-
Hodgkin lymphomas and plasma cell neoplasms, followed 
by a selection of rarer lymphoid neoplams that are patho-
genically informative or of particular clinical importance. 
Some of the salient molecular and clinical features of these 
neoplasms are summarized in Table 13-6. We will finish by 
discussing the Hodgkin lymphomas.
Precursor B- and T-Cell Neoplasms
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphomas (ALLs) are 
neoplasms composed of immature B (pre-B) or T (pre-T) 
cells, which are referred to as lymphoblasts. About 85% 
are B-ALLs, which typically manifest as childhood acute 
“leukemias.” The less common T-ALLs tend to present in 
adolescent males as thymic “lymphomas.” There is, 
however, considerable overlap in the clinical behavior of 
B- and T-ALL; for example, B-ALL uncommonly presents 
as a mass in the skin or a bone, and many T-ALLs present 
with or evolve to a leukemic picture. Because of their mor-
phologic and clinical similarities, the various forms of ALL 
will be considered here together.
ALL is the most common cancer of children. Approx­
imately 2500 new cases are diagnosed each year in the 
United States, most occurring in individuals younger than 
15 years of age. ALL is almost three times as common in 
whites as in blacks and is slightly more frequent in boys 
than in girls. Hispanics have the highest incidence of any 
ethnic group. B-ALL peaks in incidence at about the age of 
3, perhaps because the number of normal bone marrow 
pre-B cells (the cell of origin) is greatest very early in life. 
Similarly the peak incidence of T-ALL is in adolescence, 
the age when the thymus reaches maximum size. B- and 
T-ALL also occur less frequently in adults of all ages.
Pathogenesis.  Many of the chromosomal aberrations 
seen in ALL dysregulate the expression and function of 
transcription factors required for normal B- and T-cell 
development. Up to 70% of T-ALLs have gain-of-function 
mutations in NOTCH1, a gene that is essential for T-cell 
development. On the other hand, a high fraction of B-ALLs 
have loss-of-function mutations in genes that are required 
for B-cell development, such as PAX5, E2A, and EBF, or a 
balanced t(12;21) involving the genes ETV6 and RUNX1, 
two genes that are needed in very early hematopoietic 
precursors. All of these varied mutations disturb the dif-
ferentiation of lymphoid precursors and promote matura-
tion arrest, and in doing they induce increased self-renewal, 
a stem cell–like phenotype. Similar themes are relevant in 
the genesis of AML (discussed later).
In keeping with the multistep origin of cancer (Chapter 
7), single mutations are not sufficient to produce ALL. The 
identity of these complementary mutations is incomplete, 
but aberrations that drive cell growth, such as mutations 
that increase tyrosine kinase activity and RAS signaling, 
are commonly present. Emerging data from deep sequenc-
ing of ALL genomes is rapidly filling in the remaining 
gaps. Early returns suggest that fewer than 10 mutations 
are sufficient to produce full-blown ALL; hence, compared 
to solid tumors, ALL is a genetically simple tumor.
Table 13-5  Some Immune Cell Antigens Detected by 
Monoclonal Antibodies
Antigen 
Designation
Normal Cellular Distribution
Primarily T-Cell Associated
CD1
Thymocytes and Langerhans cells
CD3
Thymocytes, mature T cells
CD4
Helper T cells, subset of thymocytes
CD5
T cells and a small subset of B cells
CD8
Cytotoxic T cells, subset of thymocytes, and some NK cells
Primarily B-Cell Associated
CD10
Pre-B cells and germinal-center B cells
CD19
Pre-B cells and mature B cells but not plasma cells
CD20
Pre-B cells after CD19 and mature B cells but not plasma 
cells
CD21
EBV receptor; mature B cells and follicular dendritic cells
CD23
Activated mature B cells
CD79a
Marrow pre-B cells and mature B cells
Primarily Monocyte or Macrophage Associated
CD11c
Granulocytes, monocytes, and macrophages; also 
expressed by hairy cell leukemias
CD13
Immature and mature monocytes and granulocytes
CD14
Monocytes
CD15
Granulocytes; Reed-Sternberg cells and variants
CD33
Myeloid progenitors and monocytes
CD64
Mature myeloid cells
Primarily NK-Cell Associated
CD16
NK cells and granulocytes
CD56
NK cells and a subset of T cells
Primarily Stem Cell and Progenitor Cell Associated
CD34
Pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells 
of many lineages
Activation Markers
CD30
Activated B cells, T cells, and monocytes; Reed-Sternberg 
cells and variants
Present on All Leukocytes
CD45
All leukocytes; also known as leukocyte common antigen 
(LCA)
CD, Cluster designation; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; NK, natural killer.
lymphoid cells also recirculate through the lymphatics 
and peripheral blood to distant sites; as a result most 
lymphoid tumors are widely disseminated at the time 
of diagnosis. Notable exceptions to this rule include 
Hodgkin lymphomas, which are sometimes restricted to 
one group of lymph nodes, and marginal zone B-cell 
lymphomas, which are often restricted to sites of chronic 
inflammation.
•	 Hodgkin lymphoma spreads in an orderly fashion, 
whereas most forms of NHL spread widely early in 
their course in a less predictable fashion. Hence, while 
lymphoma staging provides generally useful prognostic 
information, it is of most utility in guiding therapy in 
Hodgkin lymphoma.
591
Disorders of white cells
Table 13-6  Summary of Major Types of Lymphoid Leukemias and Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas
Diagnosis
Cell of Origin
Genotype
Salient Clinical Features
Neoplasms of Immature B and T Cells
B-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia/lymphoma*
Bone marrow precursor 
B cell
Diverse chromosomal translocations; 
t(12;21) involving RUNX1 and ETV6 
present in 25%
Predominantly children; symptoms relating to marrow 
replacement and pancytopenia; aggressive
T-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia/lymphoma
Precursor T cell (often 
of thymic origin)
Diverse chromosomal translocations, 
NOTCH1 mutations (50%-70%)
Predominantly adolescent males; thymic masses and 
variable bone marrow involvement; aggressive
Neoplasms of Mature B Cells
Burkitt lymphoma*
Germinal-center B cell
Translocations involving MYC and lg loci, 
usually t(8;14); subset EBV-associated
Adolescents or young adults with extranodal masses; 
uncommonly presents as “leukemia”; aggressive
Diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma†
Germinal-center or 
postgerminal center 
B cell
Diverse chromosomal rearrangements, 
most often of BCL6 (30%), BCL2 (10%), 
or MYC (5%)
All ages, but most common in older adults; often appears 
as a rapidly growing mass; 30% extranodal; aggressive
Extranodal marginal zone 
lymphoma
Memory B cell
t(11;18), t(1;14), and t(14;18) creating 
MALT1-IAP2, BCL10-IgH, and 
MALT1-IgH fusion genes, respectively
Arises at extranodal sites in adults with chronic 
inflammatory diseases; may remain localized; indolent
Follicular lymphoma†
Germinal-center B cell
t(14;18) creating BCL2-IgH fusion gene
Older adults with generalized lymphadenopathy and 
marrow involvement; indolent
Hairy cell leukemia
Memory B cell
Activating BRAF mutations
Older males with pancytopenia and splenomegaly; indolent
Mantle cell lymphoma
Naive B cell
t(11;14) creating CyclinD1-IgH fusion gene
Older males with disseminated disease; moderately 
aggressive
Multiple myeloma/solitary 
plasmacytoma†
Post-germinal-center 
bone marrow homing 
plasma cell
Diverse rearrangements involving IgH; 13q 
deletions
Myeloma: older adults with lytic bone lesions, pathologic 
fractures, hypercalcemia, and renal failure; moderately 
aggressive
Plasmacytoma: isolated plasma cell masses in bone or 
soft tissue; indolent
Small lymphocytic 
lymphoma/chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia
Naive B cell or memory 
B cell
Trisomy 12, deletions of 11q, 13q, and 
17p
Older adults with bone marrow, lymph node, spleen, and 
liver disease; autoimmune hemolysis and 
thrombocytopenia in a minority; indolent
Neoplasms of Mature T Cells or NK Cells
Adult T-cell leukemia/
lymphoma
Helper T cell
HTLV-1 provirus present in tumor cells
Adults with cutaneous lesions, marrow involvement, and 
hypercalcemia; occurs mainly in Japan, West Africa, 
and the Caribbean; aggressive
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, 
unspecified
Helper or cytotoxic  
T cell
No specific chromosomal abnormality
Mainly older adults; usually presents with 
lymphadenopathy; aggressive
Anaplastic large-cell 
lymphoma
Cytotoxic T cell
Rearrangements of ALK (anaplastic large 
cell lymphoma kinase) in a subset
Children and young adults, usually with lymph node and 
soft-tissue disease; aggressive
Extranodal NK/T-cell 
lymphoma
NK-cell (common) or 
cytotoxic T cell (rare)
EBV-associated; no specific chromosomal 
abnormality
Adults with destructive extranodal masses, most 
commonly sinonasal; aggressive
Mycosis fungoides/Sézary 
syndrome
Helper T cell
No specific chromosomal abnormality
Adult patients with cutaneous patches, plaques, nodules, 
or generalized erythema; indolent
Large granular lymphocytic 
leukemia
Two types: cytotoxic T 
cell and NK cell
Point mutations in STAT3
Adult patients with splenomegaly, neutropenia, and 
anemia, sometimes, accompanied by autoimmune 
disease
*Most common tumors in children
†Most common tumors in adults.
EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; Ig, immunoglobulin; NK, natural killer.
Approximately 90% of ALLs have numerical or struc-
tural chromosomal changes. Most common is hyperploidy 
(>50 chromosomes), but hypoploidy and a variety of bal-
anced chromosomal translocations are also seen. Changes 
in chromosome numbers are of uncertain pathogenic sig-
nificance, but are important because they frequently cor-
relate with immunophenotype and sometimes prognosis. 
For example, hyperdiploidy and hypodiploidy are seen 
only in B-ALL. In addition, B- and T-ALL are associated 
with completely different sets of translocations, indicating 
that they are pathogenetically distinct.
  MORPHOLOGY
In leukemic presentations, the marrow is hypercellular and 
packed with lymphoblasts, which replace the normal marrow 
elements. Mediastinal thymic masses occur in 50% to 70% of 
T-ALLs, which are also more likely to be associated with lymph-
adenopathy and splenomegaly. In both B- and T-ALL, the 
tumor cells have scant basophilic cytoplasm and nuclei some-
what larger than those of small lymphocytes (Fig. 13-6A). 
The nuclear chromatin is delicate and finely stippled, and nucle-
oli are usually small and often demarcated by a rim of 
592
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
condensed chromatin. In many cases the nuclear membrane is 
deeply subdivided, imparting a convoluted appearance. In 
keeping with the aggressive clinical behavior, the mitotic rate is 
high. As with other rapidly growing lymphoid tumors, inter-
spersed macrophages ingesting apoptotic tumor cells may 
impart a “starry sky” appearance (shown in Fig. 13-15).
Because of their different responses to chemotherapy, ALL 
must be distinguished from acute myeloid leukemia (AML), a 
neoplasm of immature myeloid cells that can cause identical 
signs and symptoms. Compared with myeloblasts, lympho-
blasts have more condensed chromatin, less conspicu-
ous nucleoli, and smaller amounts of cytoplasm that 
usually lacks granules. However, these morphologic distinc-
tions are not absolute and definitive diagnosis relies on stains 
performed with anti­bodies specific for B- and T-cell antigens 
(Fig. 13-6B and C). Histochemical stains are also helpful, in that 
(in contrast to myeloblasts) lymphoblasts are myeloperoxidase-
negative and often contain periodic acid-Schiff–positive cyto-
plasmic material.
Figure 13-6  A, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma. Lymphoblasts with 
condensed nuclear chromatin, small nucleoli, and scant agranular cytoplasm. 
B and C represent the phenotype of the ALL shown in A, analyzed by flow 
cytometry. B, Note that the lymphoblasts represented by the red dots 
express terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase (TdT) and the B-cell marker 
CD22. C, The same cells are positive for two other markers, CD10 and CD19, 
commonly expressed on pre-B lymphoblasts. Thus, this is a B-ALL.  
(A, Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna, Department of Pathology, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas; B and C, courtesy 
Dr. Louis Picker, Oregon Health Science Center, Portland, Ore.)
A
B
Intracellular TdT
CD22
CD10
CD19
C
Immunophenotype.  Immunostaining for terminal deoxy-
nucleotidyl transferase (TdT), a specialized DNA poly-
merase that is expressed only in pre-B and pre-T 
lymphoblasts, is positive in more than 95% of cases (Fig. 
13-6B). B- and T-ALLs are distinguished with stains for 
B- and T-cell–specific markers (summarized later).
B-ALLs are arrested at various stages of pre–B-cell 
development. The lymphoblasts usually express the pan 
B-cell marker CD19 and the transcription factor PAX5, as 
well as CD10. In very immature B-ALLs, CD10 is negative. 
Alternatively, more mature “late pre-B” ALLs express 
CD10, CD19, CD20, and cytoplasmic IgM heavy chain 
(µ chain).
Similarly, T-ALLs are arrested at various stages of 
pre–T-cell development. In most cases the cells are positive 
for CD1, CD2, CD5, and CD7. The more immature tumors 
are usually negative for surface CD3, CD4, and CD8, 
whereas “late” pre–T-cell tumors are positive for these 
markers.
Clinical Features.  Although ALL and AML are genetically 
and immunophenotypically distinct, they are clinically 
very similar. In both, the accumulation of neoplastic 
“blasts” in the bone marrow suppresses normal hemato-
poiesis by physical crowding, competition for growth 
factors, and other poorly understood mechanisms. The 
common features and those more characteristic of ALL are 
the following:
•	 Abrupt stormy onset within days to a few weeks of the 
first symptoms
•	 Symptoms related to depression of marrow function, includ-
ing fatigue due to anemia; fever, reflecting infections 
secondary to neutropenia; and bleeding due to 
thrombocytopenia
•	 Mass effects caused by neoplastic infiltration (which are 
more common in ALL), including bone pain resulting 
from marrow expansion and infiltration of the subperi-
osteum; generalized lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, 
and hepatomegaly; testicular enlargement; and in 
T-ALL, complications related to compression of large 
vessels and airways in the mediastinum
•	 Central nervous system manifestations such as headache, 
vomiting, and nerve palsies resulting from meningeal 
spread, all of which are also more common in ALL
Prognosis.  Pediatric ALL is one of the great success stories 
of oncology. With aggressive chemotherapy about 95% of 
children with ALL obtain a complete remission, and 75% 
to 85% are cured. Despite these achievements, however, 
ALL remains the leading cause of cancer deaths in chil-
dren, and only 35% to 40% of adults are cured. Several 
factors are associated with a worse prognosis: (1) age 
younger than 2 years, largely because of the strong associa-
tion of infantile ALL with translocations involving the MLL 
gene; (2) presentation in adolescence or adulthood; and (3) 
peripheral blood blast counts greater than 100,000, which 
probably reflects a high tumor burden. Favorable prognos-
tic markers include (1) age between 2 and 10 years, (2) a 
low white cell count, (3) hyperdiploidy, (4) trisomy of chro-
mosomes 4, 7, and 10, and (5) the presence of a t(12;21). 
Notably, the molecular detection of residual disease after 
therapy is predictive of a worse outcome in both B- and 
T-ALL and is being used to guide new clinical trials.
593
Disorders of white cells
whereas others are not, suggesting that the cell of origin 
may be either a postgerminal center memory B cell or a 
naive B cell. For unclear reasons, tumors with unmutated 
Ig segments (those putatively of naive B-cell origin) pursue 
a more aggressive course. Deep sequencing of CLL 
genomes has also revealed gain-of-function mutations 
involving the NOTCH1 receptor in 10% to 18% of tumors, 
as well as frequent mutations in genes that regulate RNA 
splicing.
The growth of CLL/SLL cells is largely confined to pro-
liferation centers (described below), where tumor cells 
receive critical cues from the microenvironment. Stromal 
cells in proliferation centers seem to express a variety of 
factors that stimulate the activity of the transcription factor 
NF-κB, which promotes cell growth and survival. In addi-
tion, experimental models of CLL suggest that tumor cells 
rely on signals generated by the B-cell receptor (membrane 
bound immunoglobulin) for growth and survival. These 
signals are transduced by a cascade of kinases that include 
the Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK), which is defective in 
patients with congenital X-linked agammaglobulinemia 
(Chapter 6). Of note, BTK inhibitors now being tested in 
clinical trials have produced sustained responses in a high 
fraction of CLL patients, indicating that human CLL cells 
are also dependent on this signaling pathway.
Although most chromosomal aberrations in ALL alter 
the function of transcription factors, the t(9;22) instead 
creates a fusion gene that encodes a constitutively active 
BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase (described in more detail under 
chronic myelogenous leukemia). In B-ALL, the BCR-ABL 
protein is usually 190 kDa in size and has stronger tyrosine 
kinase activity than the form of BCR-ABL that is found in 
chronic myelogenous leukemia, in which a BCR-ABL 
protein of 210 kDa in size is usually seen. Treatment of 
t(9;22)-positive ALLs with BCR-ABL kinase inhibitors in 
combination with conventional chemotherapy is highly 
effective and has greatly improved the outcome for this 
molecular subtype of B-ALL in children. The outlook for 
adults with ALL remains more guarded, in part because of 
differences in the molecular pathogenesis of adult and 
childhood ALL, but also because older adults cannot toler-
ate the very intensive chemotherapy regimens that are 
curative in children.
Peripheral B-Cell Neoplasms
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia,  
Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and small lympho-
cytic lymphoma (SLL) differ only in the degree of periph-
eral blood lymphocytosis. Most affected patients have 
sufficient lymphocytosis to fulfill the diagnostic require-
ment for CLL (absolute lymphocyte count > 5000 per mm3). 
CLL is the most common leukemia of adults in the 
Western world. There are about 15,000 new cases of CLL 
each year in the United States. The median age at diagnosis 
is 60 years, and there is a 2 : 1 male predominance. In con-
trast, SLL constitutes only 4% of NHLs. CLL/SLL is much 
less common in Japan and other Asian countries than in 
the West.
Pathogenesis.  Unlike most other lymphoid malignancies, 
chromosomal translocations are rare in CLL/SLL. The 
most common genetic anomalies are deletions of 13q14.3, 
11q, and 17p, and trisomy 12q. Molecular characterization 
of the region deleted on chromosome 13 has implicated 
two microRNAs, miR-15a and miR-16-1, as possible tumor 
suppressor genes. DNA sequencing has revealed that the 
Ig genes of some CLL/SLL are somatically hypermutated, 
  MORPHOLOGY
Lymph nodes are diffusely effaced by an infiltrate of predomi-
nantly small lymphocytes 6 to 12 µm in diameter with round to 
slightly irregular nuclei, condensed chromatin, and scant cyto-
plasm (Fig. 13-7). Admixed are variable numbers of larger acti-
vated lymphocytes that often gather in loose aggregates 
referred to as proliferation centers, which contain mitotically 
active cells. When present, proliferation centers are pathog-
nomonic for CLL/SLL. The blood contains large numbers of 
small round lymphocytes with scant cytoplasm (Fig. 13-8). 
Some of these cells are usually disrupted in the process of 
making smears, producing so-called smudge cells. The bone 
marrow is almost always involved by interstitial infiltrates or 
aggregates of tumor cells. Infiltrates are also virtually always 
seen in the splenic white and red pulp and the hepatic portal 
tracts (Fig. 13-9).
Figure 13-7  Small lymphocytic lymphoma/chronic lymphocytic leukemia (lymph node). A, Low-power view shows diffuse effacement of nodal architecture. 
B, At high power the majority of the tumor cells are small round lymphocytes. A “prolymphocyte,” a larger cell with a centrally placed nucleolus, is also present 
in this field (arrow). (A, Courtesy Dr. José Hernandez, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
A
B
594
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
At the other end of the spectrum are asymptomatic patients 
with monoclonal B cells in their peripheral blood but in 
numbers that are too few to merit the diagnosis of CLL. 
These abnormal B cells often have some of the same genetic 
aberrations that are seen in CLL, such as 13q deletions and 
trisomy 12, yet only about 1% of such patients progress to 
symptomatic CLL per year, presumably due to acquisition 
of additional genetic lesions.
CLL/SLL disrupts normal immune function through 
uncertain 
mechanisms. 
Hypogammaglobulinemia 
is 
common and contributes to an increased susceptibility to 
infections, particularly those caused by bacteria. Conversely, 
10% to 15% of patients develop hemolytic anemia or 
thrombocytopenia due to autoantibodies made by non-
neoplastic B cells.
The course and prognosis are extremely variable and 
depend primarily on the clinical stage. Overall median 
survival is 4 to 6 years, but is more than 10 years in indi-
viduals with minimal tumor burdens at diagnosis. Other 
variables that correlate with a worse outcome include 
(1) the presence of deletions of 11q and 17p, (2) a lack of 
somatic hypermutation, (3) the expression of ZAP-70, a 
protein that augments signals produced by the Ig receptor, 
and (4) the presence of NOTCH1 mutations. Symptomatic 
patients are generally treated with “gentle” chemotherapy 
and immunotherapy with antibodies against proteins 
found on the surface of CLL/SLL cells, particularly CD20. 
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is being offered to 
the relatively young. The most promising new therapy is 
BTK inhibitors, described earlier.
Another factor that impacts patient survival is the ten-
dency of CLL/SLL to transform to a more aggressive 
tumor. Most commonly this takes the form of a transforma-
tion to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, so-called Richter syn-
drome (approximately 5% to 10% of patients). Transformation 
to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is often heralded by the 
development of a rapidly enlarging mass within a lymph 
node or the spleen. Transformation probably stems from 
the acquisition of additional, still mutations that increase 
growth. Large-cell transformation is an ominous event, 
with most patients surviving less than 1 year.
Follicular Lymphoma
Follicular lymphoma is the most common form of indolent 
NHL in the United States, affecting 15,000 to 20,000 indi-
viduals per year. It usually presents in middle age and 
afflicts males and females equally. It is less common in 
Europe and rare in Asian populations.
Pathogenesis.  Follicular lymphoma likely arises from 
germinal center B cells and is strongly associated with 
chromosomal translocations involving BCL2. Its hallmark 
is a (14;18) translocation that juxtaposes the IGH locus on 
chromosome 14 and the BCL2 locus on chromosome 18. 
The t(14;18) is seen in up to 90% of follicular lymphomas, 
and leads to overexpression of BCL2 (see Fig. 13-12). BCL2 
antagonizes apoptosis (Chapter 7) and promotes the sur-
vival of follicular lymphoma cells. Notably, while normal 
germinal centers contain numerous B cells undergoing 
apoptosis, follicular lymphoma is characteristically devoid 
of apoptotic cells. Deep sequencing of follicular lymphoma 
genomes have identified mutations in the MLL2 gene 
in about 90% of cases as well. MLL2 encodes a histone 
Immunophenotype.  CLL/SLL has a distinctive immuno-
phenotype. The tumor cells express the pan B-cell markers 
CD19 and CD20, as well as CD23 and CD5, the latter a 
marker that is found on a small subset of normal B cells. 
Low-level expression of surface Ig (usually IgM or IgM and 
IgD) is also typical.
Clinical Features.  Patients are often asymptomatic at diag-
nosis. When symptoms appear, they are nonspecific and 
include easy fatigability, weight loss, and anorexia. 
Generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly 
are present in 50% to 60% of symptomatic patients. The 
leukocyte count is highly variable; leukopenia can be seen 
in individuals with SLL and marrow involvement, while 
counts in excess of 200,000/mm3 are sometimes seen in 
CLL patients with heavy tumor burdens. A small mono-
clonal Ig “spike” is present in the blood of some patients. 
Figure 13-8  Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. This peripheral blood smear 
is flooded with small lymphocytes with condensed chromatin and scant 
cytoplasm. A characteristic finding is the presence of disrupted tumor cells 
(smudge cells), two of which are present in this smear. A coexistent autoim-
mune hemolytic anemia (Chapter 14) explains the presence of spherocytes 
(hyperchromatic, round erythrocytes). A nucleated erythroid cell is present in 
the lower left-hand corner of the field. In this setting, circulating nucleated 
red cells could stem from premature release of progenitors in the face of 
severe anemia, marrow infiltration by tumor (leukoerythroblastosis), or both. 
Figure 13-9  Small lymphocytic lymphoma/chronic lymphocytic leukemia 
involving the liver. Low-power view of a typical periportal lymphocytic infil-
trate. (Courtesy Dr. Mark Fleming, Department of Pathology, Children’s Hos-
pital, Boston, Mass.)
595
Disorders of white cells
Although incurable, it usually follows an indolent waxing 
and waning course. Survival (median, 7 to 9 years) is not 
improved by aggressive therapy; hence, the usual approach 
is to palliate patients with low-dose chemotherapy or 
immunotherapy (e.g., anti-CD20 antibody) when they 
become symptomatic.
Histologic transformation occurs in 30% to 50% of follicu-
lar lymphomas, most commonly to diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma. Less commonly, tumors resembling Burkitt 
lymphoma emerge that are associated with chromosomal 
translocations involving MYC. Like normal germinal center 
B cells, follicular lymphomas have ongoing somatic hyper-
mutation, which may promote transformation by causing 
point mutations or chromosomal aberrations. The median 
survival is less than 1 year after transformation.
Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most 
common form of NHL. Each year in the United States 
there are about 25,000 new cases. There is a slight male 
methyltransferase that regulates gene expression, suggest-
ing that epigenetic abnormalities have an important role in 
this neoplasm; however, the functional significance of 
MLL2 mutations has yet to be deciphered.
Particularly early in the disease, follicular lymphoma 
cells growing in lymph nodes are found within a network 
of reactive follicular dendritic cells admixed with macro-
phages and T cells. Expression profiling studies have 
shown that differences in the genes expressed by these 
reactive cells are predictive of outcome, implying that the 
response of follicular lymphoma cells to therapy is influ-
enced by the surrounding microenvironment.
Immunophenotype.  The neoplastic cells closely resemble 
normal germinal center B cells, expressing CD19, CD20, 
CD10, surface Ig, and BCL6. Unlike CLL/SLL and mantle 
cell lymphoma, CD5 is not expressed. BCL2 is expressed 
in more than 90% of cases, in distinction to normal follicu-
lar center B cells, which are BCL2-negative (Fig. 13-12).
Clinical Features.  Follicular lymphoma tends to present 
with painless, generalized lymphadenopathy. Involvement 
of extranodal sites, such as the gastrointestinal tract, 
central nervous system, or testis, is relatively uncommon. 
  MORPHOLOGY
In most cases, a predominantly nodular or nodular and diffuse 
growth pattern is observed in involved lymph nodes (Fig. 
13-10A). Two principal cell types are present in varying propor-
tions: (1) small cells with irregular or cleaved nuclear contours 
and scant cytoplasm, referred to as centrocytes (small cleaved 
cells); and (2) larger cells with open nuclear chromatin, several 
nucleoli, and modest amounts of cytoplasm, referred to as 
centroblasts (Fig. 13-10B). In most follicular lymphomas, small 
cleaved cells are in the majority. Peripheral blood involvement 
sufficient to produce lymphocytosis (usually less than 20,000 
cells/mm3) is seen in about 10% of cases. Bone marrow involve-
ment occurs in 85% of cases and characteristically takes the 
form of paratrabecular lymphoid aggregates. The splenic white 
pulp (Fig. 13-11) and hepatic portal triads are also frequently 
involved.
Figure 13-10  Follicular lymphoma (lymph node). A, Nodular aggregates of lymphoma cells are present throughout lymph node. B, At high magnification, small 
lymphoid cells with condensed chromatin and irregular or cleaved nuclear outlines (centrocytes) are mixed with a population of larger cells with nucleoli (cen-
troblasts). (A, Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
A
B
Figure 13-11  Follicular lymphoma (spleen). Prominent nodules represent 
white pulp follicles expanded by follicular lymphoma cells. Other indolent 
B-cell lymphomas (small lymphocytic lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, mar-
ginal zone lymphoma) can produce an identical pattern of involvement. (Cour-
tesy Dr. Jeffrey Jorgenson, Department of Hematopathology, MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.)
596
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
predominance. The median patient age is about 60 years, 
but DLBCL also occurs in young adults and children.
Pathogenesis.  Genetic, gene expression profiling, and 
immunohistochemical studies indicate that DLBCL is 
molecularly heterogeneous. One frequent pathogenic event 
is dysregulation of BCL6, a DNA-binding zinc-finger tran-
scriptional repressor that is required for the formation of 
normal germinal centers. About 30% of DLBCLs contain 
various translocations that have in common a breakpoint 
in BCL6 at chromosome 3q27. Acquired mutations in BCL6 
promoter sequences that abrogate BCL6 autoregulation 
(an 
important 
negative-regulatory 
mechanism) 
are 
seen even more frequently. It is hypothesized that both 
types of lesions are inadvertent byproducts of somatic 
hypermutation that result in overexpression of BCL6, 
which has several important consequences. BCL6 represses 
the expression of factors that normally serve to promote 
germinal center B-cell differentiation, growth arrest, and 
apoptosis, and each of these effects is believed to contribute 
to the development of DLBCL. Mutations similar to those 
found in BCL6 are also seen in multiple other oncogenes, 
including MYC, suggesting that somatic hypermutation in 
DLBCL cells is “mistargeted” to a wide variety of loci.
Another 10% to 20% of tumors are associated with 
the t(14;18) (discussed earlier under Follicular Lymphoma), 
which leads to the overexpression of the antiapoptotic 
protein BCL2. Tumors with BCL2 rearrangements usually 
lack BCL6 rearrangements, suggesting that these rearran­
gements define two distinct molecular classes of DLBCL. 
Some tumors with BCL2 rearrangements may arise from 
unrecognized underlying follicular lymphomas, which fre-
quently transform to DLBCL. Roughly 5% of DLBCLs are 
associated with translocations involving MYC; these 
tumors may have a distinctive biology and are discussed 
further under Burkitt Lymphoma (later). Finally, deep 
sequencing of DLBCL genomes has identified frequent 
mutations in genes encoding histone acetyltransferases 
such as p300 and CREBP, proteins that regulate gene 
expression by modifying histones and altering chromatin 
Figure 13-12  BCL2 expression in reactive and neoplastic follicles. BCL2 
protein was detected by using an immunohistochemical technique that pro-
duces a brown stain. In reactive follicles (A), BCL2 is present in mantle zone 
cells but not follicular-center B cells, whereas follicular lymphoma cells (B) 
show strong BCL2 staining. (Courtesy Dr. Jeffrey Jorgenson, Department of 
Hematopathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.)
A
B
structure. This association has sparked interest in using 
drugs that target the epigenome as therapies for DLBCL.
Immunophenotype.  These mature B-cell tumors express 
CD19 and CD20 and show variable expression of germinal 
center B-cell markers such as CD10 and BCL6. Most have 
surface Ig.
Special Subtypes.  Several subtypes of DLBCL are suffi-
ciently distinctive to merit brief discussion.
•	 Immunodeficiency-associated large B-cell lymphoma occurs 
in the setting of severe T-cell immunodeficiency (e.g., 
advanced HIV infection and allogeneic bone marrow 
transplantation). The neoplastic B cells are usually 
infected with EBV, which plays a critical pathogenic 
role. Restoration of T-cell immunity may lead to regres-
sion of these proliferations.
•	 Primary effusion lymphoma presents as a malignant 
pleural or ascitic effusion, mostly in patients with 
advanced HIV infection or older adults. The tumor cells 
are often anaplastic in appearance and typically fail to 
express surface B- or T-cell markers, but have clonal IgH 
gene rearrangements. In all cases the tumor cells are 
infected with KSHV/HHV-8, which appears to have a 
causal role.
Clinical Features.  DLBCL typically presents as a rapidly 
enlarging mass at a nodal or extranodal site. It can arise 
  MORPHOLOGY
The common features are a relatively large cell size (usually 
four to five times the diameter of a small lymphocyte) and a 
diffuse pattern of growth (Fig. 13-13). In other respects, 
substantial morphologic variation is seen. Most commonly, the 
tumor cells have a round or oval nucleus that appears vesicular 
due to margination of chromatin to the nuclear membrane, but 
large multilobated or cleaved nuclei are prominent in some 
cases. Nucleoli may be two to three in number and located 
adjacent to the nuclear membrane, or single and centrally 
placed. The cytoplasm is usually moderately abundant and  
may be pale or basophilic. More anaplastic tumors may even 
contain multinucleated cells with large inclusion-like nucleoli that 
resemble Reed-Sternberg cells (the malignant cell of Hodgkin 
lymphoma).
Figure 13-13  Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Tumor cells have large nuclei, 
open chromatin, and prominent nucleoli. (Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna, 
Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, 
Dallas, Texas.)
597
Disorders of white cells
needed for growth and cell division. Consequently, Burkitt 
lymphoma is believed to be the fastest growing human 
tumor. The translocation partner for MYC is usually the 
IgH locus [t(8;14)] but may also be the Ig κ [t(2;8)] or λ 
[t(8;22)] light chain loci. The breakpoints in the IgH locus 
in sporadic Burkitt lymphoma are usually found in the 
class switch regions, whereas the breakpoints in endemic 
Burkitt lymphoma tend to lie within more 5′ V(D)J se-
quences. The basis for this subtle molecular distinction is 
not known, but both types of translocations can be induced 
in germinal center B cells by AID, a specialized DNA-
modifying enzyme required for both Ig class switching and 
somatic hypermutation (see earlier). The net effect of these 
translocations is similar; the MYC coding sequence is repo-
sitioned adjacent to strong Ig promoter and enhancer ele-
ments, which drive increased MYC expression. In addition, 
the translocated MYC allele often harbors point mutations 
that further increase its activity.
Essentially all endemic Burkitt lymphomas are latently 
infected with EBV, which is also present in about 25% of 
HIV-associated tumors and 15% to 20% of sporadic cases. 
The configuration of the EBV DNA is identical in all tumor 
cells within individual cases, indicating that infection pre-
cedes transformation. Although this places EBV at the 
“scene of the crime,” its precise role in the genesis of Burkitt 
lymphoma remains poorly understood.
Immunophenotype.  These are tumors of mature B cells 
that express surface IgM, CD19, CD20, CD10, and BCL6, a 
phenotype consistent with a germinal center B-cell origin. 
Unlike other tumors of germinal center origin, Burkitt lym-
phoma almost always fails to express the antiapoptotic 
protein BCL2.
Clinical Features.  Both endemic and sporadic Burkitt lym-
phomas are found mainly in children or young adults; 
overall, it accounts for about 30% of childhood NHLs in 
the United States. Most tumors manifest at extranodal sites. 
Endemic Burkitt lymphoma often presents as a mass 
involving the mandible and shows an unusual predilection 
for involvement of abdominal viscera, particularly the 
kidneys, ovaries, and adrenal glands. In contrast, sporadic 
Burkitt lymphoma most often appears as a mass involving 
the ileocecum and peritoneum. Involvement of the bone 
marrow and peripheral blood is uncommon, especially in 
endemic cases.
Burkitt lymphoma is very aggressive but responds well 
to intensive chemotherapy. Most children and young adults 
can be cured. The outcome is more guarded in older adults.
virtually anywhere in the body. Waldeyer ring, the oropha-
ryngeal lymphoid tissue that includes the tonsils and 
adenoids, is involved commonly. Primary or secondary 
involvement of the liver and spleen may take the form 
of large destructive masses (Fig. 13-14). Extranodal sites 
include the gastrointestinal tract, skin, bone, brain, and 
other tissues. Bone marrow involvement is relatively 
uncommon and usually occurs late in the course. Rarely, a 
leukemic picture emerges.
DLBCLs are aggressive tumors that are rapidly fatal 
without treatment. With intensive combination chemother-
apy, 60% to 80% of patients achieve a complete remission, 
and 40% to 50% are cured. Adjuvant therapy with anti-
CD20 antibody improves both the initial response and the 
overall outcome. Individuals with limited disease fare 
better than those with widespread disease or bulky tumor 
masses. Expression profiling has identified distinct molecu-
lar subtypes with differing clinical outcomes and has pro-
vided the rationale for new therapies directed at inhibiting 
the NF-κB and B cell receptor signaling pathways. Of note, 
about 5% of DLBCLs have MYC translocations, and these 
cases of DLBCL may be difficult to distinguish from Burkitt 
lymphoma (described later) by conventional diagnostic 
tests. In fact, recent data suggest that DLBCLs with MYC 
translocations have a worse prognosis than those without 
and may be better treated with chemotherapy regimens that 
are now standard for Burkitt lymphoma.
Burkitt Lymphoma
Within the category of Burkitt Lymphoma fall (1) African 
(endemic) Burkitt lymphoma, (2) sporadic (nonendemic) 
Burkitt lymphoma, and (3) a subset of aggressive lympho-
mas occurring in individuals infected with HIV. Burkitt 
lymphomas occurring in each of these settings are histo-
logically identical but differ in some clinical, genotypic, 
and virologic characteristics.
Pathogenesis.  All forms of Burkitt lymphoma are highly 
associated with translocations of the MYC gene on chro-
mosome 8 that lead to increased MYC protein levels. 
MYC is a master transcriptional regulator that increases 
the expression of genes that are required for aerobic gly-
colysis, the so-called Warburg effect (Chapter 7). When 
nutrients such as glucose and glutamine are available, 
Warburg metabolism allow cells to biosynthesize all of the 
building blocks—nucleotides, lipids, proteins—that are 
Figure 13-14  Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma involving the spleen. The isolated 
large mass is typical. In contrast, indolent B-cell lymphomas usually produce 
multifocal expansion of white pulp (see Fig. 13-11). (Courtesy Dr. Mark 
Fleming, Department of Pathology, Children’s Hospital, Boston, Mass.)
  MORPHOLOGY
Involved tissues are effaced by a diffuse infiltrate of intermediate-
sized lymphoid cells 10 to 25 µm in diameter with round or oval 
nuclei, coarse chromatin, several nucleoli, and a moderate 
amount of cytoplasm (Fig. 13-15). The tumor exhibits a high 
mitotic index and contains numerous apoptotic cells, the 
nuclear remnants of which are phagocytosed by interspersed 
benign macrophages. These phagocytes have abundant clear 
cytoplasm, creating a characteristic “starry sky” pattern. 
When the bone marrow is involved, aspirates reveal tumor cells 
with slightly clumped nuclear chromatin, two to five distinct 
nucleoli, and royal blue cytoplasm containing clear cyto-
plasmic vacuoles.
598
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
Plasma Cell Neoplasms and Related Disorders
These B-cell proliferations contain neoplastic plasma 
cells that virtually always secrete a monoclonal Ig or Ig 
fragment, which serve as tumor markers and often have 
pathologic consequences. Collectively, the plasma cell 
neoplasms (often referred to as dyscrasias) account for 
about 15% of the deaths caused by lymphoid neoplasms. 
The most common and deadly of these neoplasms is mul-
tiple myeloma, of which there are about 15,000 new cases 
per year in the United States.
A monoclonal Ig identified in the blood is referred to as 
an M component, in reference to myeloma. Because com-
plete M components have molecular weights of 160,000 or 
higher, they are restricted to the plasma and extracellular 
fluid and excluded from the urine in the absence of glo-
merular damage. However, neoplastic plasma cells often 
synthesize excess light chains along with complete Igs. 
Occasionally only light chains are produced, and rare 
tumors secrete only heavy chains. Highly sensitive tests for 
free light chains in the blood are now available. In patients 
with plasma cell tumors, the level of free light chains is 
usually elevated and is markedly skewed toward one light 
chain (e.g., kappa) at the expense of the second (e.g., 
lambda). Because free light chains are small in size, they 
are also excreted in the urine, where they are referred to as 
Bence-Jones proteins.
Terms used to describe the abnormal Igs associated 
with plasma cell neoplasms include monoclonal gammopa-
thy, dysproteinemia, and paraproteinemia. These abnormal 
proteins are associated with the following clinicopatho-
logic entities:
•	 Multiple myeloma (plasma cell myeloma), the most impor-
tant plasma cell neoplasm, usually presents as tumorous 
masses scattered throughout the skeletal system. Solitary 
myeloma (plasmacytoma) is an infrequent variant that 
presents as a single mass in bone or soft tissue. Smoldering 
myeloma refers to another uncommon variant defined by 
a lack of symptoms and a high plasma M component.
•	 Waldenström macroglobulinemia is a syndrome in which 
high levels of IgM lead to symptoms related to hyper-
viscosity of the blood. It occurs in older adults, most 
commonly in association with lymphoplasmacytic lym-
phoma (described later).
Figure 13-15  Burkitt lymphoma. A, At low power, numerous pale tingible body macrophages are evident, producing a “starry sky” appearance. B, At high 
power, tumor cells have multiple small nucleoli and high mitotic index. The lack of significant variation in nuclear shape and size lends a monotonous appear-
ance. (B, Courtesy Dr. José Hernandez, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)
A
B
  KEY CONCEPTS
Common Forms of Lymphoid Leukemia  
and Lymphoma
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoblastic 
Lymphoma
■ Most common type of cancer in children, may be derived 
from either precursor B of T cells
■ Highly aggressive tumors manifest with signs and symp-
toms of bone marrow failure, or as rapidly growing masses.
■ Tumor cells contain genetic lesions that block differentia-
tion, leading to the accumulation of immature, nonfunc-
tional blasts.
Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma/Chronic  
Lymphocytic Leukemia
■ Most common leukemia of adults
■ Tumor of mature B cells that usually manifests with bone 
marrow and lymph node involvement
■ Indolent course, commonly associated with immune 
abnormalities, including an increased susceptibility to 
infection and autoimmune disorders
Follicular Lymphoma
■ Most common indolent lymphoma of adults
■ Tumor cells recapitulate the growth pattern of normal ger-
minal center B cells; most cases are associated with a 
(14;18) translocation that results in the overexpression 
of BCL2.
Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma
■ Most common lymphoma of adults
■ Heterogeneous group of mature B-cell tumors that shares 
a large cell morphology and aggressive clinical behavior
■ Rearrangements or mutations of BCL6 gene are recog-
nized associations; one third carry a (14;18) translocation 
involving BCL2 and may arise from follicular lymphomas.
Burkitt Lymphoma
■ Very aggressive tumor of mature B cells that usually arises 
at extranodal sites.
■ Strongly associated with translocations involving the MYC 
proto-oncogene
■ Tumor cells often are latently infected by EBV.
599
Disorders of white cells
•	 Heavy-chain disease is a rare monoclonal gammopathy 
that is seen in association with a diverse group of 
disorders, including lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 
and an unusual small bowel marginal zone lymphoma 
that occurs in malnourished populations (so-called 
Mediterranean lymphoma). The common feature is the 
synthesis and secretion of free heavy-chain fragments.
•	 Primary or immunocyte-associated amyloidosis results from 
a monoclonal proliferation of plasma cells secreting 
light chains (usually of λ isotype) that are deposited as 
amyloid. Some patients have overt multiple myeloma, 
but others have only a minor clonal population of 
plasma cells in the marrow.
•	 Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance 
(MGUS) is applied to patients without signs or symp-
toms who have small to moderately large M compo-
nents in their blood. MGUS is very common in older 
adults and has a low but constant rate of transformation 
to symptomatic monoclonal gammopathies, most often 
multiple myeloma.
With this background, we now turn to some of the spe-
cific clinicopathologic entities. Primary amyloidosis was 
discussed along with other disorders of the immune system 
in Chapter 6.
Multiple Myeloma.  Multiple myeloma is a plasma cell 
neoplasm commonly associated with lytic bone lesions, 
hypercalcemia, renal failure, and acquired immune 
abnormalities. Although bony disease dominates, it can 
spread late in its course to lymph nodes and extranodal 
sites. Multiple myeloma causes 1% of all cancer deaths in 
Western countries. Its incidence is higher in men and 
people of African descent. It is chiefly a disease of older 
adults, with a peak age of incidence of 65 to 70 years.
Pathogenesis.  Multiple myeloma is associated with fre-
quent rearrangements involving the IgH locus and various 
proto-oncogenes. Included among the loci that are recur-
rently involved in translocations with the Ig heavy-chain 
gene on chromosome 14q32 are the cell cycle-regulatory 
genes cyclin D1 on chromosome 11q13 and cyclin D3 on 
chromosome 6p21. Deletions of chromosome 17p that 
involve the TP53 tumor suppressor locus also occur and 
are associated with a poor outcome. Late-stage, highly 
aggressive forms of the disease such as plasma cell leuke-
mia are associated with acquisition of rearrangements 
involving MYC. More recent deep sequencing of myeloma 
genomes has identified frequent mutations involving com-
ponents of the NF-κB pathway, which supports B-cell sur-
vival. Based on these studies, it is evident that myeloma 
molecularly heterogeneous.
The proliferation and survival of myeloma cells are 
dependent on several cytokines, most notably IL-6. IL-6 is 
an important growth factor for plasma cells. It is produced 
by the tumor cells themselves and by resident marrow 
stromal cells. High serum levels of IL-6 are seen in patients 
with active disease and are associated with a poor progno-
sis. Myeloma cell growth and survival are also augmented 
by direct physical interactions with bone marrow stromal 
cells, which is a focus of new therapeutic approaches.
Factors produced by neoplastic plasma cells mediate 
bone destruction, the major pathologic feature of 
multiple myeloma. Of particular importance, myeloma-
derived MIP1α up-regulates the expression of the receptor 
activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL) by bone marrow 
stromal cells, which in turn activates osteoclasts. Other 
factors released from tumor cells, such as modulators of 
the Wnt pathway, are potent inhibitors of osteoblast func-
tion. The net effect is a marked increase in bone resorption, 
which leads to hypercalcemia and pathologic fractures.
  MORPHOLOGY
Multiple myeloma usually presents as destructive plasma 
cell tumors (plasmacytomas) involving the axial skeleton. 
The bones most commonly affected (in descending order of 
frequency) are the vertebral column, ribs, skull, pelvis, femur, 
clavicle, and scapula. Lesions begin in the medullary cavity, 
erode cancellous bone, and progressively destroy the bony 
cortex, often leading to pathologic fractures; these are most 
common in the vertebral column, but may occur in any affected 
bone. The bone lesions appear radiographically as 
punched-out defects, usually 1 to 4 cm in diameter (Fig. 
13-16), and consist of soft, gelatinous, red tumor masses. Less 
commonly, widespread myelomatous bone disease produces 
diffuse demineralization (osteopenia) rather than focal defects.
Even away from overt tumor masses, the marrow contains 
an increased number of plasma cells, which usually constitute 
more than 30% of the cellularity. The plasma cells may infiltrate 
the interstitium or be present in sheets that completely replace 
normal elements. Like their benign counterparts, malignant 
plasma cells have a perinuclear clearing due to a prominent 
Golgi apparatus and an eccentrically placed nucleus (Fig. 
13-17). Relatively normal-appearing plasma cells, plasma-
blasts with vesicular nuclear chromatin and a prominent single 
nucleolus, or bizarre, multinucleated cells may predominate. 
Other cytologic variants stem from the dysregulated synthesis 
and secretion of Ig, which often leads to intracellular accumula-
tion of intact or partially degraded protein. Such variants include 
flame cells with fiery red cytoplasm, Mott cells with multiple 
grapelike cytoplasmic droplets, and cells containing a variety of 
other inclusions, including fibrils, crystalline rods, and glob-
ules. The globular inclusions are referred to as Russell bodies 
(if cytoplasmic) or Dutcher bodies (if nuclear). In advanced 
disease, plasma cell infiltrates may be present in the spleen, 
liver, kidneys, lungs, lymph nodes, and other soft tissues.
Commonly, the high level of M proteins causes red cells in 
peripheral blood smears to stick to one another in linear arrays, 
a finding referred to as rouleaux formation. Rouleaux forma-
tion is characteristic but not specific, as it may be seen in other 
conditions in which Ig levels are elevated, such as lupus ery-
thematosus and early HIV infection. Rarely, tumor cells flood 
the peripheral blood, giving rise to plasma cell leukemia.
Bence Jones proteins are excreted in the kidney and contrib-
ute to a form of renal disease called myeloma kidney. This 
important complication is discussed in detail in Chapter 20.
Immunophenotype.  Plasma cell tumors are positive for 
CD138, an adhesion molecule also known as syndecan-1, 
and often express CD56, a feature that can be helpful in 
identifying small populations of neoplastic cells.
Clinical Features.  The clinical features of multiple 
myeloma stem from (1) the effects of plasma cell growth in 
600
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
tissues, particularly the bones; (2) the production of exces-
sive Igs, which often have abnormal physicochemical 
properties; and (3) the suppression of normal humoral 
immunity.
Bone resorption often leads to pathologic fractures and 
chronic pain. The attendant hypercalcemia can give rise to 
neurologic manifestations, such as confusion, weakness, 
lethargy, constipation, and polyuria, and contributes to 
renal dysfunction. Decreased production of normal Igs sets 
the stage for recurrent bacterial infections. Cellular immunity 
is relatively unaffected. Of great significance is renal insuf-
ficiency, which trails only infections as a cause of death. The 
pathogenesis of renal failure (Chapter 20), which occurs in 
up to 50% of patients, is multifactorial. However, the single 
most important factor seems to be Bence-Jones proteinuria, 
as the excreted light chains are toxic to renal tubular 
Figure 13-16  Multiple myeloma of the skull (radiograph, lateral view). The 
sharply punched-out bone lesions are most obvious in the calvarium. 
epithelial cells. Certain light chains (particularly those of 
the λ6 and λ3 families) are prone to cause amyloidosis of the 
AL type (Chapter 6), which can exacerbate renal dysfunc-
tion and deposit in other tissues as well.
In 99% of patients, laboratory analyses reveal increased 
levels of Igs in the blood and/or light chains (Bence-Jones 
proteins) in the urine. The monoclonal Igs are usually first 
detected as abnormal protein “spikes” in serum or urine 
electrophoresis and then further characterized by immuno-
fixation (Fig. 13-18). Most myelomas are associated with 
more than 3 gm/dL of serum Ig and/or more than 6 mg/
dL of urine Bence-Jones protein. The most common mono-
clonal Ig (“M protein”) is IgG (approximately 55% of 
patients), followed by IgA (approximately 25% of cases). 
Myelomas expressing IgM, IgD, or IgE occur but are rare. 
Excessive production and aggregation of M proteins, 
usually of the IgA and or IgG3 subtype, leads to symptoms 
related to hyperviscosity (described under lymphoplasma-
cytic lymphoma) in about 7% of patients. Both free light 
chains and a serum M protein are observed together in 60% 
to 70% of patients. However, in about 20% of patients only 
free light chains are present. Around 1% of myelomas are 
nonsecretory; hence, the absence of detectable M proteins 
does not completely exclude the diagnosis.
Figure 13-17  Multiple myeloma (bone marrow aspirate). Normal marrow cells 
are largely replaced by plasma cells, including forms with multiple nuclei, 
prominent nucleoli, and cytoplasmic droplets containing Ig. 
Figure 13-18  M protein detection in multiple myeloma. Serum protein electro-
phoresis (SP) is used to screen for a monoclonal immunoglobulin  
(M protein). Polyclonal IgG in normal serum (arrow) appears as a broad band; 
in contrast, serum from a patient with multiple myeloma contains a single 
sharp protein band (arrowhead) in this region of the electropherogram. 
The suspected monoclonal Ig is confirmed and characterized by immunofixa-
tion. In this procedure, proteins separated by electrophoresis within a gel are 
reacted with specific antisera. After extensive washing, proteins that are 
cross-linked by antisera are retained and detected with a protein stain. Note 
the sharp band in the patient serum is cross-linked by antisera specific for IgG 
heavy chain (G) and kappa light chain (κ), indicating the presence of an IgGκ 
M protein. Levels of polyclonal IgG, IgA (A), and lambda light chain (λ) are also 
decreased in the patient serum relative to normal, a finding typical of multiple 
myeloma. (Courtesy Dr. David Sacks, Department of Pathology, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Mass.)
+
–
+
–
SP
Normal serum
Patient serum
G
A
M
κ
λ
SP
G
A
M
κ
λ
601
Disorders of white cells
with MGUS develop a symptomatic plasma cell neo­
plasm, usually multiple myeloma, per year, a rate of con-
version that remains roughly constant over time. The clonal 
plasma cells in MGUS contain many of the same chromo-
somal translocations and deletions that are found in full-
blown multiple myeloma, indicating that MGUS is an early 
stage of myeloma development. As in patients with smol-
dering myeloma, progression to multiple myeloma is 
unpredictable; hence, periodic assessment of serum M com-
ponent levels and Bence Jones proteinuria is warranted.
Lymphoplasmacytic 
Lymphoma.  Lymphoplasmacytic 
lymphoma is a B-cell neoplasm of older adults that usually 
presents in the sixth or seventh decade of life. Although 
bearing a superficial resemblance to CLL/SLL, it differs 
in that a substantial fraction of the tumor cells undergo 
terminal differentiation to plasma cells. Most commonly, 
the plasma cell component secretes monoclonal IgM, often 
in amounts sufficient to cause a hyperviscosity syndrome 
known as Waldenström macroglobulinemia. Unlike multiple 
myeloma, complications stemming from the secretion of 
free light chains (e.g., renal failure and amyloidosis) are 
relatively rare and bone destruction does not occur.
Pathogenesis.  Recent deep sequencing studies have shown 
that virtually all cases of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 
are associated with acquired mutations in MYD88. The 
MYD88 gene encodes an adaptor protein that participates 
in signaling events that activate NF-κB and also augment 
signals downstream of the B-cell receptor (Ig) complex, 
both of which may promote the growth and survival of the 
tumor cells.
Immunophenotype.  The lymphoid component expresses 
B-cell markers such as CD20 and surface Ig, whereas 
the plasma cell component secretes the same Ig that is 
expressed on the surface of the lymphoid cells. This is 
usually IgM but can also be IgG or IgA.
Clinical Features.  The dominant presenting complaints 
are nonspecific and include weakness, fatigue, and weight 
loss. Approximately half the patients have lymphadenopa-
thy, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly. Anemia caused by 
marrow infiltration is common. About 10% of patients 
have autoimmune hemolysis caused by cold agglutinins, IgM 
antibodies that bind to red cells at temperatures of less than 
37°C (Chapter 14).
  MORPHOLOGY
Typically, the marrow contains an infiltrate of lymphocytes, 
plasma cells, and plasmacytoid lymphocytes in varying propor-
tions, often accompanied by mast cell hyperplasia (Fig. 13-19). 
Some tumors also contain a population of larger lymphoid cells 
with more vesicular nuclear chromatin and prominent nucleoli. 
Periodic acid-Schiff-positive inclusions containing Ig are fre-
quently seen in the cytoplasm (Russell bodies) or the nucleus 
(Dutcher bodies) of some of the plasma cells. At diagnosis the 
tumor has usually disseminated to the lymph nodes, spleen, 
and liver. Infiltration of the nerve roots, meninges, and more 
rarely the brain can also occur with disease progression.
The clinicopathologic diagnosis of multiple myeloma 
rests on radiographic and laboratory findings. It can be 
strongly suspected when the distinctive radiographic 
changes are present, but definitive diagnosis requires a bone 
marrow examination. Marrow involvement often gives rise 
to a normocytic normochromic anemia, sometimes accom-
panied by moderate leukopenia and thrombocytopenia.
The prognosis is variable, but has improved in recent 
years with new therapeutic approaches. The median sur-
vival is 4 to 7 years, and cures have yet to be achieved. 
Patients with multiple bony lesions, if untreated, rarely 
survive for more than 6 to 12 months, whereas patients 
with “smoldering myeloma” may be asymptomatic for 
many years. Translocations involving cyclin D1 are associ-
ated with a good outcome, whereas deletions of 13q, dele-
tions of 17p, and the t(4;14) all portend a more aggressive 
course.
New therapies are bringing hope. Myeloma cells are 
sensitive to inhibitors of the proteasome, a cellular organ-
elle that degrades unwanted and misfolded proteins. As 
discussed in Chapter 2, misfolded proteins activate apop-
totic pathways. Myeloma cells are prone to the accumula-
tion of misfolded, unpaired Ig chains. Proteasome inhibitors 
may induce cell death by exacerbating this inherent ten-
dency, and also seem to retard bone resorption through 
effects on stromal cells. Thalidomide and related com-
pounds such as lenalidomide also have activity against 
myeloma. Interestingly, this may also involve changes in 
protein degradation, as lenalidamide appears to activate 
ubiquitin ligases, thereby targeting proteins for proteolysis 
that are required for myeloma growth. Biphosphonates, 
drugs that inhibit bone resorption, reduce pathologic frac-
tures and limit the hypercalcemia. Hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation prolongs life but has not yet proven to be 
curative.
Solitary Myeloma (Plasmacytoma).  About 3% to 5% of 
plasma cell neoplasms present as a solitary lesion of bone 
or soft tissue. The bone lesions tend to occur in the same 
locations as in multiple myeloma. Extraosseous lesions 
are often located in the lungs, oronasopharynx, or nasal 
sinuses. Modest elevations of M proteins in the blood 
or urine may be found in some patients. Solitary osseous 
plasmacytoma almost inevitably progresses to multiple 
myeloma, but this can take 10 to 20 years or longer. In 
contrast, extraosseous plasmacytomas, particularly those 
involving the upper respiratory tract, are frequently cured 
by local resection.
Smoldering Myeloma.  This entity defines a middle ground 
between multiple myeloma and monoclonal gammopathy 
of uncertain significance. Plasma cells make up 10% to 30% 
of the marrow cellularity, and the serum M protein level is 
greater than 3 gm/dL, but patients are asymptomatic. 
About 75% of patients progress to multiple myeloma over 
a 15-year period.
Monoclonal Gammopathy of Uncertain Significance. 
MGUS is the most common plasma cell dyscrasia, occurring 
in about 3% of persons older than 50 years of age and in 
about 5% of individuals older than 70 years of age. By defini-
tion, patients are asymptomatic and the serum M protein 
level is less than 3 gm/dL. Approximately 1% of patients 
602
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
Patients with IgM-secreting tumors have additional 
signs and symptoms stemming from the physicochemical 
properties of IgM. Because of its large size, at high concen-
trations IgM greatly increases the viscosity of the blood, 
giving rise to a hyperviscosity syndrome characterized by the 
following:
•	 Visual impairment associated with venous congestion, 
which is reflected by striking tortuosity and distention 
of retinal veins; retinal hemorrhages and exudates can 
also contribute to the visual problems
•	 Neurologic problems such as headaches, dizziness, deaf-
ness, and stupor, all stemming from sluggish blood flow 
and sludging
•	 Bleeding related to the formation of complexes between 
macroglobulins and clotting factors as well as interfer-
ence with platelet functions
•	 Cryoglobulinemia resulting from the precipitation of 
macroglobulins at low temperatures, which produces 
symptoms such as Raynaud phenomenon and cold 
urticaria
Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma is an incurable progres-
sive disease. Because most IgM is intravascular, symptoms 
caused by the high IgM levels (e.g., hyperviscosity and 
hemolysis) can be alleviated by plasmapheresis. Tumor 
growth can be controlled for a time with low doses of che-
motherapeutic drugs and immunotherapy with anti-CD20 
antibody. Transformation to large-cell lymphoma occurs 
but is uncommon. Median survival is about 4 years.
Figure 13-19  Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. Bone marrow biopsy shows a 
characteristic mixture of small lymphoid cells exhibiting various degrees of 
plasma cell differentiation. In addition, a mast cell with purplish red cytoplas-
mic granules is present at the left-hand side of the field. 
  KEY CONCEPTS
Plasma Cell Neoplasms
Multiple Myeloma
■ Plasma cell tumor that manifests with multiple lytic 
bone lesions associated with pathologic fractures and 
hypercalcemia
■ Neoplastic plasma cells suppress normal humoral immunity 
and secrete partial immunoglobulins that are nephrotoxic
■ Associated with diverse translocations involving the IgH 
locus; frequent dysregulation and overexpression of 
D cyclins
  MORPHOLOGY
At diagnosis the majority of patients have generalized lymph-
adenopathy, and 20% to 40% have peripheral blood involve-
ment. Frequent sites of extranodal involvement include the bone 
marrow, spleen, liver, and gut. Occasionally, mucosal involve-
ment of the small bowel or colon produces polyp-like lesions 
(lymphomatoid polyposis); of all forms of NHL, mantle cell lym-
phoma is most likely to spread in this fashion.
Nodal tumor cells may surround reactive germinal centers to 
produce a nodular appearance at low power, or diffusely efface 
the node. Typically, the proliferation consists of a homo-
geneous population of small lymphocytes with irregular 
to occasionally deeply clefted (cleaved) nuclear contours 
(Fig. 13-20). Large cells resembling centroblasts and prolifera-
tion centers are absent, distinguishing mantle cell lymphoma 
from follicular lymphoma and CLL/SLL, respectively. In most 
cases the nuclear chromatin is condensed, nucleoli are incon-
spicuous, and the cytoplasm is scant. Occasionally, tumors 
composed of intermediate-sized cells with more open chroma-
tin and a brisk mitotic rate are observed; immunophenotyping 
is necessary to distinguish these “blastoid” variants from ALL.
■ May be associated with AL amyloidosis (as may other 
neoplasms later)
Other Plasma Cell Neoplasms
■ MGUS (monoclonal gammopathy of unknown signifi-
cance): common in older adults, progresses to myeloma 
at a rate of 1% per year
■ Smoldering myeloma: disseminated disease that pursues 
an unusually indolent course
■ Solitary osseous plasmacytoma: solitary bone lesion iden-
tical to disseminated myeloma; most progress to myeloma 
within 7 to 10 years
■ Extramedullary plasmacytoma: solitary mass, usually in the 
upper aerodigestive tract; rarely progresses to systemic 
disease
■ Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma: B cell lymphoma that 
exhibits plasmacytic differentiation; clinical symptoms 
dominated by hyperviscosity related to high levels of 
tumor-derived IgM; highly associated with mutations in the 
MYD88 gene
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
Mantle cell lymphoma is an uncommon lymphoid neo-
plasm that makes up about 2.5% of NHL in the United 
States and 7% to 9% of NHL in Europe. It usually presents 
in the fifth to sixth decades of life and shows a male pre-
dominance. As the name implies, the tumor cells closely 
resemble the normal mantle zone B cells that surround 
germinal centers.
Pathogenesis.  Virtually all mantle cell lymphomas have 
an (11;14) translocation involving the IgH locus on chro-
mosome 14 and the cyclin D1 locus on chromosome 11 
that leads to overexpression of cyclin D1. This transloca-
tion is detected in about 70% of cases by standard karyo-
typing and in virtually all tumors by fluorescence in situ 
hybridization. The resulting up-regulation of cyclin D1 
promotes G1- to S-phase progression during the cell cycle, 
as was described in Chapter 7.
603
Disorders of white cells
Figure 13-20  Mantle cell lymphoma. A, At low power, neoplastic lymphoid cells surround a small, atrophic germinal center, producing a mantle zone pattern 
of growth. B, High-power view shows a homogeneous population of small lymphoid cells with somewhat irregular nuclear outlines, condensed chromatin, and 
scant cytoplasm. Large cells resembling prolymphocytes (seen in chronic lymphocytic leukemia) and centroblasts (seen in follicular lymphoma) are absent. 
A
B
Immunophenotype.  Mantle cell lymphomas express high 
levels of cyclin D1. Most tumors are also express CD19, 
CD20, and moderately high levels of surface Ig (usually 
IgM and IgD with κ or λ light chain). It is usually CD5+ 
and CD23−, which help to distinguish it from CLL/SLL. 
The IgH genes lack somatic hypermutation, supporting an 
origin from a naive B cell.
Clinical Features.  The most common presentation is pain-
less lymphadenopathy. Symptoms related to involvement 
of the spleen (present in ~50% of cases) and gut are also 
common. The prognosis is poor; the median survival is 
only 3 to 4 years. This lymphoma is not curable with con-
ventional chemotherapy, and most patients eventually 
succumb to organ dysfunction caused by tumor infiltra-
tion. The blastoid variant and a “proliferative” expression 
profiling signature are associated with even shorter surviv-
als. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and protea-
some inhibitors are newer therapeutic approaches that 
show some promise.
Marginal Zone Lymphomas
The category of marginal zone lymphoma encompasses a 
heterogeneous group of B-cell tumors that arise within 
lymph nodes, spleen, or extranodal tissues. The extranodal 
tumors were initially recognized at mucosal sites and are 
often referred to as mucosa-associated lymphoid tumors 
(or “MALTomas”). In most cases, the tumor cells show 
evidence of somatic hypermutation and are considered to 
be of memory B-cell origin.
Although all marginal zone lymphomas share certain 
features, those occurring at extranodal sites deserve special 
attention because of their unusual pathogenesis and three 
exceptional characteristics.
•	 They often arise within tissues involved by chronic 
inflammatory disorders of autoimmune or infectious 
etiology; examples include the salivary gland in Sjögren 
disease, the thyroid gland in Hashimoto thyroiditis, and 
the stomach in Helicobacter gastritis.
•	 They remain localized for prolonged periods, spreading 
systemically only late in their course.
•	 They may regress if the inciting agent (e.g., Helicobacter 
pylori) is eradicated.
These characteristics suggest that extranodal marginal 
zone lymphomas arising in chronically inflamed tissues 
lie on a continuum between reactive lymphoid hyper­
plasia and full-blown lymphoma. The disease begins 
as a polyclonal immune reaction. With the acquisition of 
still-unknown initiating mutations, a B-cell clone emerges 
that still depends on antigen-stimulated T-helper cells 
for signals that drive growth and survival. At this stage, 
withdrawal of the responsible antigen causes tumor invo-
lution. A clinically relevant example is found in gastric 
“MALToma,” in which antibiotic therapy directed against 
H. pylori often leads to tumor regression (Chapter 17). With 
time, however, tumors may acquire additional mutations 
that render their growth and survival antigen-independent, 
such as the (11;18), (14;18), or (1;14) chromosomal trans­
locations, which are relatively specific for extranodal 
marginal zone lymphomas. All of these translocations 
up-regulate the expression and function of BCL10 or 
MALT1, protein components of a signaling complex that 
activates NF-κB and promotes the growth and survival of 
B cells. With further clonal evolution, spread to distant 
sites and transformation to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
may occur. This theme of polyclonal to monoclonal transi-
tion during lymphomagenesis is also applicable to the 
pathogenesis of EBV-induced lymphoma and is discussed 
more fully in Chapter 7.
Hairy Cell Leukemia
This rare but distinctive B-cell neoplasm constitutes about 
2% of all leukemias. It is predominantly a disease of 
middle-aged white males, with a median age of 55 and a 
male-to-female ratio of 5 : 1.
Pathogenesis.  Hairy cell leukemias are associated in 
more than 90% of cases with activating point mutations 
in the serine/threonine kinase BRAF, which is posi-
tioned immediately downstream of RAS in the MAPK 
signaling cascade (Chapter 7). The specific mutation, a 
valine to glutamate substitution at residue 600, is also 
found in diverse other neoplasms, including many 
melanomas and Langerhans cell histiocytosis (discussed 
later). 
604
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
  MORPHOLOGY
Hairy cell leukemia derives its picturesque name from the 
appearance of the leukemic cells, which have fine hairlike 
projections that are best recognized under the phase-contrast 
microscope (Fig. 13-21). On routine peripheral blood smears, 
hairy cells have round, oblong, or reniform nuclei and moderate 
amounts of pale blue cytoplasm with threadlike or bleblike 
extensions. The number of circulating cells is highly variable. 
The marrow is involved by a diffuse interstitial infiltrate of cells 
with oblong or reniform nuclei, condensed chromatin, and pale 
cytoplasm. Because these cells are enmeshed in an extracel-
lular matrix composed of reticulin fibrils, they usually cannot be 
aspirated (a clinical difficulty referred to as a “dry tap”) and are 
only seen in marrow biopsies. The splenic red pulp is usually 
heavily infiltrated, leading to obliteration of white pulp and a 
beefy red gross appearance. Hepatic portal triads are also 
involved frequently.
Figure 13-21  Hairy cell leukemia (peripheral blood smear). A, Phase-contrast microscopy shows tumor cells with fine hairlike cytoplasmic projections. 
B, In stained smears, these cells have round or folded nuclei and modest amounts of pale blue, agranular cytoplasm. 
Immunophenotype.  Hairy cell leukemias typically express 
the pan-B-cell markers CD19 and CD20, surface Ig (usually 
IgG), and certain relatively distinctive markers, such as 
CD11c, CD25, CD103, and annexin A1.
Clinical Features.  Clinical manifestations result largely 
from infiltration of the bone marrow, liver, and spleen. 
Splenomegaly, often massive, is the most common and 
sometimes the only abnormal physical finding. Hepatomegaly 
is less common and not as marked; lymphadenopathy is 
rare. Pancytopenia resulting from marrow involvement 
and splenic sequestration is seen in more than half the 
cases. About one third of those affected present with infec-
tions. There is an increased incidence of atypical mycobac-
terial infections, possibly related to frequent unexplained 
monocytopenia.
Hairy cell leukemia follows an indolent course. For 
unclear reasons, this tumor is exceptionally sensitive to 
“gentle” chemotherapeutic regimens, which produce long-
lasting remissions. Tumors often relapse after 5 or more 
years, yet generally respond well when retreated with the 
same agents, a feature that is highly unusual among human 
cancers. BRAF inhibitors appear to produce excellent 
responses in tumors that have failed conventional chemo-
therapy. The overall prognosis is excellent.
Peripheral T-Cell and NK-Cell Neoplasms
These categories include a heterogeneous group of neo-
plasms having phenotypes resembling mature T cells or 
NK cells. Peripheral T-cell tumors make up about 5% to 
10% of NHLs in the United States and Europe, while NK 
cell tumors are rare. By contrast, for unknown reasons both 
T cell and NK cell tumors are relatively more common in 
the Far East. Only the most common diagnoses and those 
of particular pathogenetic interest will be discussed.
Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma, Unspecified
Although the WHO classification includes a number of 
distinct peripheral T-cell neoplasms, many of these lym-
phomas are not easily categorized and are lumped into a 
“wastebasket” diagnosis, peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspec-
ified. As might be expected, no morphologic feature is 
pathognomonic, but certain findings are characteristic. 
These tumors efface lymph nodes diffusely and are typi-
cally composed of a pleomorphic mixture of variably sized 
malignant T cells (Fig. 13-22). There is often a prominent 
infiltrate of reactive cells, such as eosinophils and macro-
phages, probably attracted by tumor-derived cytokines. 
Brisk neoangiogenesis may also be seen.
By definition, all peripheral T-cell lymphomas are 
derived from mature T cells. They usually express CD2, 
CD3, CD5, and either αβ or γδ T-cell receptors. Some also 
express CD4 or CD8; such tumors are taken to be of helper 
or cytotoxic T-cell origin, respectively. However, many 
tumors have phenotypes that do not resemble any known 
normal T cell. In difficult cases where the differential diag-
nosis lies between lymphoma and a florid reactive process, 
DNA analysis is used to confirm the presence of clonal 
T-cell receptor rearrangements.
Most patients present with generalized lymphade­
nopathy, sometimes accompanied by eosinophilia, pruri-
tus, fever, and weight loss. Although cures of peripheral 
T-cell lymphoma have been reported, these tumors have 
a significantly worse prognosis than comparably aggres-
sive mature B-cell neoplasms (e.g., diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma).
Anaplastic Large-Cell Lymphoma (ALK Positive)
This uncommon entity is defined by the presence of rear-
rangements in the ALK gene on chromosome 2p23. These 
605
Disorders of white cells
substantially worse prognosis. Both the ALK+ and ALK- 
tumors usually express CD30, a member of the TNF recep-
tor family; of note, recombinant antibodies that bind 
and kill CD30-expressing cells have produced promising 
responses in patients with anaplastic large cell lymphoma 
and Hodgkin lymphoma, another CD30+ tumor (described 
later).
Adult T-Cell Leukemia/Lymphoma
This neoplasm of CD4+ T cells is only observed in adults 
infected by human T-cell leukemia retrovirus type 1 
(HTLV-1), which was discussed in Chapter 7. It occurs 
mainly in regions where HTLV-1 is endemic, namely 
southern Japan, West Africa, and the Caribbean basin. 
Common findings include skin lesions, generalized lymph-
adenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, peripheral blood lym-
phocytosis, and hypercalcemia. The appearance of the 
tumor cells varies, but cells with multilobated nuclei (“clo-
verleaf” or “flower” cells) are frequently observed. The 
tumor cells contain clonal HTLV-1 provirus, which is 
believed to play a critical pathogenic role. Notably, HTLV-1 
encodes a protein called Tax that is a potent activator of 
NF-κB, which, as previously discussed, enhances lympho-
cyte growth and survival.
Most patients present with rapidly progressive disease 
that is fatal within months to 1 year despite aggressive 
chemotherapy. Less commonly, the tumor involves only 
the skin and follows a much more indolent course, like that 
of mycosis fungoides (described below). It should be noted 
that in addition to adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma, 
HTLV-1 infection sometimes gives rise to a progressive 
demyelinating disease of the central nervous system and 
spinal cord (Chapter 28).
Mycosis Fungoides/Sézary Syndrome
Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome are different 
manifestations of a tumor of CD4+ helper T cells that 
home to the skin. Clinically, the cutaneous lesions of 
mycosis fungoides typically progress through three some-
what distinct stages, an inflammatory premycotic phase, a 
plaque phase, and a tumor phase (Chapter 25). Histologically, 
rearrangements break the ALK locus and lead to the forma-
tion of chimeric genes encoding ALK fusion proteins, con-
stitutively active tyrosine kinases that trigger the RAS and 
JAK/STAT signaling pathways.
As the name implies, this tumor is typically composed 
of large anaplastic cells, some containing horseshoe-shaped 
nuclei and voluminous cytoplasm (so-called hallmark cells) 
(Fig. 13-23A). The tumor cells often cluster about venules 
and infiltrate lymphoid sinuses, mimicking the appearance 
of metastatic carcinoma. ALK is not expressed in normal 
lymphocytes; thus, the detection of ALK protein in tumor 
cells (Fig. 13-23B) is a reliable indicator of an ALK gene 
rearrangement.
T-cell lymphomas with ALK rearrangements tend to 
occur in children or young adults, frequently involve soft 
tissues, and carry a very good prognosis (unlike other 
aggressive peripheral T-cell neoplasms). The cure rate with 
chemotherapy is 75% to 80%. Inhibitors of ALK have been 
developed and are being evaluated as a form of selective, 
targeted therapy. Morphologically similar tumors lacking 
ALK rearrangements occur in older adults and have a 
Figure 13-22  Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified (lymph node). A spec-
trum of small, intermediate, and large lymphoid cells, many with irregular 
nuclear contours, is visible. 
Figure 13-23  Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. A, Several “hallmark” cells with horseshoe-like or “embryoid” nuclei and abundant cytoplasm lie near the center 
of the field. B, Immunohistochemical stain demonstrating the presence of ALK fusion protein. (Courtesy Dr. Jeffrey Kutok, Department of Pathology, Brigham 
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Mass.)
A
B
606
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
the epidermis and upper dermis are infiltrated by neoplas-
tic T cells, which often have a cerebriform appearance due 
to marked infolding of the nuclear membrane. Late disease 
progression is characterized by extracutaneous spread, 
most commonly to lymph nodes and bone marrow.
Sézary syndrome is a variant in which skin involvement 
is manifested as a generalized exfoliative erythroderma. In con-
trast to mycosis fungoides, the skin lesions rarely proceed 
to tumefaction, and there is an associated leukemia of 
“Sézary” cells with characteristic cerebriform nuclei.
The tumor cells express the adhesion molecule cutane-
ous leukocyte antigen (CLA) and the chemokine receptors 
CCR4 and CCR10, all of which contribute to the homing of 
normal CD4+ T cells to the skin. Although cutaneous 
disease dominates the clinical picture, sensitive molecular 
analyses have shown that the tumor cells circulate through 
the blood, marrow, and lymph nodes even early in the 
course. Nevertheless, these are indolent tumors, with a 
median survival of 8 to 9 years. Transformation to aggres-
sive T-cell lymphoma occurs occasionally as a terminal 
event.
Large Granular Lymphocytic Leukemia
T-cell and NK-cell variants of this rare neoplasm are rec-
ognized, both of which occur mainly in adults. Individuals 
with T-cell disease usually present with mild to moderate 
lymphocytosis and splenomegaly. Lymphadenopathy and 
hepatomegaly are usually absent. NK-cell disease often 
presents in an even more subtle fashion, with little or no 
lymphocytosis or splenomegaly.
Recent work has shown that 30% to 40% of large granu-
lar lymphocytic leukemias have acquired mutations in the 
transcription factor STAT3, which functions downstream 
of cytokine receptors. These mutations occur in both T-cell 
and NK-cell forms of the disease and appear to result in 
cytokine-independent activation of STAT3, which is now 
postulated to have a major role in the pathogenesis of these 
heretofore mysterious proliferations.
The tumor cells are large lymphocytes with abundant 
blue cytoplasm and a few coarse azurophilic granules, best 
seen in peripheral blood smears. The marrow usually con-
tains sparse interstitial lymphocytic infiltrates, which can 
be difficult to appreciate without immunohistochemical 
stains. Infiltrates are also usually present in the spleen and 
liver. As might be expected, T-cell variants are CD3+, 
whereas NK-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemias are 
CD3−, CD56+.
Despite the relative paucity of marrow infiltration, 
neutropenia and anemia dominate the clinical picture. 
Neutropenia is often accompanied by a striking decrease 
in late myeloid forms in the marrow. Rarely, pure red cell 
aplasia is seen. There is also an increased incidence of rheu-
matologic disorders. Some patients with Felty syndrome, a 
triad of rheumatoid arthritis, splenomegaly, and neutrope-
nia, have this disorder as an underlying cause. The basis 
for these varied clinical abnormalities is unknown, but 
autoimmunity, provoked in some way by the tumor, 
seems likely.
The course is variable, being largely dependent on the 
severity of the cytopenias and their responsiveness to low-
dose chemotherapy or steroids. In general, tumors of T-cell 
origin pursue an indolent course, whereas NK-cell tumors 
behave more aggressively.
Extranodal NK/T-Cell Lymphoma
This neoplasm is rare in the United States and Europe, but 
constitutes as many as 3% of NHLs in Asia. It presents 
most commonly as a destructive nasopharyngeal mass; less 
common sites of presentation include the testis and the 
skin. The tumor cell infiltrate typically surrounds and 
invades small vessels, leading to extensive ischemic necrosis. 
In touch preparations, large azurophilic granules are seen in 
the cytoplasm of the tumor cells that resemble those found 
in normal NK cells.
Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is highly associated 
with EBV. Within individual patients, all of the tumor cells 
contain identical EBV episomes, indicating that the tumor 
originates from a single EBV-infected cell. How EBV gains 
entry is uncertain, since the tumor cells do not express 
CD21, the surface protein that serves as the B-cell EBV 
receptor. Most tumors are CD3− and lack T-cell receptor 
rearrangements and express NK-cell markers, supporting 
an NK-cell origin. No consistent chromosome aberration 
has been described.
Most extranodal NK/T-cell lymphomas are highly 
aggressive neoplasms that respond well to radiation 
therapy but are resistant to chemotherapy. Thus, the prog-
nosis is poor in patients with advanced disease.
  KEY CONCEPTS
Uncommon Lymphoid Neoplasms
Mantle cell lymphoma: Tumor of naive B cells that 
pursues a moderately aggressive course and is highly 
associated with translocations involving the cyclin D1 gene
Marginal zone lymphoma: Indolent tumors of antigen-
primed B cells that arise at sites of chronic immune 
stimulation and often remain localized for long periods  
of time
Hairy cell leukemia: Morphologically distinct, very indolent 
tumor of mature B cells that is highly associated with 
mutations in the BRAF serine/threonine kinase
Peripheral NK/T cell lymphomas and leukemias
■ Anaplastic large cell lymphoma: Aggressive T cell tumor, 
associated in a subset with activating mutations in the 
ALK tyrosine kinase
■ Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma: Aggressive tumor of 
CD4+ T cells that is uniformly associated with HTLV-1 
infection
■ Large granular lymphocytic leukemia: Indolent tumor of 
cytotoxic T cells or NK cells that is associated with muta-
tions in the transcription factor STAT3 and with auto­
immune phenomena and cytopenias
■ Extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma: Aggressive tumor, usually 
derived from NK cells, that is strongly associated with EBV 
infection
Hodgkin Lymphoma
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) encompasses a group of lym-
phoid neoplasms that differ from NHL in several respects 
(Table 13-7). While NHLs frequently occur at extranodal 
sites and spread in an unpredictable fashion, HL arises 
in a single node or chain of nodes and spreads first to 
607
Disorders of white cells
Table 13-7  Differences between Hodgkin and Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas
Hodgkin Lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
More often localized to a single axial 
group of nodes (cervical, mediastinal, 
para-aortic)
More frequent involvement of 
multiple peripheral nodes
Orderly spread by contiguity
Noncontiguous spread
Mesenteric nodes and Waldeyer ring 
rarely involved
Waldeyer ring and mesenteric 
nodes commonly involved
Extranodal presentation rare
Extranodal presentation common
anatomically contiguous lymphoid tissues. HL also has 
distinctive morphologic features. It is characterized by 
the presence of neoplastic giant cells called Reed-
Sternberg cells. These cells release factors that induce the 
accumulation of reactive lymphocytes, macrophages, and 
granulocytes, which typically make up greater than 90% of 
the tumor cellularity. In the vast majority of HLs, the neo-
plastic Reed-Sternberg cells are derived from germinal 
center or postgerminal center B cells.
Hodgkin lymphoma accounts for 0.7% of all new cancers 
in the United States; there are about 8000 new cases each 
year. The average age at diagnosis is 32 years. It is one of 
the most common cancers of young adults and adolescents, 
but also occurs in the aged. It was the first human cancer 
to be successfully treated with radiation therapy and che-
motherapy, and is curable in most cases.
Classification.  The WHO classification recognizes five 
subtypes of HL:
1.	 Nodular sclerosis
2.	 Mixed cellularity
3.	 Lymphocyte-rich
4.	 Lymphocyte depletion
5.	 Lymphocyte predominance
In the first four subtypes—nodular sclerosis, mixed cel-
lularity, lymphocyte-rich, and lymphocyte depletion—the 
Reed-Sternberg cells have a similar immunophenotype. 
These subtypes are often lumped together as classical forms 
of HL. In the remaining subtype, lymphocyte predomi-
nance, the Reed-Sternberg cells have a distinctive B-cell 
immunophenotype that differs from that of the “classical” 
types.
Pathogenesis.  The origin of the neoplastic Reed-Sternberg 
cells of classical HL has been explained through elegant 
studies relying on molecular analysis of single isolated 
Reed-Sternberg cells and variants. In the vast majority of 
cases, the Ig genes of Reed-Sternberg cells have undergone 
both V(D)J recombination and somatic hypermutation, 
establishing an origin from a germinal center or postgermi-
nal center B cell. Despite having the genetic signature of a 
B cell, the Reed-Sternberg cells of classical HL fail to express 
most B-cell–specific genes, including the Ig genes. The 
cause of this wholesale reprogramming of gene expression 
has yet to be fully explained, but presumably is the result 
of widespread epigenetic changes of uncertain etiology.
Activation of the transcription factor NF-κB is a 
common event in classical HL. This can occur by several 
mechanisms: 
  MORPHOLOGY
Identification of Reed-Sternberg cells and their variants is 
essential for the diagnosis. Diagnostic Reed-Sternberg cells 
are large cells (45 µm in diameter) with multiple nuclei or 
a single nucleus with multiple nuclear lobes, each with a 
large inclusion-like nucleolus about the size of a small 
lymphocyte (5 to 7 µm in diameter) (Fig. 13-24A). The cyto-
plasm is abundant. Several Reed-Sternberg cell variants are 
also recognized. Mononuclear variants contain a single 
nucleus with a large inclusion-like nucleolus (Fig. 13-24B). 
Lacunar cells (seen in the nodular sclerosis subtype) have 
more delicate, folded, or multilobate nuclei and abundant pale 
cytoplasm that is often disrupted during the cutting of sections, 
leaving the nucleus sitting in an empty hole (a lacuna) (Fig. 
•	 NF-κB may be activated either by EBV infection or by 
some other mechanism and turns on genes that promote 
lymphocyte survival and proliferation.
•	 EBV+ tumor cells express latent membrane protein-1 
(LMP-1), a protein encoded by the EBV genome that 
transmits signals that up-regulate NF-κB.
•	 Activation of NF-κB may occur in EBV-tumors as a 
result of acquired loss-of-function mutations in IκB or 
A20 (also known as TNF alpha-induced protein 3, or 
TNFAIP3), which are both negative regulators of NF-κB.
•	 It is hypothesized that activation of NF-κB by EBV or 
other mechanisms rescues “crippled” germinal center B 
cells that cannot express Igs from apoptosis, setting the 
stage for the acquisition of other unknown mutations 
that collaborate to produce Reed-Sternberg cells.
Little is known about the basis for the morphology of 
Reed-Sternberg cells and variants, but it is intriguing that 
EBV-infected B cells resembling Reed-Sternberg cells are 
found in the lymph nodes of individuals with infectious 
mononucleosis, strongly suggesting that EBV-encoded 
proteins play a part in the remarkable metamorphosis of B 
cells into Reed-Sternberg cells.
The florid accumulation of reactive cells in tissues 
involved by classical HL occurs in response to a wide 
variety of cytokines (e.g., IL-5, IL-10, and M-CSF) chemo-
kines (e.g.,eotaxin), and other factors (e.g., immunomodu-
latory factor galectin-1) that are secreted by Reed-Sternberg 
cells. Once attracted, the reactive cells produce factors that 
support the growth and survival of the tumor cells and 
further modify the reactive cell response. For example, 
eosinophils and T cells express ligands that activate the 
CD30 and CD40 receptors found on Reed-Sternberg cells, 
producing signals that up-regulate NF-κB. Other examples 
of “cross-talk” between Reed-Sternberg cells and sur-
rounding reactive cells are provided in Figure 13-28. Some 
of the factors produced by RS cells give rise to a state of 
immunodeficiency by impairment of T helper and cyto-
toxic cells and enhancing the generation of regulatory T 
cells (as discussed later).
Reed-Sternberg cells are aneuploid and possess diverse 
clonal chromosomal aberrations. Copy number gains in the 
REL proto-oncogene on chromosome 2p are particularly 
common and may also contribute to increases in NF-κB 
activity.
608
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
Figure 13-24  Reed-Sternberg cells and variants. A, Diagnostic Reed-Sternberg cell, with two nuclear lobes, large inclusion-like nucleoli, and abundant cyto-
plasm, surrounded by lymphocytes, macrophages, and an eosinophil. B, Reed-Sternberg cell, mononuclear variant. C, Reed-Sternberg cell, lacunar variant. 
This variant has a folded or multilobated nucleus and lies within a open space, which is an artifact created by disruption of the cytoplasm during tissue sec-
tioning. D, Reed-Sternberg cell, lymphohistiocytic variant. Several such variants with multiply infolded nuclear membranes, small nucleoli, fine chromatin, and 
abundant pale cytoplasm are present. (A, Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, 
Dallas, Tex.)
A
B
D
13-24C). In classical forms of HL, Reed-Sternberg cells undergo 
a peculiar form of cell death in which the cells shrink and 
become pyknotic, a process described as “mummification.” 
Lymphohistiocytic variants (L&H cells) with polypoid nuclei, 
inconspicuous nucleoli, and moderately abundant cytoplasm 
are characteristic of the lymphocyte predominance subtype 
(Fig. 13-24D).
HL must be distinguished from other conditions in which cells 
resembling Reed-Sternberg cells can be seen, such as infec-
tious mononucleosis, solid tissue cancers, and large-cell NHLs. 
The diagnosis of HL depends on the identification of Reed-
Sternberg cells in a background of non-neoplastic inflammatory 
cells. The Reed-Sternberg cells of HL also have a characteristic 
immunohistochemical profile.
With this as background, we turn to the subclasses of HL, 
pointing out some of the salient morphologic and immunophe-
notypic features of each (Table 13-8). The clinical manifesta-
tions common to all are presented later.
Nodular Sclerosis Type.  This is the most common form of 
HL, constituting 65% to 70% of cases. It is characterized by 
the presence of lacunar variant Reed-Sternberg cells and the 
deposition of collagen in bands that divide involved lymph 
nodes into circumscribed nodules (Fig. 13-25). The fibrosis 
may be scant or abundant. The Reed-Sternberg cells are found 
in a polymorphous background of T cells, eosinophils, plasma 
cells, and macrophages. Diagnostic Reed-Sternberg cells are 
often uncommon. The Reed-Sternberg cells in this and other 
“classical” HL subtypes have a characteristic immunopheno-
type; they are positive for PAX5 (a B-cell transcription factor), 
CD15, and CD30, and negative for other B-cell markers, T-cell 
markers, and CD45 (leukocyte common antigen). As in other 
forms of HL, involvement of the spleen, liver, bone marrow, and 
other organs and tissues can appear in due course in the form 
of irregular tumor nodules resembling those seen in lymph 
nodes. This subtype is uncommonly associated with EBV.
The nodular sclerosis type occurs with equal frequency in 
males and females. It has a propensity to involve the lower 
cervical, supraclavicular, and mediastinal lymph nodes of ado-
lescents or young adults. The prognosis is excellent.
Mixed-Cellularity Type.  This form of HL constitutes about 
20% to 25% of cases. Involved lymph nodes are diffusely 
effaced by a heterogeneous cellular infiltrate, which includes T 
cells, eosinophils, plasma cells, and benign macrophages 
admixed with Reed-Sternberg cells (Fig. 13-26). Diagnostic 
Reed-Sternberg cells and mononuclear variants are 
usually plentiful. The Reed-Sternberg cells are infected 
with EBV in about 70% of cases. The immunophenotype is 
identical to that observed in the nodular sclerosis type.
Mixed-cellularity HL is more common in males. Compared 
with the lymphocyte predominance and nodular sclerosis  
subtypes, it is more likely to be associated with older age, 
systemic symptoms such as night sweats and weight loss, and 
609
Disorders of white cells
Table 13-8  Subtypes of Hodgkin Lymphoma
Subtype
Morphology and Immunophenotype
Typical Clinical Features
Nodular sclerosis
Frequent lacunar cells and occasional diagnostic RS cells; background 
infiltrate composed of T lymphocytes, eosinophils, macrophages, and 
plasma cells; fibrous bands dividing cellular areas into nodules. RS 
cells CD15+, CD30+; usually EBV−
Most common subtype; usually stage I or II disease; frequent 
mediastinal involvement; equal occurrence in males and 
females (F = M), most patients young adults
Mixed cellularity
Frequent mononuclear and diagnostic RS cells; background infiltrate rich 
in T lymphocytes, eosinophils, macrophages, plasma cells; RS cells 
CD15+, CD30+; 70% EBV+
More than 50% present as stage III or IV disease; M greater than 
F; biphasic incidence, peaking in young adults and again in 
adults older than 55
Lymphocyte rich
Frequent mononuclear and diagnostic RS cells; background infiltrate rich 
in T lymphocytes; RS cells CD15+, CD30+; 40% EBV−
Uncommon; M greater than F; tends to be seen in older adults
Lymphocyte 
depletion
Reticular variant: Frequent diagnostic RS cells and variants and a paucity 
of background reactive cells; RS cells CD15+, CD30+; most EBV+
Uncommon; more common in older males, HIV-infected 
individuals, and in developing countries; often presents with 
advanced disease
Lymphocyte 
predominance
Frequent L&H (popcorn cell) variants in a background of follicular dendritic 
cells and reactive B cells; RS cells CD20+, CD15−, C30−; EB−
Uncommon; young males with cervical or axillary 
lymphadenopathy; mediastinal
L&H, lymphohistiocytic; RS cell, Reed-Sternberg cell.
advanced tumor stage. Nonetheless, the overall prognosis is 
very good.
Lymphocyte-Rich Type.  This is an uncommon form of clas-
sical HL in which reactive lymphocytes make up the vast 
majority of the cellular infiltrate. In most cases, involved 
lymph nodes are diffusely effaced, but vague nodularity due to 
the presence of residual B-cell follicles is sometimes seen. This 
entity is distinguished from the lymphocyte predominance type 
by the presence of frequent mononuclear variants and diagnos-
tic Reed-Sternberg cells with a “classical” immunophenotypic 
profile. It is associated with EBV in about 40% of cases and 
has a very good to excellent prognosis.
Lymphocyte Depletion Type.  This is the least common form 
of HL, amounting to less than 5% of cases. It is characterized 
by a paucity of lymphocytes and a relative abundance of Reed-
Sternberg cells or their pleomorphic variants. The immunophe-
notype of the Reed-Sternberg cells is identical to that seen in 
other classical types of HL. Immunophenotyping is essential, 
since most tumors suspected of being lymphocyte depletion 
HL actually prove to be large-cell NHLs. The Reed-Sternberg 
cells are infected with EBV in over 90% of cases.
Figure 13-25  Hodgkin lymphoma, nodular sclerosis type. A low-power view 
shows well-defined bands of pink, acellular collagen that subdivide the tumor 
into nodules. (Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna, Department of Pathology, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)
Lymphocyte depletion HL occurs predominantly in older 
adults, in HIV+ individuals of any age, and in nonindustrialized 
countries. Advanced stage and systemic symptoms are fre-
quent, and the overall outcome is somewhat less favorable than 
in the other subtypes.
Lymphocyte Predominance Type.  This uncommon “nonclas-
sical” variant of HL accounts for about 5% of cases. Involved 
nodes are effaced by a nodular infiltrate of small lymphocytes 
admixed with variable numbers of macrophages (Fig. 13-27). 
“Classical” Reed-Sternberg cells are usually difficult to find. 
Instead, this tumor contains so-called L&H (lymphocytic and 
histiocytic) variants, which have a multilobed nucleus resem-
bling a popcorn kernel (“popcorn cell”). Eosinophils and plasma 
cells are usually scant or absent.
In contrast to the Reed-Sternberg cells found in classical 
forms of HL, L&H variants express B-cell markers typical 
of germinal-center B cells, such as CD20 and BCL6, and 
are usually negative for CD15 and CD30. The typical nodular 
pattern of growth is due to the presence of expanded B-cell 
follicles, which are populated with L&H variants, numerous 
reactive B cells, and follicular dendritic cells. The IgH genes of 
Figure 13-26  Hodgkin lymphoma, mixed-cellularity type. A diagnostic, binu-
cleate Reed-Sternberg cell is surrounded by reactive cells, including eosino-
phils (bright red cytoplasm), lymphocytes, and histiocytes. (Courtesy  
Dr. Robert W. McKenna, Department of Pathology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)
610
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
Figure 13-28  Proposed signals mediating “cross-talk” between Reed-Sternberg cells and surrounding normal cells in classical forms of Hodgkin lymphoma. 
CD30L, CD30 ligand; bFGF, basic fibroblast growth factor; M-CSF, monocyte colony-stimulating factor; HGF, hepatocyte growth factor (binds to the c-MET 
receptor); TGFβ, transforming growth factor β; TNFα, tumor necrosis factor α; CTL, CD8+ cytotoxic T cell; TH1 and TH2, CD4+ T helper cell subsets; 
Treg, regulatory T cell. 
TH1
Treg
CTL
TH2
Galectin-1,
various chemokines
Various
chemokines
M-CSF
IL-13
IL-13R
IL-5
Eotaxin
Tissue
eosinophili
Enhanced Treg
response
Suppressed TH1 and
cytotoxic T cell response
Monocyte/macrophage
infiltration/activation
Enhanced TH2 response
Fibrosis
Dendritic cells
Eotaxin
TNFα
bFGF
CD30L
CD30
CD40
HGF
C-MET
CD40L
IL-10
the L&H variants show evidence of ongoing somatic hypermu-
tation, a modification that occurs only in germinal center B cells. 
In 3% to 5% of cases, this type transforms into a tumor resem-
bling diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. EBV is not associated with 
this subtype.
A majority of patients are males, usually younger than 35 
years of age, who typically present with cervical or axillary 
lymphadenopathy. Mediastinal and bone marrow involvement 
is rare. In some series, this form of HL is more likely to recur 
than the classical subtypes, but the prognosis is excellent.
Clinical Features.  HL most commonly present as painless 
lymphadenopathy. Patients with the nodular sclerosis or 
lymphocyte predominance types tend to have stage I-II 
disease and are usually free of systemic manifestations. 
Patients with disseminated disease (stages III-IV) or the 
mixed-cellularity or lymphocyte depletion subtypes are 
more likely to have constitutional symptoms, such as fever, 
night sweats, and weight loss. Cutaneous immune unre-
sponsiveness (also called anergy) resulting from depressed 
cell-mediated immunity is seen in most cases. The mix of 
factors released from Reed-Sternberg cells (Fig. 13-28) sup-
press TH1 immune responses and may contribute to 
immune dysregulation.
The spread of HL is remarkably stereotyped: nodal 
disease first, then splenic disease, hepatic disease, and 
finally involvement of the marrow and other tissues. 
Staging involves physical examination, radiologic imaging 
of the abdomen, pelvis, and chest, and biopsy of the bone 
marrow (Table 13-9). With current treatment protocols, 
tumor stage rather than histologic type is the most impor-
tant prognostic variable. The cure rate of patients with 
stages I and IIA is close to 90%. Even with advanced disease 
(stages IVA and IVB), disease-free survival at 5 years is 
60% to 70%.
Low-stage localized HL can be cured with involved 
field radiotherapy, and indeed cure of such patients was 
one of the early success stories in oncology. However, it 
was subsequently recognized that long-term survivors 
treated with radiotherapy had a much higher incidence of 
certain malignancies, including lung cancer, melanoma, 
and breast cancer. Patients treated with early chemother-
apy regimens containing alkylating agents also had a high 
Figure 13-27  Hodgkin lymphoma, lymphocyte predominance type. Numer-
ous mature-looking lymphocytes surround scattered, large, pale-staining 
lymphohistiocytic variants (“popcorn” cells). (Courtesy Dr. Robert W. 
McKenna, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)
611
Disorders of white cells
incidence of secondary tumors, particularly acute myeloid 
leukemia. These sobering results spurred the development 
of current treatment regimens, which minimize the use of 
radiotherapy and employ less genotoxic chemotherapeutic 
agents; as a result, the incidence of secondary tumors 
appears to have been reduced markedly, without any loss 
of therapeutic efficacy. Anti-CD30 antibodies have pro-
duced excellent responses in patients with disease that has 
failed conventional treatments and represent a promising 
targeted therapy.
Table 13-9  Clinical Staging of Hodgkin and Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas 
(Ann Arbor Classification)
Stage
Distribution of Disease
I
Involvement of a single lymph node region (I) or a single 
extralymphatic organ or site (IE)
II
Involvement of two or more lymph node regions on the same side 
of the diaphragm alone (II) or localized involvement of an 
extralymphatic organ or site (IIE)
III
Involvement of lymph node regions on both sides of the diaphragm 
without (III) or with (IIIE) localized involvement of an 
extralymphatic organ or site
IV
Diffuse involvement of one or more extralymphatic organs or sites 
with or without lymphatic involvement
All stages are further divided on the basis of the absence (A) or presence  
(B) of the following symptoms: unexplained fever, drenching night sweats, 
and/or unexplained weight loss of greater than 10% of normal body 
weight.
Data from Carbone PT, et al: Symposium (Ann Arbor): Staging in Hodgkin’s disease. Cancer 
Res 31:1707, 1971.
Myeloid Neoplasms
The common feature of this heterogeneous group of neo-
plasms is an origin from hematopoietic progenitor cells. 
These diseases primarily involve the marrow and to a 
lesser degree the secondary hematopoietic organs (the 
spleen, liver, and lymph nodes), and usually present with 
symptoms related to altered hematopoiesis. Three broad 
categories of myeloid neoplasia exist:
  KEY CONCEPTS
Hodgkin Lymphoma
• Unusual tumor consisting mostly of reactive lymphocytes, 
macrophages, eosinophils, plasma cells and stromal cells 
mixed with rare tumor giant cells called Reed-Sternberg 
cells and variants
• Two broad types, classical (which has several subtypes) 
and lymphocyte predominant, which are distinguished 
based on morphologic and immunophenotypic grounds
• Reed-Sternberg cells of classical types make multiple 
cytokines and chemokines that influence the host response, 
and the host response in turn makes factors that support 
the growth of the tumor cells
• Classical forms are frequently associated with acquired 
mutations that activate the transcription factor NF-κB and 
with EBV infection
• Lymphocyte predominance type expresses B cell markers 
and is not associated with EBV
•	 Acute myeloid leukemias, in which an accumulation of 
immature myeloid forms (blasts) in the bone marrow 
suppresses normal hematopoiesis
•	 Myelodysplastic syndromes, in which defective matura-
tion of myeloid progenitors gives rise to ineffective 
hematopoiesis, leading to cytopenias
•	 Myeloproliferative disorders, in which there is usually 
increased production of one or more types of blood cells
The pathogenesis of myeloid neoplasms is best under-
stood in the context of normal hematopoiesis, which 
involves a hierarchy of hematopoietic stem cells, commit-
ted progenitors, and more differentiated elements (Fig. 
13-1). Normal hematopoiesis is finely tuned by homeo-
static feedback mechanisms involving cytokines and 
growth factors that modulate the production of red cells, 
white cells, and platelets in the marrow. These mechanisms 
are deranged in marrows involved by myeloid neoplasms, 
which “escape” from normal homeostatic controls and 
suppress the function of residual normal stem cells. The 
specific manifestations of the different myeloid neoplasms 
are influenced by
•	 The position of the transformed cell within the hierarchy of 
progenitors (i.e., a pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell 
versus a more committed progenitor)
•	 The effect of the transforming events on differentiation, which 
may be inhibited, skewed, or deranged by particular 
oncogenic mutations
Given that all myeloid neoplasms originate from trans-
formed hematopoietic progenitors, it is not surprising that 
divisions between these neoplasms are sometimes blurred. 
Myeloid neoplasms, like other malignancies, tend to evolve 
over time to more aggressive forms of disease. In particu-
lar, both myelodysplastic syndromes and myeloprolif­
erative disorders often “transform” to AML. In one of 
the most important myeloproliferative disorders, chronic 
myelogenous leukemia (CML), transformation to acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia is also seen, indicating that it 
originates from a transformed pluripotent hematopoietic 
stem cell.
Acute Myeloid Leukemia
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a tumor of hematopoi-
etic progenitors caused by acquired oncogenic mutations 
that impede differentiation, leading to the accumulation of 
immature myeloid blasts in the marrow. The replacement 
of the marrow with blasts produces marrow failure and 
complications related to anemia, thrombocytopenia, and 
neutropenia. AML occurs at all ages, but the incidence rises 
throughout life, peaking after 60 years of age. There are 
about 13,000 new cases each year in the United States.
Classification.  AML is quite heterogeneous, reflecting the 
complexities of myeloid cell differentiation. The current 
WHO classification subdivides AML into four categories 
(Table 13-10). The first includes forms of AML that are 
associated with particular genetic aberrations, which are 
important because they correlate with prognosis and guide 
therapy. Also included are categories of AML arising after 
a myelodysplastic disorder (MDS) or with MDS-like fea-
tures, and therapy-related AML. AMLs in these two cate-
gories have distinct genetic features and respond poorly to 
612
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
AML. One example is found in AML with the t(15;17), 
acute promyelocytic leukemia. The t(15;17) creates yet 
another fusion gene encoding a chimeric protein consisting 
of the retinoic acid receptor-α (RARα) fused to a portion 
of a protein called PML (after the tumor). As discussed in 
Chapter 7, this fusion protein interferes with the terminal 
differentiation of granulocytes, an effect that can be over-
come by treatment with either all-trans retinoic acid or 
arsenic trioxide. However, expression of the PML-RARa 
fusion protein in the bone marrow cells of mice produces 
disease only in aged mice, suggesting that PML-RARα is 
not sufficient. Indeed, AMLs with the t(15;17) (a subtype 
referred to as acute promyelocytic leukemia) also have fre-
quent activating mutations in FLT3, a receptor tyrosine 
kinase that transmits signals that mimic normal growth 
factor signaling, thereby increasing cellular proliferation 
and survival. As might be predicted, the combination of 
PML-RARα and activated FLT3 is a potent inducer of AML 
in mice. Other similar observations in human AML and 
in mouse models indicate that aberrant activation of 
growth factor signaling pathways is a common feature 
of AML.
Deep sequencing of AML genomes has also revealed 
unexpectedly frequent mutations affecting factors that 
impact the state of the “epigenome,” suggesting the 
epigenetic alterations have a central role in AML. 
therapy. A fourth “wastebasket” category includes AMLs 
lacking any of these features. These are classified based on 
the degree of differentiation and the lineage of the leuke-
mic blasts. Given the increasing role of cytogenetic and 
molecular features in directing therapy, a further shift 
toward genetic classification of AML is both inevitable and 
desirable.
Pathogenesis.  Many of the recurrent genetic aberrations 
seen in AML disrupt genes encoding transcription factors 
that are required for normal myeloid differentiation. For 
example, the two most common chromosomal rearrange-
ments, t(8;21) and inv(16), disrupt the RUNX1 and CBFB 
genes, respectively. These two genes encode polypeptides 
that bind one another to form a RUNX1/CBF1β transcrip-
tion factor that is required for normal hematopoiesis. The 
t(8;21) and the inv(16) create chimeric genes encoding 
fusion proteins that interfere with the function of RUNX1/
CBF1β and block the maturation of myeloid cells. However, 
experiments in mouse models indicate that genetic lesions 
that merely block the maturation of myeloid progenitors 
are not sufficient to cause AML. Thus other genetic changes 
(discussed next)  are also essential.
There is increasing evidence that mutations that lead 
to activation of growth factor signaling pathways col-
laborate with transcription factor aberrations to produce 
Table 13-10  Major Subtypes of AML in the WHO Classification
Class
Prognosis
Morphology/Comments
I.  AML with Genetic Aberrations
AML with t(8;21)(q22;q22); RUNX1/ETO fusion gene
Favorable
Full range of myelocytic maturation; Auer rods easily found; abnormal cytoplasmic granules
AML with inv(16)(p13;q22); CBFB/MYH11 fusion gene
Favorable
Myelocytic and monocytic differentiation; abnormal eosinophilic precursors with abnormal 
basophilic granules
AML with t(15;17)(q22;11-12); RARA/PML fusion gene
Intermediate
Numerous Auer rods, often in bundles within individual progranulocytes; primary granules 
usually very prominent, but inconspicuous in microgranular variant; high incidence of 
DIC
AML with t(11q23;v); diverse MLL fusion genes
Poor
Usually some degree of monocytic differentiation
AML with normal cytogenetics and mutated NPM
Favorable
Detected by immunohistochemical staining for NPM
II.  AML with MDS-like Features
With prior MDS
Poor
Diagnosis based on clinical history
AML with multilineage dysplasia
Poor
Maturing cells with dysplastic features typical of MDS
AML with MDS-like cytogenetic aberrations
Poor
Associated with 5q-, 7q-, 20q-aberrations
III.  AML, therapy-related
Very poor
If following alkylator therapy or radiation therapy, 2- to 8-year latency period, MDS-like 
cytogenetic aberrations (e.g., 5q-, 7q-); if following topoisomerase II inhibitor (e.g., 
etoposide) therapy, 1- to 3-year latency, translocations involving MLL (11q23)
IV.  AML, Not Otherwise Specified
AML, minimally differentiated
Intermediate
Negative for myeloperoxidase; myeloid antigens detected on blasts by flow cytometry
AML without maturation
Intermediate
>3% of blasts positive for myeloperoxidase
AML with myelocytic maturation
Intermediate
Full range of myelocytic maturation
AML with myelomonocytic maturation
Intermediate
Myelocytic and monocytic differentiation
AML with monocytic maturation
Intermediate
Nonspecific esterase-positive monoblasts and pro-monocytes predominate in marrow; may 
see monoblasts or mature monocytes in the blood
AML with erythroid maturation
Intermediate
Erythroid/myeloid subtype defined by >50% dysplastic maturing erythroid precursors and 
>20% myeloblasts; pure erythroid subtype defined by >80% erythroid precursors 
without myeloblasts
AML with megakaryocytic maturation
Intermediate
Blasts of megakaryocytic lineage predominate; detected with antibodies against 
megakaryocyte-specific markers (GPIIb/IIIa or vWF); often associated with marrow 
fibrosis; most common AML in Down syndrome
AML, Acute myeloid leukemia; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; MDS, myelodysplasia; NPM, nucleophosmin; vWF, von Willebrand factor.
613
Disorders of white cells
  MORPHOLOGY
The diagnosis of AML is based on the presence of at least 
20% myeloid blasts in the bone marrow. Several types of 
myeloid blasts are recognized, and individual tumors may have 
more than one type of blast or blasts with hybrid features. 
Gene expression is regulated by two types of epigenetic 
modifications, DNA methylation and posttranslational 
modifi­cations of histones (e.g., acetylation, methylation, 
pho­sphorylation). Some of the most commonly mutated 
genes in AML encode factors that influence DNA methy­
lation or histone modifications. Another 15% of tumors 
have mutations involving genes encoding components of 
the cohesin complex, proteins that regulate the three-
dimensional structure of chromatin. The precise mechanism 
by which these mutations contribute to the development of 
AML remains to be determined and is a “hot” area of current 
research.
Figure 13-29  A, Acute myeloid leukemia without maturation (FAB M1 subtype). Myeloblasts have delicate nuclear chromatin, prominent nucleoli, and fine 
azurophilic granules in the cytoplasm. B, In the flow cytometric analysis shown, the myeloid blasts, represented by the red dots, express CD34, a marker 
of multipotent stem cells, but do not express CD64, a marker of mature myeloid cells. C, The same myeloid blasts express CD33, a marker of immature 
myeloid cells, and a subset express CD15, a marker of more mature myeloid cells. Thus, these blasts are myeloid cells showing limited maturation.  
(A, Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex; B and C, courtesy Dr. Louis 
Picker, Oregon Health Science Center, Portland, Ore.)
A
B
CD64
CD15
CD34
CD33
C
Figure 13-30  Acute myeloid leukemia subtypes. A, Acute promyelocytic leukemia with the t(15;17) (FAB M3 subtype). Bone marrow aspirate shows neoplastic 
promyelocytes with abnormally coarse and numerous azurophilic granules. Other characteristic findings include the presence of several cells with bilobed nuclei 
and a cell in the center of the field that contains multiple needle-like Auer rods. B, Acute myeloid leukemia with monocytic differentiation (FAB M5b subtype). 
Peripheral smear shows one monoblast and five promonocytes with folded nuclear membranes. (Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna, Department of Pathology, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)
A
B
Myeloblasts have delicate nuclear chromatin, two to four 
nucleoli, and more voluminous cytoplasm than lymphoblasts 
(Fig. 13-29A). The cytoplasm often contains fine, peroxidase-
positive azurophilic granules. Auer rods, distinctive needle-like 
azurophilic granules, are present in many cases; they are par-
ticularly numerous in AML with the t(15;17) (acute promyelocytic 
leukemia) (Fig. 13-30A). Monoblasts (Fig. 13-30B) have folded 
or lobulated nuclei, lack Auer rods, and are nonspecific esterase-
positive. In some AMLs, blasts show megakaryocytic differen-
tiation, which is often accompanied by marrow fibrosis caused 
by the release of fibrogenic cytokines. Rarely, the blasts of AML 
show erythroid differentiation.
The number of leukemic cells in the blood is highly variable. 
Blasts may be more than 100,000/mm3, but are under 10,000/
mm3 in about 50% of patients. Occasionally, blasts are 
entirely absent from the blood (aleukemic leukemia). For 
this reason, a bone marrow examination is essential to exclude 
acute leukemia in pancytopenic patients.
614
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
particularly in the absence of KIT mutations. In contrast, 
the prognosis is dismal for AMLs that follow MDS or geno-
toxic therapy, or that occur in older adults, possibly because 
in these contexts the disease arises out of a background of 
hematopoietic stem cell damage or depletion. These “high-
risk” forms of AML (as well as relapsed AML of all types) 
are treated with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
when possible.
Sequencing of AML genomes has recently revealed new 
molecular predictors of outcome. It is certain that insights 
gained from DNA sequencing will have an increasingly 
important role in selecting therapy and stratifying patients 
in clinical trials of new therapeutics, such as drugs that 
target the tumor epigenome.
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
The term “myelodysplastic syndrome” (MDS) refers to a 
group of clonal stem cell disorders characterized by mat-
uration defects that are associated with ineffective hema-
topoiesis and a high risk of transformation to AML. In 
MDS the bone marrow is partly or wholly replaced by the 
clonal progeny of a neoplastic multipotent stem cell that 
retains the capacity to differentiate but does so in an inef-
fective and disordered fashion. These abnormal cells stay 
within the bone marrow and hence the patients have 
peripheral blood cytopenias.
MDS may be either primary (idiopathic) or secondary 
to previous genotoxic drug or radiation therapy (t-MDS). 
t-MDS usually appears from 2 to 8 years after the genotoxic 
exposure. All forms of MDS can transform to AML, but 
transformation occurs with highest frequency and most 
rapidly in t-MDS. Although characteristic morphologic 
changes are typically seen in the marrow and the periph-
eral blood, the diagnosis frequently requires correlation 
with other laboratory tests. Cytogenetic analysis is particu-
larly helpful, since certain chromosomal aberrations (dis-
cussed later) are often observed.
Pathogenesis.  The pathogenesis of MDS is poorly under-
stood, but important new insights have come from recent 
deep sequencing of MDS genomes, which has identified a 
number of recurrently mutated genes. These genes can be 
lumped into three major functional categories, as follows:
•	 Epigenetic factors. Frequent mutations are seen involving 
many of the same epigenetic factors that are mutated 
in AML, including factors that regulate DNA methyla-
tion and histone modifications; thus, like AML, dys-
regulation of the epigenome appears to be important in 
the genesis of MDS.
•	 RNA splicing factors. A subset of tumors has mutations 
involving components of the 3’ end of the RNA splicing 
machinery. The impact of these mutations on RNA 
splicing and other nuclear functions is not yet known.
•	 Transcription factors. These mutations affect transcrip-
tion factors that are are required for normal myelopoi-
esis and may contribute to the deranged differentiation 
that characterizes MDS.
In addition, roughly 10% of MDS cases have loss-of-
function mutations in the tumor suppressor gene TP53, 
which correlate with the presence of a complex karyotype 
and particularly poor clinical outcomes. Both primary 
MDS and t-MDS are associated with similar recurrent 
Immunophenotype.  Because it can be difficult to distin-
guish myeloblasts and lymphoblasts morphologically, the 
diagnosis of AML is confirmed by performing stains for 
myeloid-specific antigens (Fig. 13-29B,C).
Cytogenetics.  Cytogenetic analysis has a central role in the 
classification of AML. Karyotypic aberrations are detected 
in 50% to 70% of cases with standard techniques and in 
approximately 90% of cases using special high-resolution 
banding. Particular chromosomal abnormalities correlate 
with certain clinical features. AMLs arising de novo in 
younger adults are commonly associated with balanced 
chromosomal translocations, particularly t(8;21), inv(16), 
and t(15;17). In contrast, AMLs following myelodysplastic 
syndromes or exposure to DNA-damaging agents (such as 
chemotherapy or radiation therapy) often have deletions 
or monosomies involving chromosomes 5 and 7 and 
usually lack chromosomal translocations. The exception to 
this rule is AML occurring after treatment with topoisom-
erase II inhibitors, which is strongly associated with trans-
locations involving the MLL gene on chromosome 11q23. 
AML in older adults is also more likely to be associated 
with “bad” aberrations, such as deletions of chromosomes 
5q and 7q.
Clinical Features.  Most patients present within weeks or 
a few months of the onset of symptoms with complaints 
related to anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia, most 
notably fatigue, fever, and spontaneous mucosal and cuta-
neous bleeding. You will remember that these findings are 
very similar to those produced by ALL. Thrombocytopenia 
results in a bleeding diathesis, which is often prominent. 
Cutaneous petechiae and ecchymoses, serosal hemor-
rhages into the linings of the body cavities and viscera, and 
mucosal hemorrhages into the gingivae and urinary tract 
are common. Procoagulants and fibrinolytic factors re-
leased by leukemic cells, especially in AML with the 
t(15;17), exacerbate the bleeding tendency. Infections are 
frequent, particularly in the oral cavity, skin, lungs, kidneys, 
urinary bladder, and colon, and are often caused by op-
portunists such as fungi, Pseudomonas, and commensals.
Signs and symptoms related to involvement of tissues 
other than the marrow are usually less striking in AML 
than in ALL, but tumors with monocytic differentiation 
often infiltrate the skin (leukemia cutis) and the gingiva; 
this probably reflects the normal tendency of monocytes to 
extravasate into tissues. Central nervous system spread is 
less common than in ALL. AML occasionally presents as 
a localized soft-tissue mass known variously as a myelo-
blastoma, granulocytic sarcoma, or chloroma. Without 
systemic treatment, such tumors inevitably progress to 
full-blown AML over time.
Prognosis.  AML is generally a difficult disease to treat; 
about 60% of patients achieve complete remission with 
chemotherapy, but only 15% to 30% remain free of disease 
for 5 years. However, the outcome varies markedly among 
different molecular subtypes. With targeted therapy using 
all-trans retinoic acid and arsenic salts (described in 
Chapter 7), AMLs with the t(15;17) now have the best prog-
nosis of any type, being curable in more than 80% of 
patients. AMLs with t(8;21) or inv(16) have a relatively 
good 
prognosis 
with 
conventional 
chemotherapy, 
615
Disorders of white cells
Clinical Features.  Primary MDS is predominantly a 
disease of older adults; the mean age of onset is 70 years. 
In up to half of the cases, it is discovered incidentally on 
routine blood testing. When symptomatic, it presents 
with weakness, infections, and hemorrhages, all due to 
pancytopenia.
Primary MDS is divided into eight categories based 
on morphologic and cytogenetic features in the WHO 
Figure 13-31  Myelodysplasia. Characteristic forms of dysplasia are shown. A, Nucleated red cell progenitors with multilobated or multiple nuclei. B, Ringed 
sideroblasts, erythroid progenitors with iron-laden mitochondria seen as blue perinuclear granules (Prussian blue stain). C, Pseudo-Pelger-Hüet cells, neutrophils 
with only two nuclear lobes instead of the normal three to four, are observed at the top and bottom of this field. D, Megakaryocytes with multiple nuclei instead 
of the normal single multilobated nucleus. (A, B, D, Marrow aspirates; C, peripheral blood smear.) 
  MORPHOLOGY
Although the marrow is usually hypercellular at diagnosis, it  
is sometimes normocellular or, less commonly, hypocellular. 
The most characteristic finding is disordered (dysplastic) dif-
ferentiation affecting the erythroid, granulocytic, monocytic, and 
megakaryocytic lineages to varying degrees (Fig. 13-31). Within 
the erythroid series, common abnormalities include ring sid-
eroblasts, erythroblasts with iron-laden mitochondria visible as 
chromosomal abnormalities, including monosomies 5 and 
7, deletions of 5q, 7q, and 20q, and trisomy 8.
As with aneuploidy in other cancers, it is not known 
how these aberrations contribute to MDS. One idea with 
some experimental support is that the gain or loss of single 
copies of key genes is sufficient to give cells a growth 
advantage, and that aneuploidy is one way to achieve this 
result. For example, subtle increases in the notorious onco-
protein MYC is sufficient to stimulate cell growth. Notably, 
the MYC gene is located on chromosome 8, and trisomy 8 
is one of the most common forms of aneuploidy in a wide 
range of myeloid tumors. Similarly, the region that is com-
monly lost on chromosome 5q contains a gene encoding 
the ribosomal protein RPS14. In experimental systems, loss 
of one copy of RPS14 produces ineffective erythropoiesis, 
one of the hallmarks of MDS.
perinuclear granules in Prussian blue-stained aspirates or biop-
sies; megaloblastoid maturation, resembling that seen in 
vitamin B12 and folate deficiency (Chapter 14); and nuclear 
budding abnormalities, recognized as nuclei with misshapen, 
often polyploid, outlines. Neutrophils frequently contain 
decreased numbers of secondary granules, toxic granulations, 
and/or Döhle bodies. Pseudo-Pelger-Hüet cells, neutrophils 
with only two nuclear lobes, are commonly observed, and neu-
trophils are seen occasionally that completely lack nuclear seg-
mentation. Megakaryocytes with single nuclear lobes or multiple 
separate nuclei (pawn ball megakaryocytes) are also char-
acteristic. Myeloid blasts may be increased but make up less 
than 20% of the overall marrow cellularity. The blood often 
contains pseudo-Pelger-Hüet cells, giant platelets, macrocytes, 
and poikilocytes, accompanied by a relative or absolute mono-
cytosis. Myeloid blasts usually make up less than 10% of the 
leukocytes in the blood.
616
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
progenitors. Because the tyrosine kinase mutations under-
lying the various myeloproliferative disorders do not 
impair differentiation, the most common consequence is an 
increase in the production of one or more mature blood 
elements. Most myeloproliferative disorders originate in 
multipotent myeloid progenitors, whereas others arise in 
pluripotent stem cells that give rise to both lymphoid and 
myeloid cells.
There is a considerable degree of clinical and morpho-
logic overlap among the myeloproliferative disorders. The 
common features include:
•	 Increased proliferative drive in the bone marrow
•	 Homing of the neoplastic stem cells to secondary 
hematopoietic 
organs, 
producing 
extramedullary 
hematopoiesis
•	 Variable transformation to a spent phase characterized 
by marrow fibrosis and peripheral blood cytopenias
•	 Variable transformation to acute leukemia
Certain myeloproliferative disorders are strongly asso-
ciated with activating mutations in specific tyrosine kinases. 
This insight and the availability of kinase inhibitors have 
increased the importance of molecular tests for tyrosine 
kinase mutations, both for purposes of diagnosis and 
the selection of therapy. This discussion is confined to the 
more common myeloproliferative disorders, which are 
classified based on clinical, laboratory, and molecular cri-
teria. Systemic mastocytosis, a distinctive myeloprolifera-
tive disorder that is associated with mutations in the KIT 
tyrosine kinase, is discussed under disorders of the skin 
(Chapter 25). The association of various myeloproliferative 
disorders with specific tyrosine kinase mutations (includ-
ing rare disorders not discussed here) is summarized in 
Table 13-11.
Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is distinguished 
from other myeloproliferative disorders by the presence 
of a chimeric BCR-ABL gene derived from portions of the 
BCR gene on chromosome 22 and the ABL gene on chro-
mosome 9. BCR-ABL directs the synthesis of a constitu-
tively active BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase (Fig. 13-32), which 
classification, details of which are beyond our scope. A 
prognostic scoring system has been developed that groups 
patients into 5 major prognostic groups. In brief, worse 
outcomes are (understandably) predicted by higher blast 
counts and more severe cytopenias, as well as the presence 
of multiple clonal chromosomal abnormalities.
The median survival in primary MDS varies from 9 
to 29 months, but some individuals in good prognostic 
groups may live for 5 years or more. Overall, progression 
to AML occurs in 10% to 40% of individuals and is usually 
accompanied by the appearance of additional cytogenetic 
abnormalities. Patients often succumb to the complications 
of thrombocytopenia (bleeding) and neutropenia (infec-
tion). The outlook is even grimmer in t-MDS, which has a 
median survival of only 4 to 8 months. In t-MDS, cytope-
nias tend to be more severe and progression to AML is 
often rapid.
Treatment options are fairly limited. In younger patients, 
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation offers 
hope for reconstitution of normal hematopoiesis and pos-
sible cure. Older patients with MDS are treated support-
ively with antibiotics and blood product transfusions. 
Thalidomide-like drugs (see prior discussion in myeloma) 
and DNA methylation inhibitors improve the effectiveness 
of hematopoiesis and the peripheral blood counts in a 
subset of patients. The presence of isolated 5q- is correlated 
with a hematologic response to thalidomide-like drugs, 
but as yet response to DNA methylation inhibitors is 
unpredictable.
Myeloproliferative Disorders
The common pathogenic feature of the myeloprolifera-
tive disorders is the presence of mutated, constitutively 
activated tyrosine kinases or other acquired aberrations 
in signaling pathways that lead to growth factor indepen-
dence. Hematopoietic growth factors act on normal pro-
genitors by binding to surface receptors and activating 
tyrosine kinases, which turn on pathways that promote 
growth and survival (Chapter 7). The mutated tyrosine 
kinases found in the myeloproliferative disorders circum-
vent normal controls and lead to the growth factor-
independent proliferation and survival of marrow 
Table 13-11  Tyrosine Kinase Mutations in Myeloproliferative Disorders
Disorder
Mutation
Frequency*
Consequences†
Chronic myelogenous leukemia
BCR-ABL fusion gene
100%
Constitutive ABL kinase activation‡
Polycythemia vera
JAK2 point mutations
>95%
Constitutive JAK2 kinase activation
Essential thrombocythemia
JAK2 point mutations
50% to 60%
Constitutive JAK2 kinase activation
MPL point mutations
5% to 10%
Constitutive MPL kinase activation
Primary myelofibrosis
JAK2 point mutations
50% to 60%
Constitutive JAK2 kinase activation
MPL point mutations
5% to 10%
Constitutive MPL kinase activation
Systemic mastocytosis
KIT point mutations
>90%
Constitutive KIT kinase activation
Chronic eosinophilic leukemia§
FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene
Common
Constitutive PDGFRα kinase activation
PDE4DIP-PDGFRB fusion gene
Rare
Constitutive PDGFRβ kinase activation‡
Stem cell leukemia॥
Various FGFR1 fusion genes
100%
Constitutive FGFR1 kinase activation¶
*Refers to frequency within a diagnostic category.
†All stimulate ligand-independent pro-growth and survival signals.
‡Responds to imatinib therapy.
§Associated with Loeffler endocarditis (Chapter 12).
॥Rare disorder originating in pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells that presents with concomitant myeloproliferative disorder and lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.
¶Responds to PKC412 therapy.
617
Disorders of white cells
Figure 13-32  Pathogenesis of chronic myeloid leukemia. Breakage and 
joining of BCR and ABL creates a chimeric BCR-ABL fusion gene that 
encodes a constitutively active BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. BCR-ABL activates 
multiple downstream pathways, which drive growth factor-independent pro-
liferation and survival of bone marrow progenitors. Because BCR-ABL does 
not interfere with differentiation, the net result is an increase in mature ele-
ments in the peripheral blood, particularly granulocytes and platelets. 
ABL (chromosome 9)
BCR-ABL (der chromosome 22)
BCR-ABL
fusion mRNA
210 kDa
BCR-ABL
fusion protein
Dimerization,
constitutive
kinase activity
STAT
Growth factor independent proliferation and survival
Normal differentiation
AKT
RAS
BCR (chromosome 22)
DNA breakage
Translocation
DNA breakage
Translocation
  MORPHOLOGY
The marrow is markedly hypercellular because of massively 
increased numbers of maturing granulocytic precursors, which 
usually include an elevated proportion of eosinophils and baso-
phils. Megakaryocytes are also increased and usually include 
small, dysplastic forms. Erythroid progenitors are present in 
normal or mildly decreased numbers. A characteristic finding is 
the presence of scattered macrophages with abundant wrin-
kled, green-blue cytoplasm so-called sea-blue histiocytes. 
Increased deposition of reticulin is typical, but overt marrow 
fibrosis is rare early in the course. The blood reveals a leuko-
cytosis, often exceeding 100,000 cells/mm3 (Fig. 13-33), 
which consists predominantly of neutrophils, band forms, meta-
myelocytes, myelocytes, eosinophils, and basophils. Blasts 
usually make up less than 10% of the circulating cells. Platelets 
are also usually increased, sometimes markedly. The spleen is 
often greatly enlarged as a result of extensive extramedullary 
hematopoiesis (Fig. 13-34) and often contains infarcts of varying 
age. Extramedullary hematopoiesis can also produce mild hep-
atomegaly and lymphadenopathy.
Figure 13-33  Chronic myelogenous leukemia. Peripheral blood smear shows 
many mature neutrophils, some metamyelocytes, and a myelocyte. (Courtesy 
Dr. Robert W. McKenna, Department of Pathology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)
Figure 13-34  Chronic myeloid leukemia (spleen). Enlarged spleen (2630 gm; 
normal: 150 to 200 gm) with greatly expanded red pulp stemming from 
neoplastic hematopoiesis. (Courtesy Dr. Daniel Jones, Department of Pathol-
ogy, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Tex.)
in CML is usually 210 kDa in size. In more than 90% of 
cases, BCR-ABL is created by a reciprocal (9;22)(q34;q11) 
translocation (the so-called Philadelphia chromosome [Ph]). 
In the remaining cases the BCR-ABL fusion gene is formed 
by cytogenetically complex or cryptic rearrangements and 
must be detected by other methods, such as fluorescence 
in situ hybridization or polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-
based tests. The cell of origin is a pluripotent hematopoietic 
stem cell.
Pathogenesis.  Tyrosine kinases are normally regulated by 
ligand-mediated dimerization and autophosphorylation, 
which creates an activated kinase capable of phosphorylat-
ing other protein substrates (Chapters 3 and 7). The BCR 
moiety of BCR-ABL contains a dimerization domain that 
self-associates, leading to the activation of the ABL tyrosine 
kinase moiety. The ABL kinase in turn phosphorylates pro-
teins that induce signaling through the same pro-growth 
and pro-survival pathways that are turned on by hemato-
poietic growth factors, including the RAS and JAK/STAT 
pathways. For unknown reasons, BCR-ABL preferentially 
drives the proliferation of granulocytic and megakaryo-
cytic progenitors, and also causes the abnormal release of 
immature granulocytic forms from the marrow into the 
blood.
Clinical Features.  CML is primarily a disease of adults but 
also occurs in children and adolescents. The peak incidence 
is in the fifth to sixth decades of life. There are about 4500 
new cases per year in the United States.
618
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
cases. The outlook is less favorable once the accelerated 
phase or blast crisis supervenes, as transplantation and 
treatment with BCR-ABL inhibitors are both less effective 
in these settings.
Polycythemia Vera
Polycythemia vera is strongly associated with activating 
point mutations in the tyrosine kinase JAK2. Polycythemia 
vera (PCV) is characterized by increased marrow produc-
tion of red cells, granulocytes, and platelets (panmyelosis), 
but it is the increase in red cells (polycythemia) that is 
responsible for most of the clinical symptoms. PCV must 
be differentiated from relative polycythemia resulting 
from hemoconcentration and other causes of absolute 
polycythemia (Chapter 14).
Pathogenesis.  JAK2 participates in the JAK/ STAT 
pathway, which lies downstream of multiple hematopoi-
etic growth factor receptors, including the erythropoietin 
receptor. In PCV the transformed progenitor cells have 
markedly decreased requirements for erythropoietin and 
other hematopoietic growth factors due to constitutive 
JAK2 signaling. Accordingly, serum erythropoietin levels 
in PCV are low, whereas secondary forms of polycythemia 
have high erythropoietin levels. The elevated hematocrit 
leads to increased blood viscosity and sludging. These 
hemodynamic factors, together with thrombocytosis and 
abnormal platelet function, make patients with PCV prone 
to both thrombosis and bleeding.
More than 97% of cases are associated with a muta­
tion in JAK2 that results in a valine-to-phenylalanine sub-
stitution at residue 617; other JAK2 mutations are found in 
most (and perhaps all) of the remaining cases. The mutated 
forms of JAK2 found in PCV render hematopoietic cell 
lines growth factor-independent, and when expressed in 
murine bone marrow progenitors cause a PCV-like syn-
drome that is associated with marrow fibrosis. In 25% to 
30% of cases the tumor cells contain two mutated copies of 
JAK2, a genotype that is associated with higher white cell 
counts, more significant splenomegaly, symptomatic pru-
ritus, and a greater rate of progression to the spent phase.
The proliferative drive in PCV (and other myeloprolif-
erative disorders associated with JAK2 mutations) is less 
than in CML, which is associated with more pronounced 
marrow hypercellularity, leukocytosis, and splenomegaly. 
Presumably, JAK2 signals are quantitatively weaker or 
qualitatively different from those produced by BCR-ABL 
(Fig. 13-32).
The onset is insidious. Mild-to-moderate anemia and 
hypermetabolism due to increased cell turnover lead to 
fatigability, weakness, weight loss, and anorexia. Sometimes 
the first symptom is a dragging sensation in the abdomen 
caused by splenomegaly, or the acute onset of left upper 
quadrant pain due to splenic infarction. CML is best dif-
ferentiated from other myeloproliferative disorders by 
detection of the BCR-ABL fusion gene through either chro-
mosomal analysis or PCR-based tests.
The natural history is one of slow progression; even 
without treatment, the median survival is about 3 years. 
After a variable period averaging 3 years, about 50% of 
patients enter an “accelerated phase” marked by increasing 
anemia and thrombocytopenia, sometimes accompanied 
by a rise in the number of basophils in the blood. Additional 
clonal cytogenetic abnormalities, such as trisomy 8, iso-
chromosome 17q, or duplication of the Ph chromosome, 
often appear. Within 6 to 12 months, the accelerated phase 
terminates in a picture resembling acute leukemia (blast 
crisis). In the other 50% of patients, blast crises occur 
abruptly without an accelerated phase. In 70% of crises, the 
blasts are of myeloid origin (myeloid blast crisis), whereas 
in most of the remainder the blasts are of pre–B cell origin 
(lymphoid blast crisis). This is taken as evidence that CML 
originates from a pluripotent stem cell with both myeloid 
and lymphoid potential.
Given that we have seen that acute leukemias often stem 
from complementary mutations involving a transcription 
factor and a tyosine kinase, it might be predicted that blast 
crisis would be caused by an acquired mutation in a key 
transcriptional regulator. This prediction has been realized 
in lymphoid blast crisis, in which 85% of cases are associ-
ated with mutations that interfere with the activity of 
Ikaros, a transcription factor that regulates the differentia-
tion of hematopoietic progenitors. The same types of Ikaros 
mutations are also seen in BCR-ABL-positive B-ALL, sug-
gesting that these two varieties of aggressive leukemia 
have a similar pathogenic basis.
Understanding of the pathogenesis of CML has led to 
the use of drugs that target BCR-ABL. Treatment with 
BCR-ABL inhibitors results in sustained hematologic 
remissions in greater than 90% of patients, with generally 
tolerable side effects. These inhibitors markedly decrease 
the number of BCR-ABL-positive cells in the marrow and 
elsewhere, but do not extinguish the CML “stem cell,” 
which persists at low levels. As a result, it is not clear if 
BCR-ABL inhibitors are ever truly curative. However, this 
form of targeted therapy controls blood counts and sub-
stantially decreases the risk of transformation to the accel-
erated phase and blast crisis, which is the greatest threat 
to the patient. It may be that by lowering the proliferative 
drive of the BCR-ABL-positive progenitors, BCR-ABL 
inhibitors decrease the rate at which these cells acquire 
mutations that lead to disease progression.
The other major threat to the patient is the emergence 
of resistance to first generation BCR-ABL inhibitors, which 
in about 50% of cases stems from mutations in BCR-ABL 
and in the remaining cases mutations in other kinases. This 
problem has been overcome in part by development of 
second and third generation kinase inhibitors that are 
active against mutated forms of BCR-ABL. For relatively 
young patients, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
performed in the stable phase is curative in about 75% of 
  MORPHOLOGY
The marrow is hypercellular, but some residual fat is usually 
present. The increase in red cell progenitors is subtle and 
usually accompanied by an increase in granulocytic pre-
cursors and megakaryocytes as well. At diagnosis, a mod-
erate to marked increase in reticulin fibers is seen in about 10% 
of marrows. Mild organomegaly is common, being caused early 
in the course largely by congestion; at this stage extramedullary 
hematopoiesis is minimal. The peripheral blood often contains 
increased numbers of basophils and abnormally large 
platelets.
619
Disorders of white cells
Figure 13-35  Polycythemia vera, spent phase. Massive splenomegaly 
(3020 gm; normal: 150 to 200 gm) largely due to extramedullary hematopoi-
esis occurring in the setting of advanced marrow myelofibrosis. (Courtesy  
Dr. Mark Fleming, Department of Pathology, Children’s Hospital, Boston, 
Mass.)
abnormality. The white cell count ranges from 12,000 to 
50,000 cells/mm3, and the platelet count is often greater 
than 500,000 platelets/mm3. The platelets usually exhibit 
morphologic abnormalities such as giant forms and are 
often defective in functional aggregation studies.
Without treatment, death from bleeding or thrombosis 
occurs within months of diagnosis. However, simply main-
taining the red cell mass at nearly normal levels by phle-
botomy extends the median survival to about 10 years. 
JAK2 inhibitors are in preclinical development and repre-
sent a promising form of targeted therapy.
Extended survival with treatment has revealed that 
PCV tends to evolve to a “spent phase,” during which 
clinical and anatomic features of primary myelofibrosis 
develop. The disease undergoes this transition in about 
15% to 20% of patients after an average period of 10 years. 
It is marked by the appearance of obliterative fibrosis in 
the bone marrow (myelofibrosis) and extensive extramed-
ullary hematopoiesis, principally in the spleen, which 
enlarges greatly. The mechanisms underlying the progres-
sion to the spent phase are not known.
In about 2% of patients, PCV transforms to AML. 
Surprisingly, the AML clone often lacks JAK2 mutations, 
suggesting that the causative JAK2 mutations occur in an 
abnormal stem cell that already harbors potentially onco-
genic mutations, and therefore is “at risk” for giving rise 
to several different myeloid tumors. Unlike CML, transfor-
mation to ALL is rarely observed, consistent with the 
cell of origin being a progenitor committed to myeloid 
differentiation.
Essential Thrombocytosis
Essential thrombocytosis (ET) is often associated with 
activating point mutations in JAK2 (50% of cases) or MPL 
(5% to 10% of cases), a receptor tyrosine kinase that is 
normally activated by thrombopoietin. In addition, recent 
DNA sequencing studies have revealed that most of the 
remaining cases have mutations in calreticulin, a protein 
with several described functions in the endoplasmic reticu-
lum and the cytoplasm. Since JAK2 and calreticulin muta-
tions are mutually exclusive, it is hypothesized that the 
calreticulin mutations also increase JAK-STAT signaling 
through currently unknown mechanisms.
ET manifests clinically with elevated platelet counts and 
is separated from PCV and primary myelofibrosis based 
on the absence of polycythemia and marrow fibrosis, 
respectively. In those cases without tyrosine kinase muta-
tions, causes of reactive thrombocytosis, such as inflamma-
tory disorders and iron deficiency, must be excluded before 
the diagnosis can be established.
Constitutive JAK2 or MPL signaling renders the pro-
genitors thrombopoietin-independent and leads to hyper-
proliferation. The JAK2 mutation is the same as that found 
in almost all cases of PCV. Why some patients with JAK2 
mutations present with PCV and others with ET is not 
understood. Some cases of “ET” may in fact be PCV dis-
guised by iron deficiency (which is more common in indi-
viduals diagnosed with ET), but this is probably true of 
only a small fraction of patients. As mentioned, most cases 
without JAK2 or MPL mutations have calreticulin muta-
tions instead.
Bone marrow cellularity is usually only mildly increased, 
but megakaryocytes are often markedly increased in 
Clinical Features.  PCV is uncommon, having an incidence 
of 1 to 3 per 100,000 per year. It appears insidiously, usually 
in adults of late middle age. Most symptoms are related to 
the increased red cell mass and hematocrit. Usually, there 
is also an increased total blood volume. Together, these 
factors cause abnormal blood flow, particularly on the low-
pressure venous side of the circulation, which becomes 
greatly distended. Patients are plethoric and cyanotic due 
to stagnation and deoxygenation of blood in peripheral 
vessels. Headache, dizziness, hypertension, and gastroin-
testinal symptoms are common. Intense pruritus and 
peptic ulceration may occur, both possibly resulting from 
the release of histamine from basophils. High cell turnover 
gives rise to hyperuricemia; symptomatic gout is seen in 
5% to 10% of cases.
More ominously, the abnormal blood flow and plate-
let function lead to an increased risk of both major 
bleeding and thrombotic episodes. About 25% of patients 
first come to attention due to deep venous thrombosis, 
myocardial infarction, or stroke. Thromboses sometimes 
also occur in the hepatic veins (producing Budd-Chiari 
syndrome) and the portal and mesenteric veins (leading to 
bowel infarction). It should be remembered that throm-
botic complications sometimes precede the appearance of 
the typical hematologic findings. Minor hemorrhages (epi-
staxis, bleeding gums) are common, and life-threatening 
hemorrhages occur in 5% to 10% of cases.
The hemoglobin concentration ranges from 14 to 28 gm/
dL, and the hematocrit is usually 60% or more. Sometimes 
chronic bleeding leads to iron deficiency, which can 
suppress erythropoiesis sufficiently to lower the hemato-
crit into the normal range, an example of two defects 
counteracting one another to “correct” a laboratory 
Late in the course, PCV often progresses to a spent phase 
characterized by extensive marrow fibrosis that displaces 
hematopoietic cells. This is accompanied by increased extra-
medullary hematopoiesis in the spleen and liver, often leading 
to prominent organomegaly (Fig. 13-35). Transformation to 
AML, with its typical features, occurs in about 1% of patients.
620
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
mutations in calreticulin that are hypothesized to give rise 
to increased JAK-STAT signaling.
The chief pathologic feature is the extensive deposi-
tion of collagen in the marrow by non-neoplastic fibro-
blasts. The fibrosis inexorably displaces hematopoietic 
elements, including stem cells, from the marrow and even-
tually leads to marrow failure. It is probably caused by the 
inappropriate release of fibrogenic factors from neoplastic 
megakaryocytes. Two factors synthesized by megakaryo-
cytes have been implicated: platelet-derived growth factor 
and TGF-β. As you recall, platelet-derived growth factor 
and TGF-β are fibroblast mitogens. In addition, TGF-β pro-
motes collagen deposition and causes angiogenesis, both 
of which are observed in myelofibrosis. 
As marrow fibrosis progresses, circulating hematopoi-
etic stem cells take up residence in niches in secondary 
hematopoietic organs, such as the spleen, the liver, and the 
lymph nodes, leading to the appearance of extramedullary 
hematopoiesis. For incompletely understood reasons, red 
cell production at extramedullary sites is disordered. This 
factor and the concomitant suppression of marrow func-
tion result in moderate to severe anemia. It is not clear 
whether primary myelofibrosis is truly distinct from PCV 
and ET, or merely reflects unusually rapid progression to 
the spent phase.
  MORPHOLOGY
Early in the course, the marrow is often hypercellular due to 
increases in maturing cells of all lineages, a feature reminiscent 
of PCV. Morphologically, the erythroid and granulocytic precur-
sors appear normal, but megakaryocytes are large, dysplastic, 
and abnormally clustered. At this stage fibrosis is minimal, and 
the blood may show leukocytosis and thrombocytosis. With 
progression, the marrow becomes more hypocellular and 
diffusely fibrotic. Clusters of atypical megakaryocytes with 
unusual nuclear shapes (described as “cloud-like”) are seen, 
and hematopoietic elements are often found within dilated sinu-
soids, which is a manifestation of severe architectural distortion 
cause by the fibrosis. Very late in the course, the fibrotic marrow 
space may be converted into bone, a change called “osteo-
sclerosis.” These features are identical to those seen in the 
spent phase of other myeloproliferative disorders.
Fibrotic obliteration of the marrow space leads to 
extensive extramedullary hematopoiesis, principally in 
the spleen, which is usually markedly enlarged, sometimes up 
to 4000 gm. Grossly, such spleens are firm and diffusely red to 
gray. As in CML, subcapsular infarcts are common (see Fig. 
13-40). Initially, extramedullary hematopoiesis is confined to the 
sinusoids, but later it expands into the cords. The liver may be 
enlarged moderately by sinusoidal foci of extramedullary hema-
topoiesis. Hematopoiesis can also appear within lymph nodes, 
but significant lymphadenopathy is uncommon.
The marrow fibrosis is reflected in several characteristic blood 
findings (Fig. 13-37). Marrow distortion leads to the premature 
release of nucleated erythroid and early granulocyte progeni-
tors (leukoerythroblastosis), and immature cells also enter 
the circulation from sites of extramedullary hematopoiesis. 
Teardrop-shaped red cells (dacryocytes), cells that were 
probably damaged during the birthing process in the fibrotic 
marrow, are also often seen. Although characteristic of primary 
number and include abnormally large forms. Delicate retic-
ulin fibrils are often seen, but the overt fibrosis of primary 
myelofibrosis (see later) is absent. Peripheral smears 
usually reveal abnormally large platelets (Fig. 13-36), often 
accompanied by mild leukocytosis. Modest degrees of 
extramedullary hematopoiesis may occur, producing mild 
organomegaly in about 50% of patients. Uncommonly, a 
spent phase of marrow fibrosis or transformation to AML 
supervenes.
The incidence of ET is 1 to 3 per 100,000 per year. It 
usually occurs past the age of 60 but may also be seen in 
young adults. Dysfunctions of platelets derived from the 
neoplastic clone can lead to thrombosis and hemorrhage, 
the major clinical manifestations. Platelets are not only 
increased in numbers but also frequently demonstrate 
qualitative abnormalities in functional tests. The types of 
thrombotic events resemble those observed in PCV; they 
include deep venous thrombosis, portal and hepatic vein 
thrombosis, and myocardial infarction. One characteristic 
symptom is erythromelalgia, a throbbing and burning of 
hands and feet caused by occlusion of small arterioles by 
platelet aggregates, which may also be seen in PCV.
ET is an indolent disorder with long asymptomatic 
periods punctuated by occasional thrombotic or hemor-
rhagic crises. Median survival times are 12 to 15 years. 
Thrombotic complications are most likely in patients 
with very high platelet counts and homozygous JAK2 
mutations. Therapy consists of “gentle” chemotherapeutic 
agents that suppress thrombopoiesis.
Primary Myelofibrosis
The hallmark of primary myelofibrosis is the develop-
ment of obliterative marrow fibrosis. The replacement of 
the marrow by fibrous tissue reduces bone marrow hema-
topoiesis, leading to cytopenias and extensive extramedul-
lary hematopoiesis. Histologically, the appearance is 
identical to the spent phase that occurs occasionally late in 
the course of other myeloproliferative disorders. This simi-
larity also extends to the underlying pathogenesis.
Activating JAK2 mutations are present in 50% to 60% of 
cases and activating MPL mutations in an additional 1% to 
5% of cases of primary myelofibrosis. As with ET, most of 
the remaining cases have been recently observed to have 
Figure 13-36  Essential thrombocytosis. Peripheral blood smear shows 
marked thrombocytosis, including giant platelets approximating the size of 
surrounding red cells. 
621
Disorders of white cells
myelofibrosis, leukoerythroblastosis and teardrop red cells are 
seen in many infiltrative disorders of the marrow, including 
granulomatous diseases and metastatic tumors. Other com-
mon, albeit nonspecific, blood findings include abnormally large 
platelets and basophilia.
  KEY CONCEPTS
Myeloid Neoplasms
Myeloid tumors occur mainly in adults and fall into three 
major groups:
Acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs)
■ Aggressive tumors comprised of immature myeloid lineage 
blasts, which replace the marrow and suppress normal 
hematopoiesis
■ Associated with diverse acquired mutations that lead to 
expression of abnormal transcription factors, which inter-
fere with myeloid differentiation
■ Often also associated with mutations in genes encoding 
growth factor receptor signaling pathway components or 
regulators of the epigenome
Myeloproliferative disorders 
■ Myeloid tumors in which production of formed myeloid 
elements is initially increased, leading to high blood counts 
and extramedullary hematopoiesis
■ Commonly associated with acquired mutations that lead 
to constitutive activation of tyrosine kinases, which mimic 
signals from normal growth factors. The most common 
pathogenic kinases are BCR-ABL (associated with CML) 
and mutated JAK2 (associated with polycythemia vera and 
primary myelofibrosis).
■ All can transform to acute leukemia and to a spent phase 
of marrow fibrosis associated with anemia, thrombocyto-
penia, and splenomegaly.
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
■ Poorly understood myeloid tumors characterized by disor-
dered and ineffective hematopoiesis and dysmaturation
■ Recently shown to frequently harbor mutations in splicing 
factors and epigenetic regulators
■ Manifest with one or more cytopenias and progress in 10% 
to 40% of cases to AML
Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis
The term histiocytosis is an “umbrella” designation for a 
variety of proliferative disorders of dendritic cells or mac-
rophages. Some, such as rare “histiocytic” lymphomas, are 
clearly malignant, whereas others, such as reactive prolif-
erations of macrophages in lymph nodes, are clearly 
benign. Lying between these two extremes are the 
Langerhans cell histiocytoses, a spectrum of proliferations 
of a special type of immature dendritic cell called the 
Langerhans cell (Chapter 6).
The origin and nature of the proliferating cells in 
Langerhans cell histiocytosis has been controversial, 
leading to discussion of whether it is better considered a 
neoplasm or a reactive process. Recent sequencing has 
largely settled this score, as the majority of cases have 
mutations that are known to be oncogenic in other con-
texts. The most common mutation is an activating valine-
to-glutamate substitution at residue 600 in BRAF, already 
discussed for its role in hairy cell leukemia, which is 
present in 55% to 60% of cases. Less common mutations 
have also been detected in TP53, RAS, and the tyrosine 
kinase MET. Thus, there seems no doubt that many of these 
proliferations are neoplastic in origin.
Clinical Features.  Primary myelofibrosis is less common 
than PCV and ET and usually occurs in individuals older 
than 60 years of age. Except when preceded by another 
myeloproliferative disorder, it comes to attention because 
of progressive anemia and splenomegaly, which produces 
a sensation of fullness in the left upper quadrant. 
Non­specific symptoms such as fatigue, weight loss, and 
night sweats result from an increase in metabolism associ-
ated with the expanding mass of hematopoietic cells. 
Hyper­uricemia and secondary gout due to a high rate of 
cell turnover can complicate the picture.
Laboratory studies typically show a moderate to severe 
normochromic normocytic anemia accompanied by leuko-
erythroblastosis. The white cell count is usually normal or 
mildly reduced, but can be markedly elevated (80,000 to 
100,000 cells/mm3) early in the course. The platelet count 
is usually normal or elevated at the time of diagnosis, but 
thrombocytopenia may supervene as the disease pro-
gresses. These blood findings are not specific; bone marrow 
biopsy is essential for diagnosis.
Primary myelofibrosis is a much more difficult disease 
to treat than PCV or ET. The course is variable, but the 
median survival is in the range of 3 to 5 years. Threats to 
life include intercurrent infections, thrombotic episodes, 
bleeding related to platelet abnormalities, and transforma-
tion to AML, which occurs in 5% to 20% of cases. When 
myelofibrosis is extensive, AML sometimes arises at extra-
medullary sites, including lymph nodes and soft tissues. 
JAK2 inhibitors have recently been approved to treat this 
disease and are effective at decreasing the splenomegaly 
and constitutional symptoms. Hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation offers some hope for cure in those young 
and fit enough to withstand the procedure.
Figure 13-37  Primary myelofibrosis (peripheral blood smear). Two nucleated 
erythroid precursors and several teardrop-shaped red cells (dacryocytes) are 
evident. Immature myeloid cells were present in other fields. An identical 
picture can be seen in other diseases producing marrow distortion and 
fibrosis. 
622
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
Regardless of the clinical picture, the proliferating 
Langerhans cells have abundant, often vacuolated cyto-
plasm and vesicular nuclei containing linear grooves or 
folds (Fig. 13-38A). The presence of Birbeck granules in the 
cytoplasm is characteristic. Birbeck granules are pentala-
minar tubules, often with a dilated terminal end producing 
a tennis racket-like appearance (Fig. 13-38B), which contain 
the protein langerin. In addition, the tumor cells also typi-
cally express HLA-DR, S-100, and CD1a.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis presents as several clinico-
pathologic entities:
Figure 13-38  Langerhans cell histiocytosis. A, Langerhans cells with folded 
or grooved nuclei and moderately abundant pale cytoplasm are mixed  
with a few eosinophils. B, An electron micrograph shows rodlike 
Birbeck granules with characteristic periodicity and dilated terminal end.  
(B, Courtesy Dr. George Murphy, Department of Pathology, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Mass.)
A
B
•	 Multifocal 
multisystem 
Langerhans 
cell 
histiocytosis 
(Letterer-Siwe disease) occurs most frequently before 2 
years of age but occasionally affects adults. A dominant 
clinical feature is the development of cutaneous lesions 
resembling a seborrheic eruption, which is caused by 
infiltrates of Langerhans cells over the front and back of 
the trunk and on the scalp. Most of those affected have 
concurrent hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, 
pulmonary lesions, and (eventually) destructive osteo-
lytic bone lesions. Extensive infiltration of the marrow 
often leads to anemia, thrombocytopenia, and a predis-
position to recurrent infections, such as otitis media and 
mastoiditis. In some instances the tumor cells are quite 
anaplastic; such tumors are sometimes referred to as 
Langerhans cell sarcoma. The course of untreated 
disease is rapidly fatal. With intensive chemotherapy, 
50% of patients survive 5 years.
•	 Unifocal and multifocal unisystem Langerhans cell histiocy-
tosis (eosinophilic granuloma) is characterized by prolif-
erations of Langerhans cells admixed with variable 
numbers of eosinophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and 
neutrophils. Eosinophils are usually, but not always, a 
prominent component of the infiltrate. It typically arises 
within the medullary cavities of bones, most commonly 
the calvarium, ribs, and femur. Less commonly, unisys-
tem lesions of identical histology arise in the skin, lungs, 
or stomach. Unifocal lesions most commonly affect the 
skeletal system in older children or adults. Bone lesions 
can be asymptomatic or cause pain, tenderness, and, 
in some instances, pathologic fractures. Unifocal disease 
is indolent and may heal spontaneously or be cured 
by local excision or irradiation. Multifocal unisystem 
disease usually affects young children, who present 
with multiple erosive bony masses that sometimes 
expand into adjacent soft tissue. Involvement of the 
posterior pituitary stalk of the hypothalamus leads to 
diabetes insipidus in about 50% of patients. The combi-
nation of calvarial bone defects, diabetes insipidus, 
and exophthalmos is referred to as the Hand-Schüller-
Christian triad. Many patients experience spontaneous 
regression; others can be treated successfully with 
chemotherapy.
•	 Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis represents a 
special category of disease, most often seen in adult 
smokers, which may regress spontaneously upon cessa-
tion of smoking. These lesions have been described as 
reactive proliferations of Langerhans cells, but fully 40% 
are associated with BRAF mutations, suggesting that in 
many instances, they too are neoplastic in origin.
One factor that contributes to the homing of neoplastic 
Langerhans cells is the aberrant expression of chemokine 
receptors. For example, while normal epidermal Langerhans 
cells express CCR6, their neoplastic counterparts express 
both CCR6 and CCR7. This allows the neoplastic cells to 
migrate into tissues that express the relevant chemokines—
CCL20 (a ligand for CCR6) in skin and bone, and CCL19 
and 21 (ligands for CCR7) in lymphoid organs.
623
Spleen
SPLEEN
The spleen is an ingeniously designed filter for the blood 
and a site of immune responses to blood-borne antigens. 
Normally in the adult it weighs about 150 gm and is 
enclosed within a thin, glistening, slate-gray connective 
tissue capsule. Its cut surface reveals extensive red pulp 
dotted with gray specks, which are the white pulp follicles. 
These consist of an artery with an eccentric collar of 
T lymphocytes, the so-called periarteriolar lymphatic 
sheath. At intervals this sheath expands to form lymphoid 
nodules composed mainly of B lymphocytes, which are 
capable of developing into germinal centers identical to 
those seen in lymph nodes in response to antigenic stimu-
lation (Fig. 13-39).
The red pulp of the spleen is traversed by numerous 
thin-walled vascular sinusoids, separated by the splenic 
cords or “cords of Billroth.” The endothelial lining of 
the sinusoid is discontinuous, providing a passage for 
blood cells between the sinusoids and cords. The cords 
contain a labyrinth of macrophages loosely connected 
through long dendritic processes to create both a physical 
and a functional filter. As it traverses the red pulp, the 
blood takes two routes to reach the splenic veins. Some 
flows through capillaries into the cords, from which blood 
cells squeeze through gaps in the discontinuous basement 
of the endothelial lining to reach the sinusoids; this is the 
so-called open circulation or slow compartment. In the 
other “closed circuit,” blood passes rapidly and directly 
from the capillaries to the splenic veins. Although only a 
small fraction of the blood pursues the “open” route, 
during the course of a day the entire blood volume passes 
through the cords, where it is closely examined by 
macrophages.
The spleen has four functions that impact disease states:
1.	 Phagocytosis of blood cells and particulate matter. As is dis-
cussed under the hemolytic anemias (Chapter 14), red 
cells undergo extreme deformation during passage from 
the cords into the sinusoids. In conditions in which red 
cell deformability is decreased, red cells become trapped 
in the cords and are more readily phagocytosed by mac-
rophages. Splenic macrophages are also responsible for 
“pitting” of red cells, the process by which inclusions 
such as Heinz bodies and Howell-Jolly bodies are excised, 
and for the removal of particles, such as bacteria, from 
the blood.
2.	 Antibody production. Dendritic cells in the periarterial 
lymphatic sheath trap antigens and present them to T 
lymphocytes. T- and B-cell interaction at the edges of 
white pulp follicles leads to the generation of antibody-
secreting plasma cells, which are found mainly within 
the sinuses of the red pulp. The spleen seems to be an 
important site of production of antibodies against 
microbial polysaccharides, as well as autoantibodies 
against a variety of self antigens.
3.	 Hematopoiesis. During fetal development, the spleen 
may be a minor site of hematopoiesis, but this normally 
disappears by birth. However, the spleen can become a 
major site of compensatory extramedullary hematopoi-
esis in the setting of severe chronic anemia (e.g., in 
patients with thalassemia, described in Chapter 14) 
and in patients with myeloproliferative disorders, 
such as chronic myelogenous leukemia and primary 
myelofibrosis.
4.	 Sequestration of formed blood elements. The normal spleen 
contains only about 30 to 40 mL of red cells, but 
this volume increases greatly with splenomegaly. The 
normal spleen also harbors approximately 30% to 40% 
of the total platelet mass in the body. With splenomeg-
aly up to 80% to 90% of the total platelet mass can be 
sequestered in the interstices of the red pulp, producing 
thrombocytopenia. Similarly, the enlarged spleen can 
trap white cells and thereby induce leukopenia.
As the largest unit of the mononuclear phagocyte 
system, the spleen is involved in all systemic inflamma-
tions, generalized hematopoietic disorders, and many 
metabolic disturbances. In each, the spleen undergoes 
enlargement (splenomegaly), which is the major manifesta-
tion of disorders of this organ. It is rarely the primary site 
of disease. Splenic insufficiency due to splenectomy or 
autoinfarction (as in sickle-cell disease) has one major clin-
ical manifestation, an increased susceptibility to sepsis 
cause by encapsulated bacteria such as pneumococci, 
meningococci, and Haemophilus influenzae. The decrease 
in phagocytic capacity and antibody production that result 
from asplenia both contribute to the increased risk of 
sepsis, which may be fatal. All asplenic individuals should 
be vaccinated against these agents to reduce the risk of 
this tragic complication.
Figure 13-39  Normal splenic architecture. (Modified from Faller DV: Diseases 
of the spleen. In Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH (eds): Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 
18th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1988, p 1036.)
To hilus
From hilus
Lymphoid follicle
Germinal
center
Central artery
Trabeculum
Red pulp
Red
pulp
Trabecular artery
Trabecular
vein
Venous
sinusoids
Splenic
cords
Penicilliary
arterioles
624
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
is caused both by the microbiologic agents themselves 
and by cytokines that are released as part of the immune 
response.
Congestive Splenomegaly
Chronic venous outflow obstruction causes a form of 
splenic enlargement referred to as congestive splenomegaly. 
Venous obstruction may be caused by intrahepatic disor-
ders that retard portal venous drainage, or arise from 
extrahepatic disorders that directly impinge upon the 
portal or splenic veins. All of these disorders ultimately 
lead to portal or splenic vein hypertension. Systemic, or 
central, venous congestion is encountered in cardiac decom-
pensation involving the right side of the heart, as can occur 
in tricuspid or pulmonic valvular disease, chronic cor pul-
monale, or following left-sided heart failure. Systemic con-
gestion is associated with only moderately enlarged spleens 
that rarely exceed 500 gm in weight.
Cirrhosis of the liver is the main cause of massive conges-
tive splenomegaly. The “pipe-stem” hepatic fibrosis of 
schistosomiasis causes particularly severe congestive sple-
nomegaly, while the diffuse fibrous scarring of alcoholic 
cirrhosis and pigment cirrhosis also evokes profound 
enlargements. Other forms of cirrhosis are less commonly 
implicated.
Congestive splenomegaly is also caused by obstruction 
of the extrahepatic portal vein or splenic vein. This can 
stem from spontaneous portal vein thrombosis, which is 
usually associated with some intrahepatic obstructive 
disease, or inflammation of the portal vein (pylephlebitis), 
such as follows intraperitoneal infections. Thrombosis of 
the splenic vein can be caused by infiltrating tumors arising 
in neighboring organs, such as carcinomas of the stomach 
or pancreas.
Splenomegaly
When sufficiently enlarged, the spleen causes a dragging 
sensation in the left upper quadrant and, through pressure 
on the stomach, discomfort after eating. In addition, 
enlargement can cause a syndrome known as hypersplen-
ism, which is characterized by anemia, leukopenia, throm-
bocytopenia, alone or in combination. The probable cause 
of the cytopenias is increased sequestration of formed ele-
ments and the consequent enhanced phagocytosis by the 
splenic macrophages.
Table 13-12 lists major disorders associated with spleno-
megaly. Splenomegaly in virtually all the conditions men-
tioned has been discussed elsewhere. A few disorders are 
left to consider.
Nonspecific Acute Splenitis
Enlargement of the spleen occurs in any blood-borne infec-
tion. The nonspecific splenic reaction in these infections 
  MORPHOLOGY
The spleen is enlarged (200 to 400 gm) and soft. Microscopically, 
the major feature is acute congestion of the red pulp, which 
may encroach on and virtually efface the lymphoid follicles. 
Neutrophils, plasma cells, and occasionally eosinophils are 
usually present throughout the white and red pulp. At times the 
white pulp follicles may undergo necrosis, particularly when the 
causative agent is a hemolytic streptococcus. Rarely, abscess 
formation occurs.
Table 13-12  Disorders Associated with Splenomegaly
I.  Infections
Nonspecific splenitis of various blood-borne infections (particularly infectious 
endocarditis)
Infectious mononucleosis
Tuberculosis
Typhoid fever
Brucellosis
Cytomegalovirus
Syphilis
Malaria
Histoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis
Kala-azar
Trypanosomiasis
Schistosomiasis
Leishmaniasis
Echinococcosis
II.  Congestive States Related to Portal Hypertension
Cirrhosis of the liver
Portal or splenic vein thrombosis
Cardiac failure
III.  Lymphohematogenous Disorders
Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas and lymphocytic leukemias
Multiple myeloma
Myeloproliferative disorders
Hemolytic anemias
IV.  Immunologic-Inflammatory Conditions
Rheumatoid arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
V.  Storage Diseases
Gaucher disease
Niemann-Pick disease
Mucopolysaccharidoses
VI.  Miscellaneous Disorders
Amyloidosis
Primary neoplasms and cysts
Secondary neoplasms
  MORPHOLOGY
Long-standing splenic congestion produces marked enlarge-
ment (1000 to 5000 gm). The organ is firm, and the capsule is 
usually thickened and fibrous. Microscopically, the red pulp is 
congested early in the course but becomes increasingly fibrotic 
and cellular with time. The elevated portal venous pressure 
stimulates the deposition of collagen in the basement mem-
brane of the sinusoids, which appear dilated because of  
the rigidity of their walls. The resultant slowing of blood flow 
from the cords to the sinusoids prolongs the exposure of the  
blood cells to macrophages, resulting in excessive destruction 
(hypersplenism).
625
Thymus
Neoplasms
Neoplastic involvement of the spleen is rare except in 
myeloid and lymphoid tumors, which often cause spleno-
megaly (discussed earlier). Benign fibromas, osteomas, 
chondromas, lymphangiomas, and hemangiomas may 
arise in the spleen. Of these, lymphangiomas and heman-
giomas are most common and often cavernous in type.
Congenital Anomalies
Complete absence of the spleen is rare and is usually associ-
ated with other congenital abnormalities, such as situs 
inversus and cardiac malformations. Hypoplasia is a more 
common finding.
Accessory spleens (spleniculi) are common, being present 
singly or multiply in 20% to 35% of postmortem examina-
tions. They are small, spherical structures that are histo-
logically and functionally identical to the normal spleen. 
They can be found at any place within the abdominal 
cavity. Accessory spleens are of great clinical importance 
in some hematologic disorders, such as hereditary sphero-
cytosis and immune thrombocytopenia purpura, where 
splenectomy is used as a treatment. If an accessory spleen 
is overlooked, the therapeutic benefit of removal of the 
definitive spleen may be reduced or lost entirely.
Rupture
Splenic rupture is usually precipitated by blunt trauma. 
Much less often, it occurs in the apparent absence of 
a physical blow. Such “spontaneous ruptures” never 
involve truly normal spleens but rather stem from some 
minor physical insult to a spleen made fragile by an under-
lying condition. The most common predisposing condi-
tions are infectious mononucleosis, malaria, typhoid fever, 
and lymphoid neoplasms, which may cause the spleen to 
enlarge rapidly, producing a thin, tense capsule that is 
susceptible to rupture. This dramatic event often precipi-
tates intraperitoneal hemorrhage, which must be treated 
by prompt splenectomy to prevent death from blood loss. 
Chronically enlarged spleens are unlikely to rupture 
because of the toughening effect of extensive reactive 
fibrosis.
Splenic Infarcts
Splenic infarcts are common lesions caused by the occlu-
sion of the major splenic artery or any of its branches. The 
lack of extensive collateral blood supply predisposes to 
infarction following vascular occlusion. The spleen, along 
with kidneys and brain, ranks as one of the most frequent 
sites where emboli lodge. In normal-sized spleens, infarcts 
are most often caused by emboli that arise from the heart. 
The infarcts can be small or large, single or multiple, or 
even involve the entire organ. They are usually bland, 
except in individuals with infectious endocarditis of the 
mitral or aortic valves, in whom septic infarcts are common. 
Infarcts are also common in markedly enlarged spleens, 
regardless of cause, presumably because the blood supply 
is tenuous and easily compromised.
  MORPHOLOGY
Bland infarcts are characteristically pale, wedge-shaped, and 
subcapsular in location. The overlying capsule is often covered 
with fibrin (Fig. 13-40). In septic infarcts this appearance is 
modified by the development of suppurative necrosis. In the 
course of healing, large depressed scars often develop.
Figure 13-40  Splenic infarcts. Multiple well-circumscribed infarcts are present 
in 
this 
spleen, 
which 
is 
massively 
enlarged 
(2820 gm; 
normal:  
150 to 200 gm) by extramedullary hematopoiesis secondary to a myelopro-
liferative disorder (myelofibrosis). Recent infarcts are hemorrhagic, whereas 
older, more fibrotic infarcts are a pale yellow-gray color. 
THYMUS
Once an organ buried in obscurity, the thymus now has a 
starring role in cell-mediated immunity (Chapter 6). Here, 
our interest centers on the disorders of the gland itself.
The thymus is embryologically derived from the third 
and, inconstantly, the fourth pair of pharyngeal pouches. 
At birth it weighs 10 to 35 gm. It grows until puberty, when 
it achieves a maximum weight of 20 to 50 gm, and there-
after undergoes progressive involution to little more than 
5 to 15 gm in older adults. The thymus can also involute 
in children and young adults in response to severe illness 
and HIV infection.
The fully developed thymus is composed of two fused, 
well-encapsulated lobes. Fibrous extensions of the capsule 
divide each lobe into numerous lobules, each with an outer 
cortical layer enclosing the central medulla. Diverse types 
of cells populate the thymus, but thymic epithelial cells 
and immature T lymphocytes, also called thymocytes, pre-
dominate. The cortical, peripheral, epithelial cells are 
polygonal in shape and have an abundant cytoplasm with 
dendritic extensions that contact adjacent cells. In contrast, 
the epithelial cells in the medulla are densely packed, often 
spindle-shaped, and have scant cytoplasm devoid of 
626
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
cysts to form. Therefore, the presence of a cystic thymic 
lesion in a symptomatic patient should provoke a thorough 
search for a neoplasm, particularly a lymphoma or a 
thymoma.
Thymic Hyperplasia
The term thymic hyperplasia is a bit misleading, since it 
usually applies to the appearance of B-cell germinal centers 
within the thymus, a finding that is referred to as thymic 
follicular hyperplasia. Such B-cell follicles are present in only 
small numbers in the normal thymus. Although follicular 
hyperplasia can occur in a number of chronic inflammatory 
and immunologic states, it is most frequently encountered 
in myasthenia gravis, in which it is found in 65% to 75% 
of cases (Chapter 27). Similar thymic changes are some-
times encountered in Graves disease, systemic lupus ery-
thematosus, scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis, and other 
autoimmune disorders.
In other instances, a morphologically normal thymus is 
simply large for the age of the patient. As mentioned, the 
size of the thymus varies widely, and whether this consti-
tutes a true hyperplasia or is merely a variant of normal is 
unclear. The main significance of this form of thymic 
“hyperplasia” is that it may be mistaken radiologically for 
a thymoma, leading to unnecessary surgical procedures.
Thymomas
A diversity of neoplasms may arise in the thymus—germ 
cell tumors, lymphomas, carcinoids, and others—but the 
designation “thymoma” is restricted to tumors of thymic 
epithelial cells. Such tumors typically also contain benign 
immature T cells (thymocytes).
The WHO has created a classification system based on 
histology for thymomas, but its clinical utility remains 
uncertain. We will instead use a classification that relies on 
the most important prognostic features, the surgical stage 
and the presence or absence of overt cytologic features of 
interconnecting processes. Whorls of medullary epithelial 
cells create Hassall corpuscles, with their characteristic kera-
tinized cores.
As you know from the earlier consideration of the 
thymus in relation to immunity, progenitor cells migrate 
from the marrow to the thymus and mature into T cells, 
which are exported to the periphery, but only after they 
have been educated in the “thymic university” to distin-
guish between self and non-self antigens. During adult-
hood the thymic production of T cells slowly declines as 
the organ atrophies.
Macrophages, dendritic cells, a minor population of B 
lymphocytes, rare neutrophils and eosinophils, and scat-
tered myoid (muscle-like) cells are also found within the 
thymus. The myoid cells are of particular interest because 
of the suspicion that they play some role in the develop-
ment of myasthenia gravis, a musculoskeletal disorder of 
immune origin.
Pathologic changes within the thymus are limited and 
will be described here. The changes associated with myas-
thenia gravis are considered in Chapter 27.
Developmental Disorders
Thymic hypoplasia or aplasia is seen in DiGeorge syndrome, 
which is marked by severe defects in cell-mediated immu-
nity and variable abnormalities of parathyroid develop-
ment associated with hypoparathyroidism. As discussed 
in Chapter 5, DiGeorge syndrome is often associated with 
other developmental defects as part of the 22q11 deletion 
syndrome.
Isolated thymic cysts are uncommon lesions that are 
usually discovered incidentally postmortem or during 
surgery. They rarely exceed 4 cm in diameter, can be 
spherical or arborizing, and are lined by stratified to colum-
nar epithelium. The fluid contents can be serous or muci-
nous and are often modified by hemorrhage.
While isolated cysts are not clinically significant, neo-
plastic thymic masses (whatever their origin) compress 
and distort adjacent normal thymus and sometimes cause 
Figure 13-41  Thymoma. A, Benign thymoma (medullary type). The neoplastic epithelial cells are arranged in a swirling pattern and have bland, oval to elongated 
nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli. Only a few small, reactive lymphoid cells are interspersed. B, Malignant thymoma, type I. The neoplastic epithelial cells are 
polygonal and have round to oval, bland nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli. Numerous small, reactive lymphoid cells are interspersed. The morphologic 
appearance of this tumor is identical to that of benign thymomas of the cortical type. In this case, however, the tumor was locally aggressive, invading adjacent 
lung and pericardium. 
627
Suggested readings
  MORPHOLOGY
Macroscopically, thymomas are lobulated, firm, gray-white 
masses of up to 15 to 20 cm in size. They sometimes have 
areas of cystic necrosis and calcification. Most are encapsu-
lated, but 20% to 25% of the tumors penetrate the capsule and 
infiltrate perithymic tissues and structures.
Noninvasive thymomas are most often composed of 
medullary-type epithelial cells or a mixture of medullary and 
cortical type epithelial cells. The medullary type epithelial cells 
are elongated or spindle-shaped (Fig. 13-41A). There is usually 
a sparse infiltrate of thymocytes, which often recapitulate the 
phenotype of medullary thymocytes. In mixed thymomas there 
is an admixture of polygonal cortical type epithelial cells and a 
denser infiltrate of thymocytes. The medullary and mixed pat-
terns together account for about 50% of all thymomas. Tumors 
that have a substantial proportion of medullary-type epithelial 
cells are usually noninvasive.
Invasive thymoma refers to a tumor that is cytologically 
benign but locally invasive. These tumors are much more likely 
to metastasize. The epithelial cells are most commonly of the 
cortical variety, with abundant cytoplasm and rounded vesicular 
nuclei (Fig. 13-41B), and are usually mixed with numerous 
thymocytes. In some cases, the neoplastic cells show cytologic 
atypia, a feature that correlates with a propensity for more 
aggressive behavior. These tumors account for about 20% to 
25% of all thymomas. By definition, invasive thymomas 
penetrate through the capsule into surrounding struc-
tures. The extent of invasion has been subdivided into various 
stages, which are beyond our scope. With minimal invasion, 
complete excision yields a 5-year survival rate of greater than 
90%, whereas extensive invasion is associated with a 5-year 
survival rate of less than 50%.
Thymic carcinoma represents about 5% of thymomas. 
Macroscopically, they are usually fleshy, obviously invasive 
masses, sometimes accompanied by metastases to sites such 
as the lungs. Microscopically, most are squamous cell carci-
nomas. The next most common variant is lymphoepithelioma-
like carcinoma, a tumor composed of sheets of cells with 
indistinct borders that bears a close histologic resemblance to 
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. About 50% of lymphoepithelioma-
like carcinomas contain monoclonal EBV genomes, consistent 
with a role for EBV in their pathogenesis. A variety of other less 
common histologic patterns of thymic carcinoma have been 
described; all exhibit cytologic atypia seen in other carcinomas.
Clinical Features.  About 40% of thymomas present with 
symptoms stemming from impingement on mediastinal 
structures. Another 30% to 45% are detected in the course 
of evaluating patients with myasthenia gravis. The rest are 
discovered incidentally during imaging studies or cardio-
thoracic surgery. In addition to myasthenia gravis, other 
associated autoimmune disorders include hypogamma-
globulinemia, pure red cell aplasia, Graves disease, perni-
cious anemia, dermatomyositis-polymyositis, and Cushing 
syndrome. The basis for these associations is still obscure, 
but the thymocytes that arise within thymomas give rise to 
long-lived CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and cortical thymomas 
rich in thymocytes are more likely to be associated with 
autoimmune disease. Hence, it seems likely that abnor-
malities in the selection or “education” of T cells maturing 
within the environment of the neoplasm contribute to the 
development of diverse autoimmune disorders.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Hematopoietic Stem Cells
Rossi L, Lin KK, Boles NC, et al: Less is more: unveiling the functional 
core of hematopoietic stem cells through knockout mice. Cell Stem 
Cell 11:302, 2012. [A summary of insights gained into genes that regu-
late HSC function through use of knockout mice.]
Wang LD, Wagers AJ: Dynamic niches in the origination and differ-
entiation of haematopoietic stem cells. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12:643, 
2011. [A discussion of the nature and biology of the marrow stem cell 
niche.]
White Cell Neoplasms
Badalian-Very G, Vergilio J-A, Fleming M, et al: Pathogenesis 
of Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Annu Rev Pathol epublished 
8/6/2012. [A comprehensive review of controversies and new insights 
into the pathogenesis of unusual tumor.]
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Stein H, et al: Classification of lymphoid neo-
plasms: the microscope as a tool for disease discovery. Blood 
112:4384, 2008. [An overview of the origins and utility of the most recent 
WHO classification of lymphoid neoplasms.]
Kridel R, Sehn LH, Gascoyne RD: Pathogenesis of follicular lym-
phoma. J Clin Invest 122:3424, 2012. [Discussion of new insights into 
the pathogenesis of this disease that have emerged from deep sequencing 
and expression profiling.]
Lenz G, Staudt LM: Aggressive lymphomas. N Engl J Med 362:1417, 
2010. [An excellent brief review of the molecular origins of aggressive B 
cell lymphomas.]
Lindsley RC, Ebert BL: Molecular pathophysiology of myelodysplas-
tic syndromes. Annu Rev Pathol epublished 9/1/12. [Update on the 
rapidly moving field of the molecular genetics of MDS.]
Molyneux EM, Rochford R, Griffin B, et al: Burkitt’s lymphoma. Lancet 
379:1234, 2012. [A review of the pathogenesis and treatment of Burkitt’s 
lymphoma.]
Palumbo A, Anderson KC: Multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med 364:
1046, 2011. [A review of the pathogenesis and treatment of multiple 
myeloma.]
Patel JP, Gonen M, Figueroa ME, et al: Prognostic relevance of inte-
grated genetic profiling in acute myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 
366:1079, 2012. [Landmark paper showing that focused deep sequencing 
of AML genomes can be used to predict outcome in patients treated with 
conventional chemotherapy.]
Pui CH, Mullighan CG, Evans WE, et al: Pediatric acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia: where are we going and how do we get there. Blood 
120:1165, 2012. [A review of the pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment 
of ALL.]
Schmitz R, Stanelle J, Hansmann ML, et al: Pathogenesis of classical 
and lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma. Annu Rev Pathol 
4:151, 2009. [A concise review of Hodgkin lymphoma pathogenesis.]
Shih AH, Abdel-Wahab O, Patel JP, et al: The role of epigenetic regula-
tors in myeloid malignancies. Nat Rev Cancer 12:599, 2012. [Update 
on the rapidly emerging data suggesting that epigenetic aberrations have 
broadly important roles in myeloid neoplasms.]
malignancy. In this simple system there are only three 
histologic subtypes:
•	 Tumors that are cytologically benign and noninvasive
•	 Tumors that are cytologically benign but invasive or 
metastatic
•	 Tumors that are cytologically malignant (thymic 
carcinoma)
In all categories, the tumors usually occur in adults 
older than 40 years of age; thymomas are rare in children. 
Males and females are affected equally. Most arise in the 
anterior superior mediastinum, but sometimes they occur 
in the neck, thyroid, pulmonary hilus, or elsewhere. They 
are uncommon in the posterior mediastinum. Thymomas 
account for 20% to 30% of tumors in the anterosuperior 
mediastinum, which is also a common location for certain 
lymphomas.
628
C H A P T E R  13	 Diseases of White Blood Cells, Lymph Nodes, Spleen, and Thymus 
Vardiman JW, Thiele J, Arber DA, et al: The 2008 revision of the World 
Health Organization (WHO) classification of myeloid neoplasms 
and acute leukemia. Blood 114:937, 2008. [A report providing the 
rationale for the WHO classification of myeloid neoplasms.]
The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network: Genomic and 
Epigenomic Landscapes of Adult De Novo Acute Myeloid 
Leukemia. N Eng J Med epublished May 1, 2013. [A landmark paper 
that using next generation sequencing and other genomic approaches to 
systematically describe the scope of genetic aberrations in acute myeloid 
leukemia.]
Disorders That Affect the Spleen and Thymus
Choi SS, Kim KD, Chung KY: Prognostic and clinical relevance of 
the World Health Organization schema for the classification 
of thymic epithelial tumors: a clinicopathologic study of 108 
patients and literature review. Chest 127:755, 2005. [A large clinico-
pathologic series that shows that stage is the best predictor of outcome in 
thymoma.]
629
Anemias  629
Anemias of Blood Loss  631
Acute Blood Loss  631
Chronic Blood Loss  631
Hemolytic Anemias  631
Hereditary Spherocytosis  632
Hemolytic Disease Due to Red Cell Enzyme 
Defects: Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase 
Deficiency  634
Sickle Cell Disease  635
Thalassemia Syndromes  638
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria  642
Immunohemolytic Anemia  643
Hemolytic Anemia Resulting from Trauma to Red 
Cells  644
Anemias of Diminished Erythropoiesis  645
Megaloblastic Anemias  645
Anemia of Folate Deficiency  648
Iron Deficiency Anemia  649
Anemia of Chronic Disease  652
Aplastic Anemia  653
Pure Red Cell Aplasia  655
Other Forms of Marrow Failure  655
Polycythemia  656
Bleeding Disorders: Hemorrhagic 
Diatheses  656
Bleeding Disorders Caused by Vessel Wall 
Abnormalities  656
Bleeding Related to Reduced Platelet 
Number: Thrombocytopenia  657
Chronic Immune Thrombocytopenic  
Purpura (ITP)  658
Acute Immune Thrombocytopenic  
Purpura  659
Drug-Induced Thrombocytopenia  659
HIV-Associated Thrombocytopenia  659
Thrombotic Microangiopathies: Thrombotic 
Thrombocytopenic Purpura and Hemolytic-
Uremic Syndrome (HUS)  659
Bleeding Disorders Related to Defective 
Platelet Functions  660
Hemorrhagic Diatheses Related to 
Abnormalities in Clotting Factors  661
The Factor VIII-vWF Complex  661
Von Willebrand Disease  662
Hemophilia A (Factor VIII Deficiency)  662
Hemophilia B (Christmas Disease, Factor IX 
Deficiency)  663
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation  663
Complications of Transfusion  665
Allergic Reactions  665
Hemolytic Reactions  665
Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury  666
Infectious Complications  666
C H A P T E R 
14 
Red Blood Cell and 
Bleeding Disorders
CHAPTER CONTENTS
See TARGETED THERAPY available online at 
www.studentconsult.com 
In this chapter we will first consider diseases of red cells. 
By far, the most common and important are the anemias, 
red cell deficiency states that usually have a nonneoplastic 
basis. We will then complete our review of blood diseases 
by discussing the major bleeding disorders and complica-
tions of blood transfusion.
Anemias
Anemia is defined as a reduction of the total circulating 
red cell mass below normal limits. Anemia reduces the 
oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood, leading to tissue 
hypoxia. In practice, the measurement of red cell mass is 
not easy, and anemia is usually diagnosed based on a 
reduction in the hematocrit (the ratio of packed red cells to 
total blood volume) and the hemoglobin concentration of the 
blood to levels that are below the normal range. These 
values correlate with the red cell mass except when there 
are changes in plasma volume caused by fluid retention or 
dehydration.
There are many classifications of anemia. We will follow 
one based on underlying mechanisms that is presented in 
Table 14-1. A second clinically useful approach classifies 
anemia according to alterations in red cell morphology, 
which often point to particular causes. Morphologic char-
acteristics providing etiologic clues include red cell size 
(normocytic, microcytic, or macrocytic); degree of hemo-
globinization, reflected in the color of red cells (normochro-
mic or hypochromic); and shape. In general, microcytic 
hypochromic anemias are caused by disorders of hemoglo-
bin synthesis (most often iron deficiency), while macrocytic 
anemias often stem from abnormalities that impair the 
maturation of erythroid precursors in the bone marrow. 
Normochromic, normocytic anemias have diverse etiolo-
gies; in some of these anemias, specific abnormalities of red 
cell shape (best appreciated through visual inspection of 
peripheral smears) provide an important clue as to the 
cause. The other indices can also be assessed qualitatively 
in smears, but precise measurement is carried out in clini-
cal laboratories with special instrumentation. The most 
useful red cell indices are as follows:
630
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
•	 Mean cell volume: the average volume of a red cell 
expressed in femtoliters (fL)
•	 Mean cell hemoglobin: the average content (mass) of 
hemoglobin per red cell, expressed in picograms
•	 Mean cell hemoglobin concentration: the average concen-
tration of hemoglobin in a given volume of packed red 
cells, expressed in grams per deciliter
•	 Red cell distribution width: the coefficient of variation of 
red cell volume
Adult reference ranges for red cell indices are shown in 
Table 14-2.
Whatever its cause, when sufficiently severe anemia 
leads to certain clinical findings. Patients appear pale. 
Weakness, malaise, and easy fatigability are common 
complaints. The lowered oxygen content of the circulat-
ing blood leads to dyspnea on mild exertion. Hypoxia can 
cause fatty change in the liver, myocardium, and kidney. 
If fatty changes in the myocardium are sufficiently severe, 
cardiac failure can develop and compound the tissue 
hypoxia caused by the deficiency of O2 in the blood. On 
occasion, the myocardial hypoxia manifests as angina pec-
toris, particularly when complicated by pre-existing coro-
nary artery disease. With acute blood loss and shock, 
Table 14-1  Classification of Anemia According to Underlying Mechanism
Mechanism
Specific Examples
Blood Loss
Acute blood loss
Trauma
Chronic blood loss
Gastrointestinal tract lesions, gynecologic disturbances*
Increased Red Cell Destruction (Hemolysis)
Inherited genetic defects
  Red cell membrane disorders
Hereditary spherocytosis, hereditary elliptocytosis
  Enzyme deficiencies
    Hexose monophosphate shunt enzyme deficiencies
G6PD deficiency, glutathione synthetase deficiency
    Glycolytic enzyme deficiencies
Pyruvate kinase deficiency, hexokinase deficiency
Hemoglobin abnormalities
    Deficient globin synthesis
Thalassemia syndromes
    Structurally abnormal globins (hemoglobinopathies)
Sickle cell disease, unstable hemoglobins
Acquired genetic defects
  Deficiency of phosphatidylinositol-linked glycoproteins
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Antibody-mediated destruction
Hemolytic disease of the newborn (Rh disease), transfusion reactions, drug-induced, autoimmune 
disorders
Mechanical trauma
  Microangiopathic hemolytic anemias
Hemolytic uremic syndrome, disseminated intravascular coagulation, thrombotic thrombocytopenia 
purpura
  Cardiac traumatic hemolysis
Defective cardiac valves
  Repetitive physical trauma
Bongo drumming, marathon running, karate chopping
Infections of red cells
Malaria, babesiosis
Toxic or chemical injury
Clostridial sepsis, snake venom, lead poisoning
Membrane lipid abnormalities
Abetalipoproteinemia, severe hepatocellular liver disease
Sequestration
Hypersplenism
Decreased Red Cell Production
Inherited genetic defects
  Defects leading to stem cell depletion
Fanconi anemia, telomerase defects
  Defects affecting erythroblast maturation
Thalassemia syndromes
Nutritional deficiencies
  Deficiencies affecting DNA synthesis
B12 and folate deficiencies
  Deficiencies affecting hemoglobin synthesis
Iron deficiency anemia
Erythropoietin deficiency
Renal failure, anemia of chronic disease
Immune-mediated injury of progenitors
Aplastic anemia, pure red cell aplasia
Inflammation-mediated iron sequestration
Anemia of chronic disease
Primary hematopoietic neoplasms
Acute leukemia, myelodysplasia, myeloproliferative disorders (Chapter 13)
Space-occupying marrow lesions
Metastatic neoplasms, granulomatous disease
Infections of red cell progenitors
Parvovirus B19 infection
Unknown mechanisms
Endocrine disorders, hepatocellular liver disease
G6PD, Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
*Most often cause of anemia is iron deficiency, not bleeding per se.
631
Anemias
Hemolytic Anemias
Hemolytic anemias share the following features:
•	 A shortened red cell life span below the normal 120 days
•	 Elevated erythropoietin levels and a compensatory 
increase in erythropoiesis
•	 Accumulation of hemoglobin degradation products that 
are created as part of the process of red cell hemolysis
The physiologic destruction of senescent red cells 
takes place within macrophages, which are abundant in 
the spleen, liver, and bone marrow. This process appears 
to be triggered by age-dependent changes in red cell 
surface proteins, which lead to their recognition and 
phagocytosis. In the great majority of hemolytic anemias 
the premature destruction of red cells also occurs within 
phagocytes, an event that is referred to as extravascular 
hemolysis. If persistent, extravascular hemolysis leads to a 
hyperplasia of phagocytes manifested by varying degrees 
of splenomegaly.
Extravascular hemolysis is generally caused by alterations 
that render the red cell less deformable. Extreme changes 
in shape are required for red cells to navigate the splenic 
sinusoids successfully. Reduced deformability makes this 
passage difficult, leading to red cell sequestration and 
phagocytosis by macrophages located within the splenic 
cords. Regardless of the cause, the principal clinical fea-
tures of extravascular hemolysis are anemia, splenomegaly, 
and jaundice. Some hemoglobin inevitably escapes from 
phagocytes, which leads to variable decreases in plasma 
haptoglobin, an α2-globulin that binds free hemoglobin and 
prevents its excretion in the urine. Because much of the 
pathologic destruction of red cells occurs in the spleen, 
individuals with extravascular hemolysis often benefit 
from splenectomy.
Less commonly, intravascular hemolysis predominates. 
Intravascular hemolysis of red cells may be caused by 
mechanical injury, complement fixation, intracellular para-
sites (e.g., falciparum malaria, Chapter 8), or exogenous 
toxic factors. Causes of mechanical injury include trauma 
caused by cardiac valves, thrombotic narrowing of the 
microcirculation, or repetitive physical trauma (e.g., mara-
thon running and bongo drum beating). Complement fixa-
tion occurs in a variety of situations in which antibodies 
recognize and bind red cell antigens. Toxic injury is exem-
plified by clostridial sepsis, which results in the release of 
enzymes that digest the red cell membrane.
Whatever the mechanism, intravascular hemolysis is 
manifested by anemia, hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, hemo-
siderinuria, and jaundice. The large amounts of free hemo-
globin released from lysed red cells are promptly bound by 
haptoglobin, producing a complex that is rapidly cleared 
by mononuclear phagocytes. As serum haptoglobin is 
depleted, free hemoglobin oxidizes to methemoglobin, which 
is brown in color. The renal proximal tubular cells reabsorb 
and catabolize much of the filtered hemoglobin and methe-
moglobin, but some passes out in the urine, imparting a red- 
brown color. Iron released from hemoglobin can accumulate 
within tubular cells, giving rise to renal hemosiderosis. 
Concomitantly, heme groups derived from hemoglobin- 
haptoglobin complexes are catabolized to bilirubin within 
mononuclear phagocytes, leading to jaundice. Unlike in 
extravascular hemolysis, splenomegaly is not seen.
oliguria and anuria can develop as a result of renal hypo-
perfusion. Central nervous system hypoxia can cause 
headache, dimness of vision, and faintness.
Anemias of Blood Loss
Acute Blood Loss
The effects of acute blood loss are mainly due to the loss 
of intravascular volume, which if massive can lead to 
cardiovascular collapse, shock, and death. The clinical fea-
tures depend on the rate of hemorrhage and whether the 
bleeding is external or internal. If the patient survives, the 
blood volume is rapidly restored by the intravascular shift 
of water from the interstitial fluid compartment. This fluid 
shift results in hemodilution and a lowering of the hema-
tocrit. The reduction in oxygenation triggers increased 
secretion of erythropoietin from the kidney, which stimu-
lates the proliferation of committed erythroid progenitors 
(CFU-E) in the marrow (see Fig. 13-1). It takes about 5 days 
for the progeny of these CFU-Es to mature and appear as 
newly released red cells (reticulocytes) in the peripheral 
blood. The iron in hemoglobin is recaptured if red cells 
extravasate into tissues, whereas bleeding into the gut or 
out of the body leads to iron loss and possible iron defi-
ciency, which can hamper the restoration of normal red cell 
counts.
Significant bleeding results in predictable changes in 
the blood involving not only red cells, but also white 
cells and platelets. If the bleeding is sufficiently massive 
to cause a decrease in blood pressure, the compensatory 
release of adrenergic hormones mobilizes granulocytes 
from the intravascular marginal pool and results in leuko-
cytosis (see Fig. 13-2). Initially, red cells appear normal in 
size and color (normocytic, normochromic). However, as 
marrow production increases there is a striking increase in 
the reticulocyte count (reticulocytosis), which reaches 10% 
to 15% after 7 days. Reticulocytes are larger in size than 
normal red cells (macrocytes) and have a blue-red poly-
chromatophilic cytoplasm. Early recovery from blood loss 
is also often accompanied by thrombocytosis, which results 
from an increase in platelet production.
Chronic Blood Loss
Chronic blood loss induces anemia only when the rate of 
loss exceeds the regenerative capacity of the marrow or 
when iron reserves are depleted and iron deficiency anemia 
appears (see later).
Table 14-2  Adult Reference Ranges for Red Cells*
Measurement (units)
Men
Women
Hemoglobin ( gm/dL)
13.6-17.2
12.0-15.0
Hematocrit (%)
39-49
33-43
Red cell count (×106/µL)
4.3-5.9
3.5-5.0
Reticulocyte count (%)
0.5-1.5
Mean cell volume (fL)
82-96
Mean cell hemoglobin (pg)
27-33
Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (gm/dL)
33-37
Red cell distribution width
11.5-14.5
*Reference ranges vary among laboratories. The reference ranges for the laboratory providing 
the result should always be used in interpreting test results.
632
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
inheritance pattern is seen in about 75% of cases. The 
remaining patients have a more severe form of the disease 
that is usually caused by the inheritance of two different 
defects (a state known as compound heterozygosity).
Pathogenesis.  The remarkable deformability and durabil-
ity of the normal red cell are attributable to the physico-
chemical properties of its specialized membrane skeleton 
(Fig. 14-2), which lies closely apposed to the internal 
surface of the plasma membrane. Its chief protein compo-
nent, spectrin, consists of two polypeptide chains, α and β, 
which form intertwined (helical) flexible heterodimers. The 
“head” regions of spectrin dimers self-associate to form 
tetramers, while the “tails” associate with actin oligomers. 
Each actin oligomer can bind multiple spectrin tetramers, 
thus creating a two-dimensional spectrin-actin skeleton 
that is connected to the cell membrane by two distinct 
interactions. The first, involving the proteins ankyrin and 
band 4.2, binds spectrin to the transmembrane ion trans-
porter, band 3. The second, involving protein 4.1, binds the 
“tail” of spectrin to another transmembrane protein, gly-
cophorin A.
Figure 14-2  Role of the red cell membrane skeleton in hereditary spherocytosis. The left panel shows the normal organization of the major red cell membrane 
skeletal proteins. Various mutations involving α-spectrin, β-spectrin, ankyrin, band 4.2, or band 3 that weaken the interactions between these proteins cause 
red cells to lose membrane fragments. To accommodate the resultant change in the ratio of surface area to volume these cells adopt a spherical shape. 
Spherocytic cells are less deformable than normal ones and therefore become trapped in the splenic cords, where they are phagocytosed by macrophages. 
GP, Glycophorin. 
Band 3
GP
Lipid bilayer
Actin
α
α
Spectrin
β
β
4.2
Ankyrin
4.1
4.1
Normal
Spherocyte
Splenic
macrophage
In all types of uncomplicated hemolytic anemias, the 
excess serum bilirubin is unconjugated. The level of hyper-
bilirubinemia depends on the functional capacity of the 
liver and the rate of hemolysis. When the liver is normal, 
jaundice is rarely severe. Excessive bilirubin excreted by 
the liver into the gastrointestinal tract leads to increased 
formation and fecal excretion of urobilin (Chapter 18), and 
often leads to the formation of gallstones derived from 
heme pigments.
  MORPHOLOGY
Certain changes are seen in hemolytic anemias regardless of 
cause or type. Anemia and lowered tissue oxygen tension 
trigger the production of erythropoietin, which stimulates ery-
throid differentiation and leads to the appearance of increased 
numbers of erythroid precursors (normoblasts) in the 
marrow (Fig. 14-1). Compensatory increases in erythropoiesis 
result in a prominent reticulocytosis in the peripheral blood. 
The phagocytosis of red cells leads to the accumulation of the 
iron containing pigment hemosiderin, particularly in the spleen, 
liver, and bone marrow. Such iron accumulation is referred to 
as hemosiderosis. If the anemia is severe, extramedullary 
hematopoiesis can appear in the liver, spleen, and lymph 
nodes. With chronic hemolysis, elevated biliary excretion of  
bilirubin promotes the formation of pigment gallstones 
(cholelithiasis).
Figure 14-1  Marrow smear from a patient with hemolytic anemia. The marrow 
reveals increased numbers of maturing erythroid progenitors (normoblasts). 
(Courtesy Dr. Steven Kroft, Department of Pathology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
The hemolytic anemias can be classified in a variety of 
ways; here, we rely on the underlying mechanisms (Table 
14-1). We begin by discussing the major inherited forms of 
hemolytic anemia, and then move on to the acquired forms 
that are most common or of particular pathophysiologic 
interest.
Hereditary Spherocytosis
Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) is an inherited disorder 
caused by intrinsic defects in the red cell membrane skel-
eton that render red cells spheroid, less deformable, and 
vulnerable to splenic sequestration and destruction. The 
prevalence of HS is highest in northern Europe, where 
rates of 1 in 5000 are reported. An autosomal dominant 
633
Anemias
The characteristic clinical features are anemia, spleno-
megaly, and jaundice. The severity varies greatly. In a small 
minority (mainly compound heterozygotes) HS presents at 
birth with marked jaundice and requires exchange transfu-
sions. In 20% to 30% of patients the disease is so mild as to 
be virtually asymptomatic; here the decreased red cell sur-
vival is readily compensated for by increased erythropoi-
esis. In most, however, the compensatory changes are 
outpaced, producing a chronic hemolytic anemia of mild 
to moderate severity.
The generally stable clinical course is sometimes punc-
tuated by aplastic crises, usually triggered by an acute par-
vovirus infection. Parvovirus infects and kills red cell 
HS is caused by diverse mutations that lead to an 
insufficiency of membrane skeletal components. As a 
result of these alterations, the life span of the affected red 
cells is decreased on average to 10 to 20 days from the 
normal 120 days. The pathogenic mutations most com-
monly affect ankyrin, band 3, spectrin, or band 4.2, the 
proteins involved in one of the two tethering interactions, 
presumably because this complex is particularly important 
in stabilizing the lipid bilayer. Most mutations cause 
frameshifts or introduce premature stop codons, such that 
the mutated allele fails to produce any protein. The result-
ing deficiency of the affected protein reduces the assembly 
of the skeleton as a whole, destabilizing the overlying 
plasma membrane. Young HS red cells are normal in 
shape, but the destabilized lipid bilayer sheds membrane 
fragments as red cells age in the circulation. The loss of 
membrane relative to cytoplasm “forces” the cells to 
assume the smallest possible diameter for a given volume, 
namely, a sphere. Compound heterozygosity for two 
defective alleles understandably results in a more severe 
membrane skeleton deficiency.
The invariably beneficial effects of splenectomy prove 
that the spleen has a cardinal role in the premature demise 
of spherocytes. The travails of spherocytic red cells are 
fairly well defined. In the life of the portly inflexible sphe-
rocyte, the spleen is the villain. Normal red cells must 
undergo extreme deformation to leave the cords of Billroth 
and enter the sinusoids. Because of their spheroidal shape 
and reduced deformability, the hapless spherocytes are 
trapped in the splenic cords, where they are easy prey for 
macrophages. The splenic environment also somehow 
exacerbates the tendency of HS red cells to lose membrane 
along with K+ ions and H2O; prolonged splenic exposure 
(erythrostasis), depletion of red cell glucose, and dimin-
ished red cell pH have all been suggested to contribute to 
these abnormalities (Fig. 14-3). After splenectomy the sphe-
rocytes persist, but the anemia is corrected.
Figure 14-3  Pathophysiology of hereditary spherocytosis. 
Splenic trapping
Membrane loss
Membrane stability
Surface to volume ratio
   (spherocytosis)
Deformability
Primary membrane
skeletal defect
Phagocytosis
Extravascular hemolysis
Erythrostasis
Glucose       pH 
  MORPHOLOGY
The most specific morphologic finding is spherocytosis, 
apparent on smears as small, dark-staining (hyperchromic) red 
cells lacking the central zone of pallor (Fig. 14-4). Spherocytosis 
is distinctive but not pathognomonic, as spherocytes are also 
seen in other disorders associated with membrane loss, such 
as in autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Other features are common 
to all hemolytic anemias. These include reticulocytosis, marrow 
erythroid hyperplasia, hemosiderosis, and mild jaundice. 
Cholelithiasis (pigment stones) occurs in 40% to 50% of 
affected adults. Moderate splenomegaly is characteristic 
(500-1000 gm); in few other hemolytic anemias is the spleen 
enlarged as much or as consistently. Splenomegaly results from 
congestion of the cords of Billroth and increased numbers of 
phagocytes.
Clinical Features.  The diagnosis is based on family history, 
hematologic findings, and laboratory evidence. In two 
thirds of the patients the red cells are abnormally sensitive 
to osmotic lysis when incubated in hypotonic salt solutions, 
which causes the influx of water into spherocytes with little 
margin for expansion. HS red cells also have an increased 
mean cell hemoglobin concentration, due to dehydration 
caused by the loss of K+ and H2O.
Figure 14-4  Hereditary spherocytosis (peripheral smear). Note the 
anisocytosis and several dark-appearing spherocytes with no central  
pallor. Howell-Jolly bodies (small dark nuclear remnants) are also present  
in red cells of this asplenic patient. (Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna, 
Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, 
Dallas, Texas.)
634
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
are harmless. Two variants, designated G6PD− and G6PD 
Mediterranean, cause most of the clinically significant 
hemolytic anemias. G6PD− is present in about 10% of 
American blacks; G6PD Mediterranean, as the name 
implies, is prevalent in the Middle East. The high frequency 
of these variants in each population is believed to stem 
from a protective effect against Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria (discussed later). G6PD variants associated with 
hemolysis result in misfolding of the protein, making it 
more susceptible to proteolytic degradation. Compared 
with the most common normal variant, G6PD B, the half-
life of G6PD− is moderately reduced, whereas that of G6PD 
Mediterranean is more markedly abnormal. Because 
mature red cells do not synthesize new proteins, G6PD− or 
G6PD Mediterranean enzyme activities fall quickly to 
levels inadequate to protect against oxidant stress as red 
cells age. Thus, older red cells are much more prone to 
hemolysis than younger ones.
The episodic hemolysis that is characteristic of G6PD 
deficiency is caused by exposures that generate oxidant 
stress. The most common triggers are infections, in which 
oxygen-derived free radicals are produced by activated 
leukocytes. Many infections can trigger hemolysis; viral 
hepatitis, pneumonia, and typhoid fever are among those 
most likely to do so. The other important initiators are 
drugs and certain foods. The oxidant drugs implicated are 
numerous, including antimalarials (e.g., primaquine and 
chloroquine), sulfonamides, nitrofurantoins, and others. 
Some drugs cause hemolysis only in individuals with the 
more severe Mediterranean variant. The most frequently 
cited food is the fava bean, which generates oxidants when 
metabolized. “Favism” is endemic in the Mediterranean, 
Middle East, and parts of Africa where consumption is 
prevalent. Uncommonly, G6PD deficiency presents as 
neonatal jaundice or a chronic low-grade hemolytic anemia 
in the absence of infection or known environmental 
triggers.
Oxidants cause both intravascular and extravascular hemo-
lysis in G6PD-deficient individuals. Exposure of G6PD-
deficient red cells to high levels of oxidants causes the 
cross-linking of reactive sulfhydryl groups on globin 
chains, which become denatured and form membrane-
bound precipitates known as Heinz bodies. These are seen as 
dark inclusions within red cells stained with crystal violet 
(Fig. 14-6). Heinz bodies can damage the membrane suffi-
ciently to cause intravascular hemolysis. Less severe mem-
brane damage results in decreased red cell deformability. 
As inclusion-bearing red cells pass through the splenic 
cords, macrophages pluck out the Heinz bodies. As a result 
of membrane damage, some of these partially devoured 
cells retain an abnormal shape, appearing to have a bite 
taken out of them (Fig. 14-6). Other less severely damaged 
cells become spherocytes due to loss of membrane surface 
area. Both bite cells and spherocytes are trapped in splenic 
cords and removed rapidly by phagocytes.
Acute intravascular hemolysis, marked by anemia, 
hemoglobinemia, and hemoglobinuria, usually begins 2 to 
3 days following exposure of G6PD-deficient individuals 
to oxidants. The hemolysis is greater in individuals with 
the highly unstable G6PD Mediterranean variant. Because 
only older red cells are at risk for lysis, the episode is 
self-limited, as hemolysis ceases when only younger 
G6PD-replete red cells remain (even if the patient 
progenitors, effectively causing red cell production to 
cease until an immune response commences, generally in 
1 to 2 weeks. Because of the reduced life span of HS red 
cells, cessation of erythropoiesis for even short time periods 
leads to sudden worsening of the anemia. Transfusions 
may be necessary to support the patient until the immune 
response clears the infection. Hemolytic crises are produced 
by intercurrent events leading to increased splenic destruc-
tion of red cells (e.g., infectious mononucleosis); these are 
clinically less significant than aplastic crises. Gallstones, 
found in many patients, can also produce symptoms. 
Splenectomy treats the anemia and its complications, but 
brings with it an increased risk of sepsis, since the spleen 
acts as an important filter for blood borne bacteria.
Hemolytic Disease Due to Red Cell Enzyme Defects: 
Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency
Abnormalities in the hexose monophosphate shunt or 
glutathione metabolism resulting from deficient or 
impaired enzyme function reduce the ability of red cells 
to protect themselves against oxidative injuries and lead 
to hemolysis. The most important of these enzyme derange-
ments is the hereditary deficiency of glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD) activity. G6PD reduces nicotin-
amide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) to NADPH 
while oxidizing glucose-6-phosphate (Fig. 14-5). NADPH 
then provides reducing equivalents needed for conversion 
of oxidized glutathione to reduced glutathione, which 
protects against oxidant injury by participating as a cofac-
tor in reactions that neutralize compounds such as H2O2 
(Fig. 14-5).
G6PD deficiency is a recessive X-linked trait, placing 
males at higher risk for symptomatic disease. Several 
hundred G6PD genetic variants are known, but most 
Figure 14-5  Role of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in defense 
against oxidant injury. The disposal of H2O2, a potential oxidant, 
is dependent on the adequacy of reduced glutathione (GSH), which is 
generated by the action of the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide (NADPH). The synthesis of NADPH is dependent on the activity 
of G6PD. GSSG, Oxidized glutathione. 
Glucose-6-phosphate
6-Phosphogluconate
NADP
NADPH
GSH
GSSG
H2O2
H2O
G6PD
Glutathione
reductase
Glutathione
peroxidase
635
Anemias
Figure 14-6  Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: effects of 
oxidant drug exposure (peripheral blood smear). Inset, Red cells with 
precipitates of denatured globin (Heinz bodies) revealed by supravital staining. 
As the splenic macrophages pluck out these inclusions, “bite cells” like  
the one in this smear are produced. (Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna, 
Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, 
Dallas, Texas.)
continues to take the offending drug). The recovery phase 
is heralded by reticulocytosis. Because hemolytic episodes 
related to G6PD deficiency occur intermittently, features 
related to chronic hemolysis (e.g., splenomegaly, choleli-
thiasis) are absent.
Sickle Cell Disease
Sickle cell disease is a common hereditary hemoglobin-
opathy caused by a point mutation in β-globin that pro-
motes the polymerization of deoxygenated hemoglobin, 
leading to red cell distortion, hemolytic anemia, micro-
vascular obstruction, and ischemic tissue damage. Several 
hundred different hemoglobinopathies caused by muta-
tions in globin genes are known, but only those associated 
with sickle cell disease are prevalent enough in the United 
States to merit discussion. Hemoglobin is a tetrameric 
protein composed of two pairs of globin chains, each with 
its own heme group. Normal adult red cells contain mainly 
HbA (α2β2), along with small amounts of HbA2 (α2δ2) and 
fetal hemoglobin (HbF; α2γ2). Sickle cell disease is caused 
by a point mutation in the sixth codon of β-globin that 
leads to the replacement of a glutamate residue with a 
valine residue. The abnormal physiochemical properties of 
the resulting sickle hemoglobin (HbS) are responsible for 
the disease.
About 8% to 10% of African Americans, or roughly 2 
million individuals, are heterozygous for HbS, a largely 
asymptomatic condition known as sickle cell trait. The off-
spring of two heterozygotes has a 1 in 4 chance of being 
homozygous for the sickle mutation, a state that produces 
symptomatic sickle cell disease. In such individuals, almost 
all the hemoglobin in the red cell is HbS (α2βS
2). There are 
about 70,000 individuals with sickle cell disease in the 
United States. In certain populations in Africa the preva-
lence of heterozygosity is as high as 30%.
This high frequency stems from protection afforded by 
HbS against falciparum malaria. Population studies have 
shown that the sickle hemoglobin mutation has arisen inde-
pendently at least six times in areas in which falciparum 
malaria is endemic, providing clear evidence of strong 
Darwinian selection for this trait. Parasite densities are 
lower in infected AS children than in AA children, and AS 
children are significantly less likely to have severe disease 
or to die from malaria. While mechanistic details are lacking 
two scenarios to explain these observations are favored:
•	 Metabolically active intracellular parasites consume O2 
and decrease intracellular pH, both of which promote 
hemoglobin sickling in AS red cells. These distorted and 
stiffened cells may be cleared more rapidly by phago-
cytes in the spleen and liver, helping to keep parasite 
loads down.
•	 Another effect of sickling is that it impairs the formation 
of membrane knobs containing a protein made by the 
parasite called PfEMP-1. These membrane knobs are 
implicated in adhesion of infected red cells to endothe-
lium, which is believed to have an important pathogenic 
role in the most severe form of the disease, cerebral 
malaria.
It has been suggested that G6PD deficiency and thalasse-
mias also protect against malaria by increasing the clear-
ance and decreasing the adherence of infected red cells, 
possibly by raised levels of oxidant stress and causing 
membrane damage in the parasite-bearing cells.
Pathogenesis.  The major pathologic manifestations—
chronic hemolysis, microvascular occlusions, and tissue 
damage—all stem from the tendency of HbS molecules to 
stack into polymers when deoxygenated. Initially, this 
process converts the red cell cytosol from a freely flowing 
liquid into a viscous gel. With continued deoxygenation 
HbS molecules assemble into long needle-like fibers within 
red cells, producing a distorted sickle or holly-leaf shape.
Several variables affect the rate and degree of sickling:
•	 Interaction of HbS with the other types of hemoglobin in the 
cell. In heterozygotes with sickle cell trait, about 40% 
of the hemoglobin is HbS and the rest is HbA, which 
interferes with HbS polymerization. As a result, red 
cells in heterozygous individuals do not sickle except 
under conditions of profound hypoxia. HbF inhibits the 
polymerization of HbS even more than HbA; hence, 
infants do not become symptomatic until they reach 5 
or 6 months of age, when the level of HbF normally falls. 
However, in some individuals HbF expression remains 
at relatively high levels, a condition known as heredi-
tary persistence of HbF; in these individuals, sickle cell 
disease is much less severe. Another variant hemoglo-
bin is HbC, in which lysine is substituted for glutamate 
in the sixth amino acid residue of β-globin. HbC is also 
common in regions where HbS is found; overall, about 
2% to 3% of American blacks are HbC heterozygotes 
and about 1 in 1250 are compound HbS/HbC heterozy-
gotes. In HbSC red cells the percentage of HbS is 50%, 
as compared with only 40% in HbAS cells. Moreover, 
HbSC cells tend to lose salt and water and become dehy-
drated, which increases the intracellular concentration 
of HbS. Both of these factors increase the tendency for 
HbS to polymerize. As a result, individuals who are 
compound heterozygotes for HbS and HbC have a 
symptomatic sickling disorder (termed HbSC disease), 
but it is milder than sickle cell disease.
636
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
inflamed vascular beds results in extended exposure to low 
oxygen tension, sickling, and vascular obstruction. Once 
started, it is easy to envision how a vicious cycle of sickling, 
obstruction, hypoxia, and more sickling ensues. Depletion 
of nitric oxide (NO) may also play a part in the vascular 
occlusions. Free hemoglobin released from lysed sickle red 
cells can bind and inactivate NO, which is a potent vaso-
dilator and inhibitor of platelet aggregation. The reduction 
in active NO leads to increased vascular tone (narrowing 
vessels) and enhances platelet aggregation, both of which 
may contribute to red cell stasis, sickling, and (in some 
instances) thrombosis.
  MORPHOLOGY
In sickle cell anemia, the peripheral blood demonstrates variable 
numbers of irreversibly sickled cells, reticulocytosis, and 
target cells, which result from red cell dehydration (Fig. 14-8). 
Howell-Jolly bodies (small nuclear remnants) are also present 
in some red cells due to the asplenia (see later). The bone 
marrow is hyperplastic as a result of a compensatory erythroid 
hyperplasia. Expansion of the marrow leads to bone resorption 
and secondary new bone formation, resulting in prominent 
cheekbones and changes in the skull that resemble a “crewcut” 
on x-ray studies. Extramedullary hematopoiesis can also 
appear. The increased breakdown of hemoglobin can cause 
pigment gallstones and hyperbilirubinemia.
In early childhood, the spleen is enlarged up to 500 gm by 
red pulp congestion, which is caused by the trapping of sickled 
red cells in the cords and sinuses (Fig. 14-9). With time, 
however, the chronic erythrostasis leads to splenic infarction, 
•	 Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC). Higher HbS 
concentrations increase the probability that aggregation 
and polymerization will occur during any given period 
of deoxygenation. Thus, intracellular dehydration, 
which increases the MCHC, facilitates sickling. Con­
versely, conditions that decrease the MCHC reduce 
the disease severity. This occurs when the individual 
is homozygous for HbS but also has coexistent 
α-thalassemia, which reduces Hb synthesis and leads to 
milder disease.
•	 Intracellular pH. A decrease in pH reduces the oxygen 
affinity of hemoglobin, thereby increasing the fraction 
of deoxygenated HbS at any given oxygen tension and 
augmenting the tendency for sickling.
•	 Transit time of red cells through microvascular beds. As will 
be discussed, much of the pathology of sickle cell disease 
is related to vascular occlusion caused by sickling within 
microvascular beds. Transit times in most normal micro-
vascular beds are too short for significant aggregation 
of deoxygenated HbS to occur, and as a result sickling 
is confined to microvascular beds with slow transit 
times. Blood flow is sluggish in the normal spleen and 
bone marrow, which are prominently affected in sickle 
cell disease, and also in vascular beds that are inflamed. 
The movement of blood through inflamed tissues is 
slowed because of the adhesion of leukocytes to acti-
vated endothelial cells and the transudation of fluid 
through leaky vessels. As a result, inflamed vascular 
beds are prone to sickling and occlusion.
Sickling causes cumulative damage to red cells through 
several mechanisms. As HbS polymers grow, they herniate 
through the membrane skeleton and project from the cell 
ensheathed by only the lipid bilayer. This severe derange-
ment in membrane structure causes the influx of Ca2+ ions, 
which induce the cross-linking of membrane proteins 
and activate an ion channel that permits the efflux of K+ 
and H2O. With repeated episodes of sickling, red cells 
become increasingly dehydrated, dense, and rigid (Fig. 
14-7). Eventually, the most severely damaged cells are con-
verted to end-stage, nondeformable, irreversibly sickled 
cells, which retain a sickle shape even when fully oxygen-
ated. The severity of the hemolysis correlates with the per-
centage of irreversibly sickled cells, which are rapidly 
sequestered and removed by mononuclear phagocytes 
(extravascular hemolysis). Sickled red cells are also 
mechanically fragile, leading to some intravascular hemo-
lysis as well.
The pathogenesis of the microvascular occlusions, which 
are responsible for the most serious clinical features, is far 
less certain. Microvascular occlusions are not related to the 
number of irreversibly sickled cells in the blood, but instead 
may be dependent upon more subtle red cell membrane 
damage and local factors, such as inflammation or vaso-
constriction, that tend to slow or arrest the movement of 
red cells through microvascular beds (Fig. 14-7). As men-
tioned above, sickle red cells express higher than normal 
levels of adhesion molecules and are sticky. Mediators 
released from granulocytes during inflammatory reactions 
up-regulate the expression of adhesion molecules on endo-
thelial cells (Chapter 3) and further enhance the tendency 
for sickle red cells to get arrested during transit through 
the microvasculature. The stagnation of red cells within 
Figure 14-7  Pathophysiology of sickle cell disease. 
HbA
Point
mutation
HbS
C
T
A
C
G
G
C
A
T
C
G
G
RBC
Deoxygenation
Oxygenation
Additional
cycles of
deoxygenation
Ca2+
K+, H2O
Irreversibly
sickled
cell
Cell with dehydration
and membrane damage
Extensive
membrane
damage
Deoxygenation,
prolonged
transit times
Hemolysis
Microvascular
occlusion
637
Anemias
frequently manifest as the hand-foot syndrome or dactylitis 
of the bones of the hands or feet, or both. Acute chest syn-
drome is a particularly dangerous type of vaso-occlusive 
crisis involving the lungs, which typically presents with 
fever, cough, chest pain, and pulmonary infiltrates. 
Pulmonary inflammation (such as may be induced by a 
Figure 14-8  Sickle cell disease (peripheral blood smear). A, Low magnification 
shows sickle cells, anisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. B, Higher magnification 
shows an irreversibly sickled cell in the center. (Courtesy Dr. Robert W. 
McKenna, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
B
Figure 14-9  A, Spleen in sickle cell disease (low power). Red pulp cords and 
sinusoids are markedly congested; between the congested areas, pale areas 
of fibrosis resulting from ischemic damage are evident. B, Under high power, 
splenic sinusoids are dilated and filled with sickled red cells. (Courtesy Dr. 
Darren Wirthwein, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
Figure 14-10  “Autoinfarcted” splenic remnant in sickle cell disease. (Courtesy 
Drs. Dennis Burns and Darren Wirthwein, Department of Pathology, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
fibrosis, and progressive shrinkage, so that by adolescence or 
early adulthood only a small nubbin of fibrous splenic tissue is 
left; this process is called autosplenectomy (Fig. 14-10). 
Infarctions caused by vascular occlusions can occur in many 
other tissues as well, including the bones, brain, kidney, liver, 
retina, and pulmonary vessels, the latter sometimes producing 
cor pulmonale. In adult patients, vascular stagnation in subcu-
taneous tissues often leads to leg ulcers; this complication is 
rare in children.
Clinical Features
Sickle cell disease causes a moderately severe hemolytic 
anemia (hematocrit 18% to 30%) that is associated with 
reticulocytosis, hyperbilirubinemia, and the presence of 
irreversibly sickled cells. Its course is punctuated by a 
variety of “crises.” Vaso-occlusive crises, also called pain 
crises, are episodes of hypoxic injury and infarction that 
cause severe pain in the affected region. Although infec-
tion, dehydration, and acidosis (all of which favor sickling) 
can act as triggers, in most instances no predisposing cause 
is identified. The most commonly involved sites are the 
bones, lungs, liver, brain, spleen, and penis. In children, 
painful bone crises are extremely common and often 
difficult to distinguish from acute osteomyelitis. These 
638
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
beyond the fifth decade. A mainstay of treatment is an 
inhibitor of DNA synthesis, hydroxyurea, which has 
several beneficial effects. These include (1) an increase in 
red cell HbF levels, which occurs by unknown mecha-
nisms; and (2) an antiinflammatory effect, which stems 
from an inhibition of leukocyte production. These activities 
(and possibly others) are believed to act in concert to 
decrease crises related to vascular occlusions in both chil-
dren and adults. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
offers a chance at cure and is increasingly being explored 
as a therapeutic option.
Thalassemia Syndromes
The thalassemia syndromes are a heterogeneous group 
 of disorders caused by inherited mutations that decrease 
the synthesis of either the α-globin or  β-globin chains 
that compose adult hemoglobin, HbA (α2β2), leading to 
anemia, tissue hypoxia, and red cell hemolysis related to 
the imbalance in globin chain synthesis. The two α chains 
in HbA are encoded by an identical pair of α-globin genes 
on chromosome 16, while the two β chains are encoded by 
a single β-globin gene on chromosome 11. β-thalassemia is 
caused by deficient synthesis of β chains, whereas 
α-thalassemia is caused by deficient synthesis of α chains. 
The hematologic consequences of diminished synthesis of 
one globin chain stem not only from hemoglobin deficiency 
but also from a relative excess of the other globin chain, 
particularly in β-thalassemia (described below).
Thalassemia 
syndromes 
are 
endemic 
in 
the 
Mediterranean basin (indeed, thalassa means “sea” in 
Greek), as well as the Middle East, tropical Africa, the 
Indian subcontinent, and Asia, and in aggregate are among 
the most common inherited disorders of humans. As with 
sickle cell disease and other common inherited red cell 
disorders, their prevalence seems to be explained by the 
protection they afford heterozygous carriers against 
malaria. Although we discuss the thalassemia syndromes 
with other inherited forms of anemia associated with 
hemolysis, it is important to recognize that the defects in 
globin synthesis that underlie these disorders cause anemia 
through two mechanisms: decreased red cell production, 
and decreased red cell lifespan.
β-Thalassemias
The β-thalassemias are caused by mutations that dimin-
ish the synthesis of β-globin chains. The clinical severity 
varies widely due to heterogeneity in the causative muta-
tions. We will begin our discussion with the molecular 
lesions in β-thalassemia and then relate the clinical variants 
to specific underlying molecular defects.
Molecular Pathogenesis.  The causative mutations fall into 
two categories: (1) β0 mutations, associated with absent 
β-globin synthesis, and (2) β+ mutations, characterized by 
reduced (but detectable) β-globin synthesis. Sequencing of 
β-thalassemia genes has revealed more than 100 different 
causative mutations, mostly consisting of point mutations. 
Details of these mutations and their effects are found in 
specialized texts. Figure 14-11 gives a few illustrative 
examples.
•	 Splicing mutations. These are the most common cause of 
β+-thalassemia. Most of these mutations lie within 
simple infection) may cause blood flow to become sluggish 
and “spleenlike,” leading to sickling and vaso-occlusion. 
This compromises pulmonary function, creating a poten-
tially fatal cycle of worsening pulmonary and systemic 
hypoxemia, sickling, and vaso-occlusion. Priapism affects 
up to 45% of males after puberty and may lead to hypoxic 
damage and erectile dysfunction. Other disorders related 
to vascular obstruction, particularly stroke and retinopathy 
leading to loss of visual acuity and even blindness, can take 
a devastating toll. Factors proposed to contribute to stroke 
include the adhesion of sickle red cells to arterial vascular 
endothelium and vasoconstriction caused by the depletion 
of NO by free hemoglobin.
Although occlusive crises are the most common cause 
of patient morbidity and mortality, several other acute 
events complicate the course. Sequestration crises occur in 
children with intact spleens. Massive entrapment of sickle 
red cells leads to rapid splenic enlargement, hypovolemia, 
and sometimes shock. Both sequestration crises and the 
acute chest syndrome may be fatal and sometimes require 
prompt treatment with exchange transfusions. Aplastic 
crises stem from the infection of red cell progenitors by 
parvovirus B19, which causes a transient cessation of 
erythropoiesis and a sudden worsening of the anemia.
In addition to these dramatic crises, chronic tissue 
hypoxia takes a subtle but important toll. Chronic hypoxia 
is responsible for a generalized impairment of growth and 
development, as well as organ damage affecting the spleen, 
heart, kidneys, and lungs. Sickling provoked by hyperto-
nicity in the renal medulla causes damage that eventually 
leads to hyposthenuria (the inability to concentrate urine), 
which increases the propensity for dehydration and its 
attendant risks.
Increased susceptibility to infection with encapsulated 
organisms is another threat. This is due in large part to 
altered splenic function, which is severely impaired in chil-
dren by congestion and poor blood flow, and completely 
absent in adults because of splenic infarction. Defects 
of uncertain etiology in the alternative complement path­
way also impair the opsonization of bacteria. Pneumococcus 
pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae septicemia and 
meningitis are common, particularly in children, but can 
be reduced by vaccination and prophylactic antibiotics.
It must be emphasized that there is great variation in 
the clinical manifestations of sickle cell disease. Some indi-
viduals are crippled by repeated vaso-occlusive crises, 
whereas others have only mild symptoms. The basis for 
this wide range in disease expression is not understood; 
both modifying genes and environmental factors are 
suspected.
The diagnosis is suggested by the clinical findings and 
the presence of irreversibly sickled red cells and is con-
firmed by various tests for sickle hemoglobin. In general, 
these involve mixing a blood sample with an oxygen-
consuming reagent, such as metabisulfite, which induces 
sickling of red cells if HbS is present. Hemoglobin electro-
phoresis is also used to demonstrate the presence of HbS 
and exclude other sickle syndromes, such as HbSC disease. 
Prenatal diagnosis is possible by analysis of fetal DNA 
obtained by amniocentesis or chorionic biopsy.
The outlook for patients with sickle cell disease has 
improved considerably over the past 10 to 20 years. About 
90% of patients survive to age 20, and close to 50% survive 
639
Anemias
β+Thal
β0Thal
β0Thal
β+Thal
5´
3´
Exon-1
Exon-2
Exon-3
Transcription defect
RNA splicing defect
Translation defect
  
Promoter
sequence
introns, while a few are located within exons. Some of 
these mutations destroy the normal RNA splice junc-
tions and completely prevent the production of normal 
β-globin mRNA, resulting in β0-thalassemia. Others 
create an “ectopic” splice site within an intron. Because 
the flanking normal splice sites remain, both normal and 
abnormal splicing occurs and some normal β-globin 
mRNA is made, resulting in β+-thalassemia.
•	 Promoter region mutations. These mutations reduce tran-
scription by 75% to 80%. Some normal β-globin is syn-
thesized; thus, these mutations are associated with 
β+-thalassemia.
•	 Chain terminator mutations. These are the most common 
cause of β0-thalassemia. Two subtypes of mutations fall 
into this category. The most common type creates a new 
stop codon within an exon; the other introduces small 
insertions or deletions that shift the mRNA reading 
frames (frameshift mutations; see Chapter 5). Both block 
translation and prevent the synthesis of any functional 
β-globin.
Impaired β-globin synthesis results in anemia by two 
mechanisms (Fig. 14-12). The deficit in HbA synthesis 
produces “underhemoglobinized” hypochromic, micro-
cytic red cells with subnormal oxygen transport capacity. 
Even more important is the diminished survival of red 
cells and their precursors, which results from the imbal-
ance in α- and β-globin synthesis. Unpaired α chains pre-
cipitate within red cell precursors, forming insoluble 
inclusions. These inclusions cause a variety of untoward 
effects, but membrane damage is the proximal cause of 
most red cell pathology. Many red cell precursors succumb 
to membrane damage and undergo apoptosis. In severe 
β-thalassemia, it is estimated that 70% to 85% of red cell 
precursors suffer this fate, which leads to ineffective eryth-
ropoiesis. Those red cells that are released from the marrow 
also contain inclusions and have membrane damage, 
leaving theme prone to splenic sequestration and extravas-
cular hemolysis.
In severe β-thalassemia, ineffective erythropoiesis 
creates several additional problems. Erythropoietic drive 
in the setting of severe uncompensated anemia leads to 
massive erythroid hyperplasia in the marrow and exten-
sive extramedullary hematopoiesis. The expanding mass 
of red cell precursors erodes the bony cortex, impairs bone 
growth, and produces skeletal abnormalities (described 
later). Extramedullary hematopoiesis involves the liver, 
spleen, and lymph nodes, and in extreme cases produces 
extraosseous masses in the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis. 
The metabolically active erythroid progenitors steal nutri-
ents from other tissues that are already oxygen-starved, 
causing severe cachexia in untreated patients.
Another serious complication of ineffective erythropoi-
esis is excessive absorption of dietary iron. Ineffective 
erythropoiesis suppresses hepcidin, a critical negative 
regulator of iron absorption (see Iron Deficiency Anemia). 
Increased absorption of iron from the gut due to low 
hepcidin levels and the iron load of repeated blood trans-
fusions inevitably lead to severe iron accumulation 
unless preventive steps are taken. Secondary injury to 
paren­chymal organs, particularly the liver, often follows 
and 
sometimes 
induces 
secondary 
hemochromatosis 
(Chapter 18).
Clinical Syndromes.  The relationships of clinical pheno-
types to underlying genotypes are summarized in Table 
14-3. Clinical classification of β-thalassemia is based on 
the severity of the anemia, which in turn depends on the 
genetic defect (β+ or β0) and the gene dosage (homozygous 
or heterozygous). In general, individuals with two β-
thalassemia alleles (β+/β+,β+/β0, or β0/β0) have a severe, 
transfusion-dependent anemia called β-thalassemia major. 
Heterozygotes with one β-thalassemia gene and one 
normal gene (β+/β or β0/β) usually have a mild asymptom-
atic microcytic anemia. This condition is referred to as 
β-thalassemia minor or β-thalassemia trait. A third genetically 
heterogeneous variant of moderate severity is called 
β-thalassemia intermedia. This category includes milder 
variants of β+/β+ or β+/β0-thalassemia and unusual forms 
of heterozygous β-thalassemia. Some patients with β-
thalassemia intermedia have two defective β-globin genes 
and an α-thalassemia gene defect, which improves the 
effectiveness of erythropoiesis and red cell survival by less-
ening the imbalance in α- and β-chain synthesis. In other 
rare but informative cases, individuals have a single 
β-globin defect and one or two extra copies of normal 
α-globin genes (stemming from a gene duplication event), 
which worsens the chain imbalance. These unusual forms 
of the disease serve to emphasize the cardinal role of 
unpaired α-globin chains in the pathology. The clinical and 
morphologic features of β-thalassemia intermedia are not 
described separately but can be surmised from the follow-
ing discussions of β-thalassemia major and β-thalassemia 
minor.
Figure 14-11  Distribution of β-globin gene mutations associated with β-thalassemia. Arrows denote sites where point mutations giving rise to β0 or β+ 
thalassemia have been identified. 
640
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
β-Thalassemia Major.  β-Thalassemia major is most 
common in Mediterranean countries, parts of Africa, and 
Southeast Asia. In the United States the incidence is highest 
in immigrants from these areas. The anemia manifests 6 to 
9 months after birth as hemoglobin synthesis switches 
from HbF to HbA. In untransfused patients, hemoglobin 
levels are 3 to 6 gm/dL. The red cells may completely lack 
HbA (β0/β0 genotype) or contain small amounts (β+/β+ or 
β0/β+ genotypes). The major red cell hemoglobin is HbF, 
which is markedly elevated. HbA2 levels are sometimes 
high but more often are normal or low.
  MORPHOLOGY
Blood smears show severe red cell abnormalities, including 
marked variation in size (anisocytosis) and shape (poikilocyto-
sis), microcytosis, and hypochromia. Target cells (so called 
because hemoglobin collects in the center of the cell), basophilic 
stippling, and fragmented red cells are also common. Inclusions 
of aggregated α chains are efficiently removed by the spleen and 
Figure 14-12  Pathogenesis of β-thalassemia major. Note that the aggregates of unpaired α-globin chains, a hallmark of the disease, are not visible in routinely 
stained blood smears. Blood transfusions are a double-edged sword, diminishing the anemia and its attendant complications, but also adding to the systemic 
iron overload. 
HbA
(α2β2)
Normal erythroblast
Abnormal erythroblast
NORMAL
β-THALASSEMIA
Normal red blood cells
Dietary iron
Reduced β-globin synthesis,
with relative excess of α-globin
HbA
Ineffective erythropoiesis
Most erythroblasts
die in bone marrow
Tissue hypoxia
Blood
transfusions
Reduce
ANEMIA
Systemic iron overload
(secondary hemochromatosis)
Skeletal deformities
Few abnormal
red cells leave
Hypochromic red cell
Extravascular hemolysis
Destruction of
aggregate-containing
red cells in spleen
Insoluble α-globin aggregate
α-globin
aggregate
Normal HbA
Increased
iron
absorption
Erythropoietin
increase
Marrow expansion
Liver
Heart
not easily seen. The reticulocyte count is elevated, but it is lower 
than expected for the severity of anemia because of the ineffec-
tive erythropoiesis. Variable numbers of poorly hemoglobinized 
nucleated red cell precursors (normoblasts) are seen in the 
peripheral blood as a result of “stress” erythropoiesis and abnor-
mal release from sites of extramedullary hematopoiesis.
Other major alterations involve the bone marrow and spleen. 
In the untransfused patient there is a striking expansion of 
hematopoietically active marrow. In the bones of the face and 
skull the burgeoning marrow erodes existing cortical bone and 
induces new bone formation, giving rise to a “crewcut” appear-
ance on x-ray studies (Fig. 14-13). Both phagocyte hyperplasia 
and extramedullary hematopoiesis contribute to enlargement of 
the spleen, which can weigh as much as 1500 gm. The liver 
and the lymph nodes can also be enlarged by extramedullary 
hematopoiesis.
Hemosiderosis and secondary hemochromatosis, the two 
manifestations of iron overload (Chapter 18), occur in almost all 
patients. The deposited iron often damages organs, most 
notably the heart, liver, and pancreas.
641
Anemias
iron-binding capacity, and serum ferritin (see Iron 
Deficiency Anemia). The increase in HbA2 is diagnostically 
useful, particularly in individuals (such as women of child-
bearing age) who are at risk for both β-thalassemia trait 
and iron deficiency.
α-Thalassemias
The α-thalassemias are caused by inherited deletions that 
result in reduced or absent synthesis of α-globin chains. 
Normally, there are four α-globin genes, and the severity 
of α-thalassemia depends on how many α-globin genes are 
affected. As in β-thalassemias, the anemia stems both from 
a lack of adequate hemoglobin and the presence of excess 
unpaired globin chains (β, γ, and δ), which vary in type at 
different ages. In newborns with α-thalassemia, excess 
unpaired γ-globin chains form γ4 tetramers known as hemo-
globin Barts, whereas in older children and adults excess 
β-globin chains form β4 tetramers known as HbH. Because 
free β and γ chains are more soluble than free α chains and 
form fairly stable homotetramers, hemolysis and ineffec-
tive erythropoiesis are less severe than in β-thalassemias. 
A variety of molecular lesions give rise to α-thalassemia, 
but gene deletion is the most common cause of reduced 
α-chain synthesis.
Clinical Syndromes.  The clinical syndromes are deter-
mined and classified by the number of α-globin genes that 
are deleted. Each of the four α-globin genes normally con-
tributes 25% of the total α-globin chains. α-Thalassemia 
syndromes stem from combinations of deletions that 
remove one to four α-globin genes. Not surprisingly, the 
severity of the clinical syndrome is proportional to the 
number of α-globin genes that are deleted. The different 
types of α-thalassemia and their salient clinical features are 
listed in Table 14-3.
Silent Carrier State.  Silent carrier state is associated with 
the deletion of a single α-globin gene, which causes a 
barely detectable reduction in α-globin chain synthesis. 
These individuals are completely asymptomatic but have 
slight microcytosis.
α-Thalassemia Trait.  α-Thalassemia trait is caused by 
the deletion of two α-globin genes from a single chromo-
some (α/α −/−) or the deletion of one α-globin gene from 
each of the two chromosomes (α/− α/−) (Table 14-3). The 
former genotype is more common in Asian populations, 
the latter in regions of Africa. Both genotypes produce 
similar quantitative deficiencies of α-globin and are clini-
cally identical, but have different implications for the chil-
dren of affected individuals, who are at risk of clinically 
significant α-thalassemia (HbH disease or hydrops fetalis) 
only when at least one parent has the −/− haplotype. As a 
result, symptomatic α-thalassemia is relatively common in 
Asian populations and rare in black African populations. 
The clinical picture in α-thalassemia trait is identical to that 
described for β-thalassemia minor, that is, small red cells 
(microcytosis), minimal or no anemia, and no abnormal 
physical signs. HbA2 levels are normal or low.
Hemoglobin H Disease.  HbH disease is caused by deletion 
of three α-globin genes. As discussed, HbH disease is most 
common in Asian populations. With only one normal 
Figure 14-13  Thalassemia. X-ray film of the skull showing new bone formation 
on the outer table, producing perpendicular radiations resembling a crewcut. 
(Courtesy Dr. Jack Reynolds, Department of Radiology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
The clinical course of β-thalassemia major is brief unless 
blood transfusions are given. Untreated children suffer 
from growth retardation and die at an early age from the 
effects of anemia. In those who survive long enough, the 
cheekbones and other bony prominences are enlarged and 
distorted. Hepatosplenomegaly due to extramedullary 
hematopoiesis is usually present. Although blood transfu-
sions improve the anemia and suppress complications 
related to excessive erythropoiesis, they lead to complica-
tions of their own. Cardiac disease resulting from progres-
sive iron overload and secondary hemochromatosis 
(Chapter 18) is an important cause of death, particularly in 
heavily transfused patients, who must be treated with 
iron chelators to prevent or reduce this complication. With 
transfusions and iron chelation, survival into the third 
decade is possible, but the overall outlook remains guarded. 
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is the only therapy 
offering a cure and is being used increasingly. Prenatal 
diagnosis is possible by molecular analysis of DNA.
β-Thalassemia Minor.  β-Thalassemia minor is much 
more common than β-thalassemia major and understand-
ably affects the same ethnic groups. Most patients are 
heterozygous carriers of a β+ or β0 allele. These patients 
are usually asymptomatic. Anemia, if present, is mild. The 
peripheral blood smear typically shows some red cell 
abnormalities, including hypochromia, microcytosis, baso-
philic stippling, and target cells. Mild erythroid hyperpla-
sia is seen in the bone marrow. Hemoglobin electrophoresis 
usually reveals an increase in HbA2 (α2δ2) to 4% to 8% of 
the total hemoglobin (normal, 2.5% ± 0.3%), which is a 
reflection of an elevated ratio of δ-chain to β-chain synthe-
sis. HbF levels are generally normal or occasionally slightly 
increased.
Recognition of β-thalassemia trait is important for two 
reasons: (1) it superficially resembles the hypochromic 
microcytic anemia of iron deficiency, and (2) it has implica-
tions for genetic counseling. Iron deficiency can usually 
be excluded through measurement of serum iron, total 
642
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
phospholipid called glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI). In 
PNH, these GPI-linked proteins are deficient because of 
somatic mutations that inactivate PIGA. PIGA is X-linked 
and subject to lyonization (random inactivation of one X 
chromosome in cells of females; Chapter 5). As a result, a 
single acquired mutation in the active PIGA gene of any 
given cell is sufficient to produce a deficiency state. Because 
the causative mutations occur in a hematopoietic stem cell, 
all of its clonal progeny (red cells, white cells, and platelets) 
are deficient in GPI-linked proteins. Typically the mutant 
clone coexists with the progeny of normal stem cells that 
are not PIGA deficient.
Remarkably, most normal individuals harbor small 
numbers of bone marrow cells with PIGA mutations identi-
cal to those that cause PNH. It is hypothesized that these 
cells increase in numbers (thus producing clinically evident 
PNH) only in rare instances where they have a selective 
advantage, such as in the setting of autoimmune reactions 
against GPI-linked antigens. Such a scenario might explain 
the frequent association of PNH and aplastic anemia, a 
marrow failure syndrome (discussed later) that has an 
autoimmune basis in many individuals.
PNH blood cells are deficient in three GPI-linked pro-
teins that regulate complement activity: (1) decay-
accelerating factor, or CD55; (2) membrane inhibitor of 
reactive lysis, or CD59; and (3) C8 binding protein. Of these 
factors, the most important is CD59, a potent inhibitor of 
C3 convertase that prevents the spontaneous activation of 
the alternative complement pathway.
Red cells deficient in these GPI-linked factors are 
abnormally susceptible to lysis or injury by complement. 
This manifests as intravascular hemolysis, which is caused 
by the C5b-C9 membrane attack complex. The hemolysis 
is paroxysmal and nocturnal in only 25% of cases; chronic 
hemolysis without dramatic hemoglobinuria is more 
typical. The tendency for red cells to lyse at night is 
explained by a slight decrease in blood pH during sleep, 
which increases the activity of complement. The anemia is 
variable but usually mild to moderate in severity. The loss 
of heme iron in the urine (hemosiderinuria) eventually 
leads to iron deficiency, which can exacerbate the anemia 
if untreated.
Thrombosis is the leading cause of disease-related death 
in individuals with PNH. About 40% of patients suffer 
α-globin gene, the synthesis of α chains is markedly 
reduced, and tetramers of β-globin, called HbH, form. 
HbH has an extremely high affinity for oxygen and there-
fore is not useful for oxygen delivery, leading to tissue 
hypoxia disproportionate to the level of hemoglobin. 
Additionally, HbH is prone to oxidation, which causes 
it to precipitate and form intracellular inclusions that 
promote red cell sequestration and phagocytosis in the 
spleen. The result is a moderately severe anemia resem-
bling β-thalassemia intermedia.
Hydrops Fetalis.  Hydrops fetalis  is the most severe 
form of α-thalassemia and is caused by deletion of all 
four α-globin genes. In the fetus, excess γ-globin chains 
form tetramers (hemoglobin Barts) that have such a high 
affinity for oxygen that they deliver little to tissues. Survival 
in early development is due to the expression of ζ chains, 
an embryonic globin that pairs with γ chains to form a 
functional ζ2γ2 Hb tetramer. Signs of fetal distress usually 
become evident by the third trimester of pregnancy. In 
the past, severe tissue anoxia led to death in utero or 
shortly after birth; with intrauterine transfusion many 
such infants are now saved. The fetus shows severe pallor, 
generalized edema, and massive hepatosplenomegaly 
similar to that seen in hemolytic disease of the newborn 
(Chapter 10). There is a lifelong dependence on blood 
transfusions for survival, with the associated risk of iron 
overload. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation can be 
curative.
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a disease 
that results from acquired mutations in the phospha­
tidylinositol glycan complementation group A gene 
(PIGA), an enzyme that is essential for the synthesis of 
certain membrane-associated complement regulatory 
proteins. PNH has an incidence of 2 to 5 per million in the 
United States. Despite its rarity, it has fascinated hematolo-
gists because it is the only hemolytic anemia caused by an 
acquired genetic defect. Recall that proteins are anchored 
into the lipid bilayer in two ways. Most have a hydropho-
bic region that spans the cell membrane; these are called 
transmembrane proteins. The others are attached to the 
cell membrane through a covalent linkage to a specialized 
Table 14-3  Clinical and Genetic Classification of Thalassemias
Clinical Syndromes
Genotype
Clinical Features
Molecular Genetics
β-Thalassemias
β-Thalassemia major
Homozygous β-thalassemia (β0/β0, β+/β+, β0/β+)
Severe; requires blood transfusions
Mainly point mutations that lead 
to defects in the transcription, 
splicing, or translation of 
β-globin mRNA
β-Thalassemia intermedia
Variable (β0/β+, β+/β+, β0/β, β+/β)
Severe but does not require regular blood 
transfusions
β-Thalassemia minor
Heterozygous β-thalassemia (β0/β, β+/β)
Asymptomatic with mild or absent anemia; 
red cell abnormalities seen
α-Thalassemias
Silent carrier
−/α α/α
Asymptomatic; no red cell abnormality
Mainly gene deletions
α-Thalassemia trait
−/− α/α (Asian)
Asymptomatic, like β-thalassemia minor
−/α −/α (black African, Asian)
HbH disease
−/− −/α
Severe; resembles β-thalassemia intermedia
Hydrops fetalis
−/− −/−
Lethal in utero without transfusions
643
Anemias
particular defined antigens. This test is used to characterize 
the antigen target and temperature dependence of the 
responsible antibody. Quantitative immunologic tests to 
measure such antibodies directly are also available.
Warm Antibody Type.  Warm antibody type is the most 
common form of immunohemolytic anemia. About 50% of 
cases are idiopathic (primary); the others are related to a 
predisposing condition (Table 14-4) or exposure to a drug. 
Most causative antibodies are of the IgG class; less com-
monly, IgA antibodies are the culprits. The red cell hemo-
lysis is mostly extravascular. IgG-coated red cells bind to 
Fc receptors on phagocytes, which remove red cell mem-
brane during “partial” phagocytosis. As in hereditary 
spherocytosis, the loss of membrane converts the red cells 
to spherocytes, which are sequestered and destroyed in the 
spleen. Moderate splenomegaly due to hyperplasia of 
splenic phagocytes is usually seen.
As with other autoimmune disorders, the cause of 
primary immunohemolytic anemia is unknown. In many 
cases, the antibodies are directed against the Rh blood 
group antigens. The mechanisms of drug-induced immu-
nohemolytic anemia are better understood. Two different 
mechanisms have been described.
•	 Antigenic drugs. In this setting hemolysis usually follows 
large, intravenous doses of the offending drug and 
occurs 1 to 2 weeks after therapy is initiated. These 
drugs, exemplified by penicillin and cephalosporins, 
bind to the red cell membrane and are recognized by 
antidrug antibodies. Sometimes the antibodies bind 
only to the drug, as in penicillin-induced hemolysis. In 
other cases, such as in quinidine-induced hemolysis, the 
antibodies recognize a complex of the drug and a mem-
brane protein. The responsible antibodies sometimes fix 
complement and cause intravascular hemolysis, but 
more often they act as opsonins that promote extravas-
cular hemolysis within phagocytes.
•	 Tolerance-breaking drugs. These drugs, of which the anti-
hypertensive agent α-methyldopa is the prototype, 
induce in some unknown manner the production of 
antibodies against red cell antigens, particularly the Rh 
blood group antigens. About 10% of patients taking 
α-methyldopa develop autoantibodies, as assessed by 
the direct Coombs test, and roughly 1% develop clini-
cally significant hemolysis.
from venous thrombosis, often involving the hepatic, 
portal, or cerebral veins. About 5% to 10% of patients even-
tually develop acute myeloid leukemia or a myelodysplas-
tic syndrome, possibly because hematopoietic stem cells 
have suffered some type of genetic damage.
PNH is diagnosed by flow cytometry, which provides a 
sensitive means for detecting red cells that are deficient in 
GPI-linked proteins such as CD59 (Fig. 14-14). The cardinal 
role of complement activation in PNH pathogenesis has 
been proven by therapeutic use of a monoclonal antibody 
called Eculizumab that prevents the conversion of C5 to 
C5a. This inhibitor not only reduces the hemolysis and 
attendant transfusion requirements, but also lowers the 
risk of thrombosis by up to 90%. How complement activa-
tion leads to thrombosis in patients with PNH is not clear; 
the absorption of NO by free hemoglobin (discussed under 
sickle cell disease) may be one contributing factor. The 
drawbacks to C5 inhibitor therapy are its high cost and an 
increased risk of serious or fatal meningococcal infections 
(as is true in individuals with inherited complement 
defects). Immunosuppressive drugs are sometimes benefi-
cial for those with evidence of marrow aplasia. The only 
cure is hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Immunohemolytic Anemias
Hemolytic anemias in this category are caused by anti-
bodies that bind to red cells, leading to their premature 
destruction. Although these disorders are commonly 
referred to as autoimmune hemolytic anemias, the designation 
immunohemolytic anemia is preferred because in some 
instances the immune reaction is initiated by an ingested 
drug. Immunohemolytic anemia can be classified based on 
the characteristics of the responsible antibody (Table 14-4).
The diagnosis of immunohemolytic anemia requires the 
detection of antibodies and/or complement on red cells 
from the patient. This is done using the direct Coombs anti-
globulin test, in which the patient’s red cells are mixed with 
sera containing antibodies that are specific for human 
immunoglobulin or complement. If either immunoglobu-
lin or complement is present on the surface of the red cells, 
the antibodies cause agglutination, which is easily appreci-
ated visually as clumping. In the indirect Coombs antiglobu-
lin test, the patient’s serum is tested for its ability to 
agglutinate commercially available red cells bearing 
Table 14-4  Classification of Immunohemolytic Anemias
Warm Antibody Type (IgG Antibodies Active at 37°C)
Primary (idiopathic)
Secondary
Autoimmune disorders (particularly systemic lupus erythematosus)
Drugs
Lymphoid neoplasms
Cold Agglutinin Type (IgM Antibodies Active Below 37°C)
Acute (mycoplasmal infection, infectious mononucleosis)
Chronic
Idiopathic
Lymphoid neoplasms
Cold Hemolysin Type (IgG Antibodies Active Below 37°C)
Rare; occurs mainly in children following viral infections
Figure 14-14  Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). A, Flow cytogram 
of blood from a normal individual shows that the red cells express two 
phosphatidylinositol glycan (PIG)-linked membrane proteins, CD55 and 
CD59, on their surfaces. B, Flow cytogram of blood from a patient with PNH 
shows a population of red cells that is deficient in both CD55 and CD59. As 
is typical of PNH, a second population of CD55+/CD59+ red cells that is 
derived from residual normal hematopoietic stem cells is also present. 
(Courtesy Dr. Scott Rodig, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston, Mass.)
A
CD55
CD59
CD55
CD59
B
644
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
Figure 14-15  Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. A peripheral blood smear 
from a person with hemolytic-uremic syndrome shows several fragmented 
red cells. (Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna, Department of Pathology, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
  KEY CONCEPTS
Hereditary Spherocytosis
■ Autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations that 
affect the red cell membrane skeleton, leading to loss of 
membrane and eventual conversion of red cells to sphe-
rocytes, which are phagocytosed and removed in the 
spleen
■ Manifested by anemia, splenomegaly
Thalassemias
■ Autosomal codominant disorders caused by mutations in 
α- or β-globin that reduce hemoglobin synthesis, resulting 
in a microcytic, hypochromic anemia.
■ In β-thalassemia, unpaired α-globin chains form aggre-
gates that damage red cell precursors and further impair 
erythropoiesis.
Sickle Cell Anemia
■ Autosomal recessive disorder resulting from a mutation 
in β-globin that causes deoxygenated hemoglobin to 
self-associate into long polymers that distort (sickle) the 
red cell
■ Blockage of vessels by sickled cells causes pain crises and 
tissue infarction, particularly of the marrow and spleen
■ Red cell membrane damage caused by repeated bouts of 
sickling results in a moderate to severe hemolytic anemia
Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency
■ X-linked disorder caused by mutations that destabilize 
G6PD, making red cells susceptible to oxidant damage
Immunohemolytic Anemias
■ Caused by antibodies against either normal red cell con-
stituents or antigens modified by haptens (e.g., drugs)
■ Antibody binding results in either red cell opsonization and 
extravascular hemolysis or (uncommonly) complement 
fixation and intravascular hemolysis
Cold Agglutinin Type.  Cold agglutinin type  of immuno-
hemolytic anemia is caused by IgM antibodies that bind 
red cells avidly at low temperatures (0°C to 4°C). It is less 
common than warm antibody immunohemolytic anemia, 
accounting for 15% to 30% of cases. Cold agglutinin anti-
bodies sometimes appear transiently following certain 
infections, such as with Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Epstein-
Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, influenza virus, and human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). In these settings the dis­
order is self-limited and the antibodies rarely induce 
clinically important hemolysis. Chronic cold agglutinin 
immunohemolytic anemia occurs in association with 
certain B-cell neoplasms or as an idiopathic condition.
Clinical symptoms result from binding of IgM to red 
cells in vascular beds where the temperature may fall 
below 30°C, such as in exposed fingers, toes, and ears. IgM 
binding agglutinates red cells and fixes complement 
rapidly. As the blood recirculates and warms, IgM is 
released, usually before complement-mediated hemolysis 
can occur. However, the transient interaction with IgM is 
sufficient to deposit sublytic quantities of C3b, an excellent 
opsonin, which leads to the removal of affected red cells 
by phagocytes in the spleen, liver, and bone marrow. The 
hemolysis is of variable severity. Vascular obstruction 
caused by agglutinated red cells results in pallor, cyanosis, 
and Raynaud phenomenon (Chapter 11) in body parts 
exposed to cold temperature.
Cold Hemolysin Type.  Cold hemolysins are autoantibod-
ies responsible for an unusual entity known as paroxysmal 
cold hemoglobinuria. This rare disorder causes substantial, 
sometimes fatal, intravascular hemolysis and hemoglobin-
uria. The autoantibodies are IgGs that bind to the P blood 
group antigen on the red cell surface in cool, peripheral 
regions of the body. Complement-mediated lysis occurs 
when the cells recirculate to warm central regions, because 
the complement cascade functions more efficiently at 37°C. 
Most cases are seen in children following viral infections; 
in this setting the disorder is transient, and most of those 
affected recover within 1 month.
Treatment of warm antibody immunohemolytic anemia 
centers on the removal of initiating factors (i.e., drugs); 
when this is not feasible, immunosuppressive drugs and 
splenectomy are the mainstays. Chronic cold agglutinin 
immunohemolytic anemia caused by IgM antibodies is 
more difficult to treat.
Hemolytic Anemia Resulting from Trauma to Red Cells
The most significant hemolysis caused by trauma to red 
cells is seen in individuals with cardiac valve prostheses 
and microangiopathic disorders. Artificial mechanical 
cardiac valves are more frequently implicated than are bio-
prosthetic porcine or bovine valves. The hemolysis stems 
from shear forces produced by turbulent blood flow and 
pressure gradients across damaged valves. Microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia is most commonly seen with disseminated 
intravascular coagulation, but it also occurs in thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), hemolytic-uremic syn-
drome (HUS), malignant hypertension, systemic lupus 
erythematosus, and disseminated cancer. The common 
pathogenic feature in these disorders is a microvascular 
lesion that results in luminal narrowing, often due to the 
deposition of fibrin and platelets. These vascular changes 
produce shear stresses that mechanically injure passing red 
cells. Regardless of the cause, traumatic damage leads to 
the appearance of red cell fragments (schistocytes), “burr 
cells,” “helmet cells,” and “triangle cells” in blood smears 
(Fig. 14-15).
645
Anemias
of vitamin B12 deficiency anemia) and folate deficiency 
anemia.
Some of the metabolic roles of vitamin B12 and folate 
are considered later. For now it suffices that vitamin B12 
and folic acid are coenzymes required for the synthesis 
of thymidine, one of the four bases found in DNA. A defi-
ciency of these vitamins or impairment in their metabolism 
results in defective nuclear maturation due to deranged or 
inadequate DNA synthesis, with an attendant delay or 
block in cell division.
Table 14-5  Causes of Megaloblastic Anemia
Vitamin B12 Deficiency
Decreased Intake
Inadequate diet, vegetarianism
Impaired Absorption
Intrinsic factor deficiency
Pernicious anemia
Gastrectomy
Malabsorption states
Diffuse intestinal disease (e.g., lymphoma, systemic sclerosis)
Ileal resection, ileitis
Competitive parasitic uptake
Fish tapeworm infestation
Bacterial overgrowth in blind loops and diverticula of bowel
Folic Acid Deficiency
Decreased Intake
Inadequate diet, alcoholism, infancy
Impaired Absorption
Malabsorption states
Intrinsic intestinal disease
Anticonvulsants, oral contraceptives
Increased Loss
Hemodialysis
Increased Requirement
Pregnancy, infancy, disseminated cancer, markedly increased hematopoiesis
Impaired Utilization
Folic acid antagonists
Unresponsive to Vitamin B12 or Folic Acid Therapy
Metabolic Inhibitors of DNA Synthesis and/or Folate Metabolism  
(e.g., Methotrexate)
Modified from Beck WS: Megaloblastic anemias. In Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH (eds): Cecil 
Textbook of Medicine, 18th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1988, p. 900.
Anemias of Diminished Erythropoiesis
Although the anemias that stem from the inadequate pro-
duction of red cells are heterogeneous, they can be classi-
fied into several major categories based on pathophysiology 
(Table 14-1). The most common and important anemias 
associated with red cell underproduction are those caused 
by nutritional deficiencies, followed by those that arise 
secondary to renal failure and chronic inflammation. Also 
included are less common disorders that lead to general-
ized bone marrow failure, such as aplastic anemia, primary 
hematopoietic neoplasms (Chapter 13), and infiltrative dis-
orders that lead to marrow replacement (e.g., metastatic 
cancer and disseminated granulomatous disease). We first 
discuss the extrinsic causes of diminished erythropoiesis, 
which are more common and clinically important, and 
then nonneoplastic intrinsic causes.
Megaloblastic Anemias
The common theme among the various causes of mega-
loblastic anemia is an impairment of DNA synthesis that 
leads to ineffective hematopoiesis and distinctive mor-
phologic changes, including abnormally large erythroid 
precursors and red cells. The causes of megaloblastic 
anemias are given in Table 14-5. The following discussion 
first describes the common features and then turns to the 
two principal types: pernicious anemia (the major form 
  MORPHOLOGY
Certain peripheral blood findings are shared by all megaloblastic 
anemias. The presence of red cells that are macrocytic and oval 
(macro-ovalocytes) is highly characteristic. Because they are 
larger than normal and contain ample hemoglobin, most mac-
rocytes lack the central pallor of normal red cells and even 
appear “hyperchromic,” but the MCHC is not elevated. There 
is marked variation in the size (anisocytosis) and shape (poikilo-
cytosis) of red cells. The reticulocyte count is low. Nucleated 
red cell progenitors occasionally appear in the circulating blood 
when anemia is severe. Neutrophils are also larger than normal 
(macropolymorphonuclear) and show nuclear hypersegmen-
tation, having five or more nuclear lobules instead of the normal 
three to four (Fig. 14-16).
The marrow is usually markedly hypercellular as a result of 
increased hematopoietic precursors, which often completely 
replace the fatty marrow. Megaloblastic changes are detected 
at all stages of erythroid development. The most primitive cells 
(promegaloblasts) are large, with a deeply basophilic cytoplasm, 
prominent nucleoli, and a distinctive, fine nuclear chromatin 
pattern (Fig. 14-17). As these cells differentiate and begin to 
accumulate hemoglobin, the nucleus retains its finely distributed 
chromatin and fails to develop the clumped pyknotic chromatin 
typical of normoblasts. While nuclear maturation is delayed, 
cytoplasmic maturation and hemoglobin accumulation proceed 
at a normal pace, leading to nuclear-to-cytoplasmic asyn-
chrony. Because DNA synthesis is impaired in all proliferating 
cells, granulocytic precursors also display dysmaturation  
in the form of giant metamyelocytes and band forms. 
Megakaryocytes, too, can be abnormally large and have bizarre, 
multilobate nuclei.
The marrow hyperplasia is a response to increased levels of 
growth factors, such as erythropoietin. However, the derange-
ment in DNA synthesis causes most precursors to undergo 
apoptosis in the marrow (an example of ineffective hematopoi-
esis) and leads to pancytopenia. The anemia is further exacer-
bated by a mild degree of red cell hemolysis of uncertain 
etiology.
Anemias of Vitamin B12 Deficiency: Pernicious Anemia
Pernicious anemia is a specific form of megaloblastic 
anemia caused by an autoimmune gastritis that impairs 
the production of intrinsic factor, which is required for 
vitamin B12 uptake from the gut.
Normal Vitamin B12 Metabolism.  Vitamin B12 is a complex 
organometallic compound also known as cobalamin. 
Under normal circumstances humans are totally depen-
dent on dietary vitamin B12. Microorganisms are the source 
of cobalamin in the food chain. Plants and vegetables 
contain little cobalamin, save that contributed by microbial 
646
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
contamination, and strictly vegetarian or macrobiotic diets 
do not provide adequate amounts of this essential nutrient. 
The daily requirement is 2 to 3 µg. A diet that includes 
animal products contains significantly larger amounts and 
normally results in the accumulation of intrahepatic stores 
of vitamin B12 that are sufficient to last for several years.
Absorption of vitamin B12 requires intrinsic factor, 
which is secreted by the parietal cells of the fundic 
mucosa (Fig. 14-18). Vitamin B12 is freed from binding pro-
teins in food through the action of pepsin in the stomach 
and binds to a salivary protein called haptocorrin. In the 
duodenum, bound vitamin B12 is released from haptocorrin 
by the action of pancreatic proteases and it associates with 
intrinsic factor. This complex is transported to the ileum, 
where it is endocytosed by ileal enterocytes that express a 
receptor for intrinsic factor called cubilin on their surfaces. 
Within ileal cells, vitamin B12 associates with a major carrier 
Figure 14-18  Schematic illustration of vitamin B12 absorption. IF, Intrinsic 
factor; haptocorrin, cubilin, see text. 
Diet
Salivary
fluid
B12
Binding protein
Haptocorrin
Haptocorrin-B12 complex
Gastric
parietal
cells
Intrinsic factor
Pancreas
Proteases
Pepsin
Splitting of
Haptocorrin-B12 complex
IF-B12
complex
Ileum
Ileal cell
IF receptor (cubulin)
Transcobalamin II
Portal
vein
Figure 14-16  Megaloblastic anemia. A peripheral blood smear shows a 
hypersegmented neutrophil with a six-lobed nucleus. (Courtesy Dr. Robert 
W. McKenna, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
Figure 14-17  Megaloblastic anemia (bone marrow aspirate). A to C, 
Megaloblasts in various stages of differentiation. Note that the orthochromatic 
megaloblast (B) is hemoglobinized (as revealed by cytoplasmic color), but in 
contrast to normal orthochromatic normoblasts, the nucleus is not pyknotic. 
The early erythroid precursors (A and C) and the granulocytic precursors 
are also large and have abnormally immature chromatin. (Courtesy Dr. Jose 
Hernandez, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
647
Anemias
protein, transcobalamin II, and is secreted into the plasma. 
Transcobalamin II delivers vitamin B12 to the liver and 
other cells of the body, including rapidly proliferating cells 
in the bone marrow and the gastrointestinal tract. In addi-
tion to this major pathway, there is also a poorly under-
stood alternative uptake mechanism that is not dependent 
on intrinsic factor or an intact terminal ileum. Up to 1% of 
a large oral dose can be absorbed by this pathway, making 
it feasible to treat pernicious anemia with high doses of oral 
vitamin B12.
Biochemical Functions of Vitamin B12.  Only two reactions 
in humans are known to require vitamin B12. In one, 
methylcobalamin serves as an essential cofactor in the 
conversion of homocysteine to methionine by methionine 
synthase (Fig. 14-19). In the process, methylcobalamin 
yields a methyl group that is recovered from N5-
methyltetrahydrofolic acid (N5-methyl FH4), the principal 
form of folic acid in plasma. In the same reaction, N5-
methyl FH4 is converted to tetrahydrofolic acid (FH4). FH4 
is crucial, because it is required (through its derivative 
N5,10-methylene FH4) for the conversion of deoxyuridine 
monophosphate (dUMP) to deoxythymidine monophos-
phate (dTMP), a building block for DNA. It is postulated 
that the fundamental cause of the impaired DNA synthesis 
in vitamin B12 deficiency is the reduced availability of FH4, 
most of which is “trapped” as N5-methyl FH4. The FH4 
deficit may be further exacerbated by an “internal” folate 
deficiency caused by a failure to synthesize metabolically 
active polyglutamylated forms. This stems from the 
requirement for vitamin B12 in the synthesis of methionine, 
which contributes a carbon group needed in the metabolic 
reactions that create folate polyglutamates (Fig. 14-20). 
Whatever the mechanism, lack of folate is the proximate 
cause of anemia in vitamin B12 deficiency, because the 
anemia improves with administration of folic acid.
The neurologic complications associated with vitamin 
B12 deficiency are more enigmatic, because they are not 
improved (and may actually be worsened) by folate admin-
istration. The other known reaction that depends 
on vitamin B12 is the isomerization of methylmalonyl 
coenzyme A to succinyl coenzyme A, which requires 
adeno­sylcobalamin as a prosthetic group on the enzyme 
methylmalonyl-coenzyme A mutase. A deficiency of vitamin 
B12 thus leads to increased plasma and urine levels of meth-
ylmalonic acid. Interruption of this reaction and the conse-
quent buildup of methylmalonate and propionate (a 
precursor) could lead to the formation and incorporation 
of abnormal fatty acids into neuronal lipids. It has been 
suggested that this biochemical abnormality predisposes 
to myelin breakdown and thereby produces the neurologic 
complications of vitamin B12 deficiency (Chapter 28). 
However, rare individuals with hereditary deficiencies of 
methylmalonyl-coenzyme A mutase do not suffer from the 
neurologic abnormalities seen in vitamin B12 deficiency, 
casting doubt on this explanation.
Pernicious Anemia
Incidence.  Although somewhat more prevalent in Scan­
dinavian and other Caucasian populations, pernicious 
anemia occurs in all racial groups, including blacks and 
Hispanics. It is a disease of older adults; the median age 
at diagnosis is 60 years, and it is rare in people younger 
than 30. A genetic predisposition is strongly suspected, 
but no definable genetic pattern of transmission has been 
discerned. As described later, many affected individuals 
have a tendency to form antibodies against multiple 
self-antigens.
Pathogenesis.  Pernicious anemia is believed to result from 
an autoimmune attack on the gastric mucosa. Histologically, 
there is a chronic atrophic gastritis marked by a loss of pari-
etal cells, a prominent infiltrate of lymphocytes and plasma 
cells, and megaloblastic changes in mucosal cells similar to 
those found in erythroid precursors. Three types of auto-
antibodies are present in many, but not all, patients. About 
75% of patients have a type I antibody that blocks the binding 
of vitamin B12 to intrinsic factor. Type I antibodies are 
found in both plasma and gastric juice. Type II antibodies 
prevent binding of the intrinsic factor-vitamin B12 complex 
to its ileal receptor. These antibodies are also found in a 
large proportion of patients with pernicious anemia. Type 
III antibodies are present in 85% to 90% of patients and 
recognize the α and β subunits of the gastric proton 
pump, which is normally localized to the microvilli of 
the canalicular system of the gastric parietal cell. Type III 
Figure 14-19  Relationship of N5-methyl FH4, methionine synthase, and 
thymidylate synthetase. In cobalamin (Cbl) deficiency, folate is sequestered 
as N5-methyl FH4. This ultimately deprives thymidylate synthetase of its folate 
coenzyme (N5,10-methylene FH4), thereby impairing DNA synthesis. FH4, 
Tetrahydrofolic acid. 
dUMP
Methyl-Cbl
dTMP
DNA
N5, 10–Methylene FH4
N5–Methyl FH4
Methionine
Homocysteine
FH4
–Cbl
Thymidylate Synthetase
Methionine Synthase
Figure 14-20  Role of folate derivatives in the transfer of one-carbon fragments 
for synthesis of biologic macromolecules. FH4, Tetrahydrofolic acid; FH2, 
dihydrofolic acid; FIGlu, formiminoglutamate; dTMP, deoxythymidine 
monophosphate. 
dTMP
Purines,
methionine
One-carbon
fragments
derived from
serine, FIGlu
FH4 derivatives
(one-carbon
donor pool)
One-carbon fragments
used in synthesis of
FH4
(one-carbon acceptor)
FH2
648
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
Clinical Features
Pernicious anemia is insidious in onset, and the anemia is 
often quite severe by the time it comes to medical attention. 
The course is progressive unless halted by therapy.
The diagnosis is based on (1) a moderate to severe meg-
aloblastic anemia, (2) leukopenia with hypersegmented 
granulocytes, (3) low serum vitamin B12, and (4) elevated 
serum levels of homocysteine and methylmalonic acid. The 
diagnosis is confirmed by an outpouring of reticulocytes 
and a rise in hematocrit levels beginning about 5 days after 
parenteral administration of vitamin B12. Serum antibodies 
to intrinsic factor are highly specific for pernicious anemia. 
Their presence attests to the cause rather than the presence 
or absence of vitamin B12 deficiency.
Persons with atrophy and metaplasia of the gastric 
mucosa associated with pernicious anemia have an 
increased risk of gastric carcinoma (Chapter 17). Elevated 
homocysteine levels are a risk factor for atherosclerosis and 
thrombosis, and it is suspected that vitamin B12 deficiency 
may increase the incidence of vascular disease on this 
basis. With parenteral or high-dose oral vitamin B12, the 
anemia is cured and the progression of the peripheral neu-
rologic disease can be reversed or at least halted, but the 
changes in the gastric mucosa and the risk of carcinoma 
are unaffected.
Anemia of Folate Deficiency
A deficiency of folic acid (more properly, pteroylmono-
glutamic acid) results in a megaloblastic anemia having 
the same pathologic features as that caused by vitamin 
B12 deficiency. FH4 derivatives act as intermediates in the 
transfer of one-carbon units such as formyl and methyl 
groups to various compounds (Fig. 14-20). FH4 serves as 
an acceptor of one-carbon fragments from compounds 
such as serine and formiminoglutamic acid. The FH4 deriv-
atives so generated in turn donate the acquired one-carbon 
fragments in reactions synthesizing various metabolites. 
FH4, then, can be viewed as the biologic “middleman” in 
a series of swaps involving one-carbon moieties. The most 
important metabolic processes depending on such trans-
fers are (1) purine synthesis; (2) the conversion of homo-
cysteine to methionine, a reaction also requiring vitamin 
B12; and (3) deoxythymidylate monophosphate (dTMP) 
synthesis. In the first two reactions, tetrahydrofolate (FH4) 
is regenerated from its one-carbon carrier derivatives and 
is available to accept another one-carbon moiety and 
reenter the donor pool. In the synthesis of dTMP, a dihy-
drofolate (FH2) is produced that must be reduced by dihy-
drofolate reductase for reentry into the FH4 pool. The 
reductase step is significant, because this enzyme is sus-
ceptible to inhibition by various drugs. Among the mole-
cules whose synthesis is dependent on folates, dTMP is 
perhaps the most important biologically, because it is 
required for DNA synthesis. It should be apparent from 
this discussion that suppressed synthesis of DNA, the 
common denominator of folic acid and vitamin B12 defi-
ciency, is the immediate cause of megaloblastosis.
Etiology.  The three major causes of folic acid deficiency 
are (1) decreased intake, (2) increased requirements, and 
(3) impaired utilization (Table 14-5). Humans are entirely 
dependent on dietary sources for their folic acid 
antibodies are not specific, in that they are found in as 
many as 50% of older adults with idiopathic chronic gas-
tritis not associated with pernicious anemia.
Autoantibodies are of diagnostic utility, but they are not 
thought to be the primary cause of the gastric pathology; 
rather, it seems that an autoreactive T-cell response initi-
ates gastric mucosal injury and triggers the formation of 
autoantibodies. When the mass of intrinsic factor-secreting 
cells falls below a threshold (and reserves of stored vitamin 
B12 are depleted), anemia develops. The common associa-
tion of pernicious anemia with other autoimmune disor-
ders, particularly autoimmune thyroiditis and adrenalitis, 
is also consistent with an underlying immune basis. The 
tendency to develop pernicious anemia (as well as other 
autoimmune disorders) is linked to genetic variants involv-
ing the inflammasome, suggesting that altered innate 
immunity may also play some role.
Vitamin B12 deficiency is associated with disorders other 
than pernicious anemia. Most of these impair absorption 
of the vitamin at one of the steps outlined earlier (Table 
14-5). With achlorhydria and loss of pepsin secretion 
(which occurs in some older adults), vitamin B12 is not 
readily released from proteins in food. With gastrectomy, 
intrinsic factor is not available for uptake in the ileum. 
With loss of exocrine pancreatic function, vitamin B12 
cannot be released from haptocorrin-vitamin B12 com-
plexes. Ileal resection or diffuse ileal disease can remove or 
damage the site of intrinsic factor-vitamin B12 complex 
absorption. Certain tapeworms (particularly those acquired 
by eating raw fish) compete with the host for B12 and can 
induce a deficiency state. In some settings, such as preg-
nancy, hyperthyroidism, disseminated cancer, and chronic 
infection, an increased demand for vitamin B12 can produce 
a relative deficiency, even with normal absorption.
  MORPHOLOGY
The findings in the bone marrow and blood in pernicious anemia 
are similar to those described earlier for all megaloblastic 
anemias. The stomach typically shows diffuse chronic gastritis 
(Chapter 17). The most characteristic alteration is fundic gland 
atrophy, affecting both chief cells and parietal cells, the latter 
being virtually absent. The glandular epithelium is replaced by 
mucus-secreting goblet cells that resemble those lining the 
large intestine, a form of metaplasia referred to as intestinal-
ization. Some of the cells as well as their nuclei may increase 
to double the normal size, a “megaloblastic” change analogous 
to that seen in the marrow. With time, the tongue may become 
shiny, glazed, and “beefy” (atrophic glossitis). The gastric 
atrophy and metaplastic changes are due to autoimmunity and 
not vitamin B12 deficiency; hence, parenteral administration of 
vitamin B12 corrects the megaloblastic changes in the marrow 
and the epithelial cells of the alimentary tract, but gastric atrophy 
and achlorhydria persist.
Central nervous system lesions are found in about three 
fourths of all cases of florid pernicious anemia but can also be 
seen in the absence of overt hematologic findings. The principal 
alterations involve the cord, where there is demyelination of 
the dorsal and lateral spinal tracts, sometimes followed by 
loss of axons. These changes give rise to spastic paraparesis, 
sensory ataxia, and severe paresthesias in the lower limbs. Less 
frequently, degenerative changes occur in the ganglia of the 
posterior roots and in peripheral nerves (Chapter 28).
649
Anemias
therapy. As already mentioned, folate does not prevent 
(and may even exacerbate) the neurologic deficits seen in 
vitamin B12 deficiency states. It is thus essential to exclude 
vitamin B12 deficiency in megaloblastic anemia before ini-
tiating therapy with folate.
Iron Deficiency Anemia
Deficiency of iron is the most common nutritional disor-
der in the world and results in a clinical signs and symp-
toms that are mostly related to inadequate hemoglobin 
synthesis. Although the prevalence of iron deficiency 
anemia is higher in developing countries, this form of 
anemia is common in the United States, particularly in 
toddlers, adolescent girls, and women of childbearing age. 
The factors underlying the iron deficiency differ somewhat 
in various population groups and can be best considered 
in the context of normal iron metabolism.
Iron Metabolism.  The normal daily Western diet contains 
about 10 to 20 mg of iron, most in the form of heme con-
tained in animal products, with the remainder being inor-
ganic iron in vegetables. About 20% of heme iron (in 
contrast to 1% to 2% of nonheme iron) is absorbable, so the 
average Western diet contains sufficient iron to balance 
fixed daily losses. The total body iron content is normally 
about 2.5 gm in women and as high as 6 gm in men, and 
can be divided into functional and storage compartments 
(Table 14-6). About 80% of the functional iron is found in 
hemoglobin; myoglobin and iron-containing enzymes such 
as catalase and the cytochromes contain the rest. The 
storage pool represented by hemosiderin and ferritin con-
tains about 15% to 20% of total body iron. The major sites 
of iron storage are the liver and mononuclear phagocytes. 
Healthy young females have smaller stores of iron than do 
males, primarily because of blood loss during menstrua-
tion, and often develop iron deficiency due to excessive 
losses or increased demands associated with menstruation 
and pregnancy, respectively.
Iron in the body is recycled between the functional and 
storage pools (Fig. 14-21). It is transported in plasma by 
an iron-binding glycoprotein called transferrin, which is 
synthesized in the liver. In normal individuals, transferrin 
is about one third saturated with iron, yielding serum iron 
levels that average 120 µg/dL in men and 100 µg/dL in 
women. The major function of plasma transferrin is to 
deliver iron to cells, including erythroid precursors, 
which require iron to synthesize hemoglobin. Erythroid 
precursors possess high-affinity receptors for transferrin 
that mediate iron import through receptor-mediated 
endocytosis.
requirement, which is 50 to 200 µg daily. Most normal diets 
contain ample amounts. The richest sources are green veg-
etables such as lettuce, spinach, asparagus, and broccoli. 
Certain fruits (e.g., lemons, bananas, melons) and animal 
sources (e.g., liver) contain lesser amounts. The folic acid 
in these foods is largely in the form of folylpolyglutamates. 
Despite their abundance in raw foods, polyglutamates are 
sensitive to heat; boiling, steaming, or frying of foods for 5 
to 10 minutes destroys up to 95% of the folate content. 
Intestinal conjugases split the polyglutamates into mono-
glutamates that are readily absorbed in the proximal 
jejunum. During intestinal absorption they are modified to 
5-methyltetrahydrofolate, the normal transport form of 
folate. The body’s reserves of folate are relatively modest, 
and a deficiency can arise within weeks to months if intake 
is inadequate.
Decreased intake can result from either a nutritionally 
inadequate diet or impairment of intestinal absorption. A 
normal diet contains folate in excess of the minimal daily 
adult requirement. Inadequate dietary intakes are almost 
invariably associated with grossly deficient diets. Such 
dietary inadequacies are most frequently encountered in 
chronic alcoholics, the indigent, and the very old. In alco-
holics with cirrhosis, other mechanisms of folate deficiency 
such as trapping of folate within the liver, excessive urinary 
loss, and disordered folate metabolism have also been 
implicated. Under these circumstances, the megaloblastic 
anemia is often accompanied by general malnutrition and 
manifestations of other avitaminoses, including cheilosis, 
glossitis, and dermatitis. Malabsorption syndromes, such 
as sprue, can lead to inadequate absorption of this nutrient, 
as can diffuse infiltrative diseases of the small intestine 
(e.g., lymphoma). In addition, certain drugs, particularly 
the anticonvulsant phenytoin and oral contraceptives, 
interfere with absorption.
Despite normal intake of folic acid, a relative deficiency 
can be encountered when requirements are increased. 
Conditions in which this is seen include pregnancy, infancy, 
derangements associated with hyperactive hematopoiesis 
(hemolytic anemias), and disseminated cancer. In all these 
circumstances the demands of increased DNA synthesis 
render normal intake inadequate.
Folic acid antagonists, such as methotrexate, inhibit dihy-
drofolate reductase and lead to a deficiency of FH4. With 
inhibition of folate metabolism, all rapidly growing cells 
are affected, but particularly the cells of the bone marrow 
and the gastrointestinal tract. Many chemotherapeutic 
drugs used in the treatment of cancer damage DNA or 
inhibit DNA synthesis through other mechanisms; these 
can also cause megaloblastic changes in rapidly dividing 
cells.
As mentioned at the outset, the megaloblastic anemia 
that results from a deficiency of folic acid is identical to that 
encountered in vitamin B12 deficiency. Thus, the diagnosis 
of folate deficiency can be made only by demonstration of 
decreased folate levels in the serum or red cells. As in 
vitamin B12 deficiency, serum homocysteine levels are 
increased, but methylmalonate concentrations are normal. 
Importantly, neurologic changes do not occur.
Although prompt hematologic response heralded by 
reticulocytosis follows the administration of folic acid, it 
should be remembered that the hematologic symptoms of 
vitamin B12 deficiency anemia also respond to folate 
Table 14-6  Iron Distribution in Healthy Young Adults (mg)
Pool
Men
Women
Total
3450
2450
Functional
2100
1750
  Hemoglobin
300
250
  Myoglobin
50
50
  Enzymes
Storage
1000
400
  Ferritin, hemosiderin
650
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
regulating the absorption of dietary iron in the proximal 
duodenum. There is no regulated pathway for iron excre-
tion, which is limited to the 1 to 2 mg lost each day through 
the shedding of mucosal and skin epithelial cells. In con-
trast, as body iron stores increase, absorption falls, and vice 
versa.
The pathways responsible for the absorption of iron are 
now understood in reasonable detail (Fig. 14-22), and differ 
partially for nonheme and heme iron. Luminal nonheme 
iron is mostly in the Fe3+ (ferric) state and must first be 
reduced to Fe2+ (ferrous) iron by ferrireductases, such as b 
cytochromes and STEAP3. Fe2+ iron is then transported 
across the apical membrane by divalent metal transporter 
1 (DMT1). The absorption of nonheme iron is variable and 
often inefficient, being inhibited by substances in the diet 
that bind and stabilize Fe3+ iron and enhanced by sub-
stances that stabilize Fe2+ iron (described later). Frequently, 
less than 5% of dietary nonheme iron is absorbed. In con-
trast, about 25% of the heme iron derived from hemoglo-
bin, myoglobin, and other animal proteins is absorbed. 
Heme iron is moved across the apical membrane into the 
cytoplasm through transporters that are incompletely char-
acterized. Here, it is metabolized to release Fe2+ iron, which 
enters a common pool with nonheme Fe2+ iron.
Iron that enters the duodenal cells can follow one of two 
pathways: transport to the blood or storage as mucosal 
iron. This distribution is influenced by body iron stores. 
Fe2+ iron destined for the circulation is transported from 
the cytoplasm across the basolateral enterocyte membrane 
by ferroportin. This process is coupled to the oxidation of 
Fe2+ iron to Fe3+ iron, which is carried out by the iron oxi-
dases hephaestin and ceruloplasmin. Newly absorbed Fe3+ 
iron binds rapidly to the plasma protein transferrin, which 
delivers iron to red cell progenitors in the marrow (Fig. 
14-21). Both DMT1 and ferroportin are widely distributed 
in the body and are involved in iron transport in other 
tissues as well. For example, DMT1 also mediates the 
uptake of “functional” iron (derived from endocytosed 
transferrin) across lysosomal membranes into the cytosol 
of red cell precursors in the bone marrow, and ferroportin 
plays an important role in the release of storage iron from 
macrophages.
Iron absorption is regulated by hepcidin, a small circu-
lating peptide that is synthesized and released from the 
liver in response to increases in intrahepatic iron levels. 
Hepcidin inhibits iron transfer from the enterocyte to 
plasma by binding to ferroportin and causing it to be endo-
cytosed and degraded. As a result, as hepcidin levels rise, 
iron becomes trapped within duodenal cells in the form of 
mucosal ferritin and is lost as these cells are sloughed. 
Thus, when the body is replete with iron, high hepcidin 
levels inhibit its absorption into the blood. Conversely, 
with low body stores of iron, hepcidin synthesis falls and 
this in turn facilitates iron absorption. By inhibiting ferro-
portin, hepcidin not only reduces iron uptake from entero-
cytes but also suppresses iron release from macrophages, 
which are an important source of the iron that is used by 
erythroid precursors to make hemoglobin. This, as we shall 
see, is important in the pathogenesis of anemia of chronic 
diseases.
Alterations in hepcidin have a central role in diseases 
involving disturbances of iron metabolism. This is illus-
trated by the following examples.
Free iron is highly toxic (Chapter 18), and it is therefore 
important that storage iron be sequestered. This is achieved 
by binding of iron in the storage pool to either ferritin or 
hemosiderin. Ferritin is a ubiquitous protein-iron complex 
that is found at highest levels in the liver, spleen, bone 
marrow, and skeletal muscles. In the liver, most ferritin is 
stored within the parenchymal cells; in other tissues, such 
as the spleen and the bone marrow, it is found mainly in 
macrophages. Hepatocyte iron is derived from plasma 
transferrin, whereas storage iron in macrophages is derived 
from the breakdown of red cells. Intracellular ferritin is 
located in the cytosol and in lysosomes, in which partially 
degraded protein shells of ferritin aggregate into hemosid-
erin granules. Iron in hemosiderin is chemically reactive 
and turns blue-black when exposed to potassium ferrocya-
nide, which is the basis for the Prussian blue stain. With 
normal iron stores, only trace amounts of hemosiderin are 
found in the body, principally in macrophages in the bone 
marrow, spleen, and liver, most being stored as ferritin. In 
iron-overloaded cells, most iron is stored in hemosiderin.
Because plasma ferritin is derived largely from the 
storage pool of body iron, its levels correlate well with 
body iron stores. In iron deficiency, serum ferritin is below 
12 µg/L, whereas in iron overload values approaching 
5000 µg/L may be seen. Of physiologic importance, the 
storage iron pool can be readily mobilized if iron require-
ments increase, as may occur after loss of blood.
Iron is both essential for cellular metabolism and highly 
toxic in excess, and total body iron stores must therefore 
be regulated meticulously. Iron balance is maintained by 
Figure 14-21  Iron metabolism. Iron absorbed from the gut is bound to plasma 
transferrin and transported to the marrow, where it is delivered to developing 
red cells and incorporated into hemoglobin. Mature red cells are released 
into the circulation and, after 120 days, are ingested by macrophages, 
primarily 
in 
the 
spleen, 
liver, 
and 
bone 
marrow. 
Here 
iron  
is extracted from hemoglobin and recycled to plasma transferrin. At 
equilibrium, iron absorbed from the gut is balanced by losses in shed 
keratinocytes, enterocytes, and (in women) endometrium. 
Circulating
erythrocytes
Intestinal
absorption
Plasma
transferrin
iron
Marrow
erythroid
precursors
Skin, gut,
endometrium
Shedding,
blood loss
(1–2 mg/day)
Mononuclear
phagocyte
stores
Liver
651
Anemias
enhanced by ascorbic acid, citric acid, amino acids, and 
sugars in the diet, and inhibited by tannates (found in tea), 
carbonates, oxalates, and phosphates.
Dietary lack is rare in developed countries, where on 
average about two thirds of the dietary iron is in the readily 
absorbed heme form provided by meat. The situation is 
different in developing countries, where food is less abun-
dant and most iron in the diet is found in plants in the 
poorly absorbable inorganic form. Dietary iron inadequacy 
occurs in even privileged societies in the following groups:
•	 Infants, who are at high risk due to the very small 
amounts of iron in milk. Human breast milk provides 
only about 0.3 mg/L of iron. Cow’s milk contains about 
twice as much iron, but its bioavailability is poor.
•	 The impoverished, who can have suboptimal diets for 
socioeconomic reasons at any age
•	 Older adults, who often have restricted diets with little 
meat because of limited income or poor dentition
•	 Teenagers who subsist on “junk” food
Impaired absorption is found in sprue, other causes 
of fat malabsorption (steatorrhea), and chronic diarrhea. 
Gastrectomy impairs iron absorption by decreasing the 
acidity of the proximal duodenum (which enhances 
uptake), and also by increasing the speed with which gut 
contents pass through the duodenum. Specific items in the 
diet, as is evident from the preceding discussion, can also 
affect absorption.
Increased requirement is an important cause of iron 
deficiency in growing infants, children, and adolescents, as 
well as premenopausal women, particularly during preg-
nancy. Economically deprived women having multiple, 
closely spaced pregnancies are at exceptionally high risk.
Chronic blood loss is the most common cause of iron 
deficiency in the Western world. External hemorrhage or 
bleeding into the gastrointestinal, urinary, or genital tracts 
depletes iron reserves. Iron deficiency in adult men and 
postmenopausal women in the Western world must be 
•	 As will be described subsequently, the anemia of chronic 
disease (perhaps more accurately referred to as the 
anemia of chronic inflammation) is caused in part by 
inflammatory mediators that increase hepatic hepcidin 
production. 
•	 A rare form of microcytic anemia is caused by mutations 
that disable TMPRSS6, a hepatic transmembrane serine 
protease that normally suppresses hepcidin production 
when iron stores are low. Affected patients have high 
hepcidin levels, resulting in reduced iron absorption 
and failure to respond to iron therapy.
•	 Conversely, hepcidin activity is inappropriately low in 
both primary and secondary hemochromatosis, a syn-
drome caused by systemic iron overload. 
•	 Secondary hemochromatosis can occur in diseases asso-
ciated with ineffective erythropoiesis, such as β-thalassemia 
major and myelodysplastic syndromes (Chapter 13). 
Through incompletely understood mechanisms, ineffec-
tive erythropoiesis suppresses hepatic hepcidin produc-
tion, even when iron stores are high. As discussed in 
Chapter 18, the various inherited forms of primary hemo-
chromatosis are associated with mutations in hepcidin or 
the genes that regulate hepcidin expression.
Etiology.  Iron deficiency can result from (1) dietary lack, 
(2) impaired absorption, (3) increased requirement, or 
(4) chronic blood loss. To maintain a normal iron balance, 
about 1 mg of iron must be absorbed from the diet every 
day. Because only 10% to 15% of ingested iron is absorbed, 
the daily iron requirement is 7 to 10 mg for adult men and 
7 to 20 mg for adult women. Because the average daily 
dietary intake of iron in the Western world is about 15 to 
20 mg, most men ingest more than adequate iron, whereas 
many women consume marginally adequate amounts of 
iron. The bioavailability of dietary iron is as important as 
the overall content. Heme iron is much more absorbable 
than inorganic iron, the absorption of which is influenced 
by other dietary contents. Absorption of inorganic iron is 
Figure 14-22  Regulation of iron absorption. Duodenal epithelial cell uptake of heme and nonheme iron is depicted. When the storage sites of the body are 
replete with iron and erythropoietic activity is normal, plasma hepcidin levels are high. This leads to down-regulation of ferroportin and trapping of most of the 
absorbed iron, which is lost when duodenal epithelial cells are shed into the gut. Conversely, when body iron stores decrease or when erythropoiesis  
is stimulated, hepcidin levels fall and ferroportin activity increases, allowing a greater fraction of the absorbed iron to be transferred to plasma transferrin.  
DMT1, Divalent metal transporter 1. 
FOOD
IRON
Heme iron
Nonheme
iron
Fe3+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe3+
DMT1
Duodenal
cytochrome B
Heme transporter
Ferroportin 1
Hephaestin
Blood
Liver
Hepcidin
Erythroid
marrow
Plasma
transferrin
Mucosal
ferritin
Lost by shedding
of epithelial cells
652
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
iron-containing enzymes in cells throughout the body also 
causes other changes, including koilonychia, alopecia, 
atrophic changes in the tongue and gastric mucosa, and 
intestinal malabsorption. Depletion of iron from the central 
nervous system may lead to the appearance of pica, in 
which affected individuals consume non-foodstuffs such 
as clay or food ingredients such as flour, and periodically 
move their limbs during sleep. Esophageal webs appear 
together with microcytic hypochromic anemia and atro-
phic glossitis to complete the triad of major findings in the 
rare Plummer-Vinson syndrome (Chapter 17).
The diagnosis of iron deficiency anemia ultimately rests 
on laboratory studies. Both the hemoglobin and hematocrit 
are depressed, usually to a moderate degree, in association 
with hypochromia, microcytosis, and modest poikilocy­
tosis. The serum iron and ferritin are low, and the total 
plasma iron-binding capacity (reflecting elevated transfer-
rin levels) is high. Low serum iron with increased iron-
binding capacity results in a reduction of transferrin 
saturation to below 15%. Reduced iron stores inhibit hep-
cidin synthesis, and its serum levels fall. In uncomplicated 
iron deficiency, oral iron supplementation produces an 
increase in reticulocytes in about 5 to 7 days that is fol-
lowed by a steady increase in blood counts and the nor-
malization of red cell indices.
Anemia of Chronic Disease
Impaired red cell production associated with chronic dis-
eases that produce systemic inflammation is perhaps the 
most common cause of anemia among hospitalized 
patients in the United States. This form of anemia stems 
from a reduction in the proliferation of erythroid progeni-
tors and impaired iron utilization. The chronic illnesses 
associated with this form of anemia can be grouped into 
three categories:
1.	 Chronic microbial infections, such as osteomyelitis, bac-
terial endocarditis, and lung abscess
2.	 Chronic immune disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis 
and regional enteritis
3.	 Neoplasms, such as carcinomas of the lung and breast, 
and Hodgkin lymphoma
The anemia of chronic disease occurs in the setting 
of persistent systemic inflammation and is associated 
with low serum iron, reduced total iron-binding capacity, 
and abundant stored iron in tissue macrophages. Several 
effects of inflammation contribute to the observed abnor-
malities. Most notably, certain inflammatory mediators, 
particularly interleukin-6 (IL-6), stimulate an increase in 
the hepatic production of hepcidin. As was discussed 
under the anemia of iron deficiency, hepcidin inhibits 
ferroportin function in macrophages and reduces the trans-
fer of iron from the storage pool to developing erythroid 
precursors in the bone marrow. As a result, the erythroid 
precursors are starved for iron in the midst of plenty. In 
addition, these progenitors do not proliferate adequately 
because erythropoietin levels are inappropriately low for 
the degree of anemia. The precise mechanism underlying 
this reduction in erythropoietin is uncertain, but transgenic 
mice expressing high levels of hepcidin develop a micro-
cytic anemia asso­ciated with low erythropoietin levels, 
suggesting that hepcidin directly or indirectly suppresses 
erythropoietin production.
attributed to gastrointestinal blood loss until proven oth-
erwise. To prematurely ascribe iron deficiency in such indi-
viduals to any other cause is to run the risk of missing an 
occult gastrointestinal cancer or other bleeding lesion. An 
alert clinician investigating unexplained iron deficiency 
anemia occasionally discovers an occult bleeding source 
such as a cancer and thereby saves a life.
Pathogenesis.  Whatever its basis, iron deficiency produces 
a hypochromic microcytic anemia. At the outset of chronic 
blood loss or other states of negative iron balance, reserves 
in the form of ferritin and hemosiderin may be adequate 
to maintain normal hemoglobin and hematocrit levels as 
well as normal serum iron and transferrin saturation. 
Progressive depletion of these reserves first lowers serum 
iron and transferrin saturation levels without producing 
anemia. In this early stage there is increased erythroid 
activity in the bone marrow. Anemia appears only when 
iron stores are completely depleted and is accompanied by 
lower than normal serum iron, ferritin, and transferrin 
saturation levels.
  MORPHOLOGY
The bone marrow reveals a mild to moderate increase in ery-
throid progenitors. A diagnostically significant finding is the dis-
appearance of stainable iron from macrophages in the 
bone marrow, which is best assessed by performing Prussian 
blue stains on smears of aspirated marrow. In peripheral blood 
smears, the red cells are small (microcytic) and pale (hypo-
chromic). Normal red cells with sufficient hemoglobin have a 
zone of central pallor measuring about one third of the cell 
diameter. In established iron deficiency the zone of pallor is 
enlarged; hemoglobin may be seen only in a narrow peripheral 
rim (Fig. 14-23). Poikilocytosis in the form of small, elongated 
red cells (pencil cells) is also characteristically seen.
Figure 14-23  Hypochromic microcytic anemia of iron deficiency (peripheral 
blood smear). Note the small red cells containing a narrow rim of peripheral 
hemoglobin. Scattered fully hemoglobinized cells, present due to recent 
blood transfusion, stand in contrast. (Courtesy Dr. Robert W. McKenna, 
Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, 
Dallas, Texas.)
Clinical Features
The clinical manifestations of the anemia are nonspecific 
and were detailed earlier. The dominating signs and 
symptoms frequently relate to the underlying cause of 
the anemia, for example, gastrointestinal or gynecologic 
disease, malnutrition, pregnancy, and malabsorption. In 
severe and long-standing iron deficiency, depletion of 
653
Anemias
cellular immortality and limitless replication (Chapters 
1 and 7). It might be anticipated, therefore, that partial 
deficits in telomerase activity could result in premature 
hematopoietic stem cell exhaustion and marrow aplasia.
•	 Even more common than telomerase mutations are 
abnormally short telomeres, which are found in the 
marrow cells of as many as half of those affected with 
aplastic anemia. It is unknown whether this shortening 
is due to other unappreciated telomerase defects or is a 
consequence of excessive stem cell replication.
In most instances, however, no initiating factor can 
be identified; about 65% of cases fall into this idiopathic 
category.
Pathogenesis.  The pathogenesis of aplastic anemia is not 
fully understood. Indeed, it is unlikely that a single mecha-
nism underlies all cases. However, two major etiologies 
have been invoked: an extrinsic, immune-mediated sup-
pression of marrow progenitors, and an intrinsic abnor-
mality of stem cells (Fig. 14-24).
Experimental studies have focused on a model in which 
activated T cells suppress hematopoietic stem cells. Stem 
cells may first be antigenically altered by exposure to 
drugs, infectious agents, or other unidentified environ-
mental insults. This provokes a cellular immune response, 
during which activated TH1 cells produce cytokines such 
as interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and TNF that suppress and kill 
hematopoietic progenitors. This scenario is supported by 
several observations.
•	 Analysis of the few remaining marrow stem cells from 
aplastic anemia marrows has revealed that genes 
What might be the reason for iron sequestration in the 
setting of inflammation? The best guess is that it enhances 
the body’s ability to fend off certain types of infection, 
particularly those caused by bacteria (e.g., H. influenzae) 
that require iron for pathogenicity. In this regard it is inter-
esting to consider that hepcidin is structurally related to 
defensins, a family of peptides that have intrinsic antibac-
terial activity. This connection further highlights the poorly 
understood but intriguing relationship between inflamma-
tion, innate immunity, and iron metabolism.
The anemia is usually mild, and the dominant symp-
toms are those of the underlying disease. The red cells can 
be normocytic and normochromic, or hypochromic and 
microcytic, as in anemia of iron deficiency. The presence 
 of increased storage iron in marrow macrophages, a high 
serum ferritin level, and a reduced total iron-binding 
capacity readily rule out iron deficiency as the cause of 
anemia. Only successful treatment of the underlying condi-
tion reliably corrects the anemia. However, some patients, 
particularly those with cancer, benefit from administration 
of erythropoietin.
Aplastic Anemia
Aplastic anemia refers to a syndrome of chronic primary 
hematopoietic 
failure 
and 
attendant 
pancytopenia 
(anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia). In the major-
ity of patients autoimmune mechanisms are suspected, but 
inherited or acquired abnormalities of hematopoietic stem 
cells also seem to contribute in at least a subset of patients.
Etiology.  The most common circumstances associated 
with aplastic anemia are listed in Table 14-7. Most cases 
of “known” etiology follow exposure to chemicals and 
drugs. Certain drugs and agents (including many cancer 
chemotherapy drugs and the organic solvent benzene) 
cause marrow suppression that is dose related and revers-
ible. In other instances, aplastic anemia arises in an unpre-
dictable, idiosyncratic fashion following exposure to drugs 
that normally cause little or no marrow suppression. The 
implicated drugs include chloramphenicol and gold salts.
Persistent marrow aplasia can also appear after a variety 
of viral infections, most commonly viral hepatitis of the 
non-A, non-B, non-C, non-G type, which is associated with 
5% to 10% of cases. Why aplastic anemia develops in 
certain individuals is not understood.
Whole-body irradiation can destroy hematopoietic stem 
cells in a dose-dependent fashion. Persons who receive 
therapeutic irradiation or are exposed to radiation in 
nuclear accidents (e.g., Chernobyl) are at risk for marrow 
aplasia.
Specific abnormalities underlie some cases of aplastic 
aplasia.
•	 Fanconi anemia is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by defects in a multiprotein complex that is 
required for DNA repair (Chapter 7). Marrow hypo-
function becomes evident early in life and is often 
accompanied by multiple congenital anomalies, such 
as hypoplasia of the kidney and spleen and bone 
anomalies, which most commonly involve the thumbs 
or radii.
•	 Inherited defects in telomerase are found in 5% to 10% of 
adult-onset aplastic anemia. Telomerase is required for 
Table 14-7  Major Causes of Aplastic Anemia
Acquired
Idiopathic
Acquired stem cell defects
Immune mediated
Chemical Agents
Dose related
Alkylating agents
Antimetabolites
Benzene
Chloramphenicol
Inorganic arsenicals
Idiosyncratic
Chloramphenicol
Phenylbutazone
Organic arsenicals
Methylphenylethylhydantoin
Carbamazepine
Penicillamine
Gold salts
Physical Agents
Whole-body irradiation
Viral Infections
Hepatitis (unknown virus)
Cytomegalovirus infections
Epstein-Barr virus infections
Herpes zoster (varicella zoster)
Inherited
Fanconi anemia
Telomerase defects
654
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
Alternatively, the notion that aplastic anemia results 
from a fundamental stem cell abnormality is supported by 
the presence of karyotypic aberrations in many cases; the 
occasional transformation of aplasias into myeloid neo-
plasms, typically myelodysplasia or acute myeloid leuke-
mia; and the association with abnormally short telomeres. 
Some marrow insult (or a predisposition to DNA damage) 
presumably results in sufficient injury to limit the prolif-
erative and differentiation capacity of stem cells. If the 
damage is extensive enough, aplastic anemia results. These 
two mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, because 
genetically altered stem cells might also express “neoanti-
gens” that could serve as targets for a T-cell attack.
involved in apoptosis and death pathways are up- 
regulated; of note, the same genes are up-regulated in 
normal stem cells exposed to interferon-γ.
•	 Even more compelling (and clinically relevant) evidence 
comes from experience with immunosuppressive 
therapy. Antithymocyte globulin and other immuno-
suppressive drugs such as cyclosporine produce 
responses in 60% to 70% of patients. It is proposed that 
these therapies work by suppressing or killing autoreac-
tive T-cell clones. The antigens recognized by the auto-
reactive T cells are not well defined. In some instances 
GPI-linked proteins may be the targets, possibly explain-
ing the previously noted association of aplastic anemia 
and PNH.
Figure 14-24  Pathophysiology of aplastic anemia. Damaged stem cells 
can produce progeny expressing neoantigens that evoke an autoimmune 
reaction, or give rise to a clonal population with reduced proliferative capacity. 
Either pathway could lead to marrow aplasia. See text for abbreviations. 
Stem cell
Environmental insult
(viruses, drugs, etc.)
Genetically altered
stem cells
Reduced proliferative and
differentiative capacity
Express new antigens
T-cell response
IFNγ
TNF
Marrow
aplasia
  MORPHOLOGY
The markedly hypocellular bone marrow is largely devoid of 
hematopoietic cells; often only fat cells, fibrous stroma, and 
scattered lymphocytes and plasma cells remain. Marrow aspi-
rates often yield little material (a “dry tap”); hence, aplasia is best 
appreciated in marrow biopsies (Fig. 14-25). Other nonspecific 
pathologic changes are related to granulocytopenia and throm-
bocytopenia, such as mucocutaneous bacterial infections and 
abnormal bleeding, respectively. If the anemia necessitates 
multiple transfusions, systemic hemosiderosis can appear.
Figure 14-25  Aplastic anemia (bone marrow biopsy). Markedly hypocellular marrow contains mainly fat cells. A, Low power. B, High power. (Courtesy 
Dr. Steven Kroft, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
Clinical Features
Aplastic anemia can occur at any age and in either sex. The 
onset is usually insidious. Initial manifestations vary some-
what, depending on which cell line is predominantly 
affected, but pancytopenia ultimately appears, with the 
expected consequences. Anemia can cause progressive 
weakness, pallor, and dyspnea; thrombocytopenia is her-
alded by petechiae and ecchymoses; and neutropenia man-
ifests as frequent and persistent minor infections or the 
sudden onset of chills, fever, and prostration. Splenomegaly 
is characteristically absent; if it is present, the diagnosis of 
aplastic anemia should be seriously questioned. The red 
cells are usually slightly macrocytic and normochromic. 
Reticulocytopenia is the rule.
The diagnosis rests on examination of a bone marrow 
biopsy. It is important to distinguish aplastic anemia 
from other causes of pancytopenia, such as “aleukemic” 
655
Anemias
dominant cause is the diminished synthesis of erythropoi-
etin by the damaged kidneys, which leads to inadequate 
red cell production. Other contributors are an extracorpus-
cular defect that reduces red cell life span, and iron defi-
ciency due to platelet dysfunction and increased bleeding, 
which is often encountered in uremia. Administration of 
recombinant erythropoietin results in a significant improve-
ment of the anemia, although an optimal response may 
require concomitant iron replacement therapy.
Hepatocellular liver disease, whether toxic, infectious, or 
cirrhotic, is associated with anemia attributed to decreased 
marrow function. Folate and iron deficiencies caused by 
poor nutrition and excessive bleeding often exacerbate 
anemia in this setting. Erythroid progenitors are preferen-
tially affected; depression of the white cell count and plate-
lets is less common but also occurs. The anemia is often 
slightly macrocytic due to lipid abnormalities associated 
with liver failure, which cause red cell membranes to 
acquire phospholipid and cholesterol as they circulate in 
the peripheral blood.
Endocrine disorders, particularly hypothyroidism, may 
also be associated with a mild normochromic, normocytic 
anemia.
leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes (Chapter 13), 
which can have identical clinical manifestations. In aplastic 
anemia, the marrow is hypocellular (and usually markedly 
so), whereas myeloid neoplasms are associated with hyper-
cellular marrows filled with neoplastic progenitors.
The prognosis is variable. Bone marrow transplantation 
is the treatment of choice in those with a suitable donor 
and provides a 5-year survival of more than 75%. Older 
patients or those without suitable donors often respond 
well to immunosuppressive therapy.
Pure Red Cell Aplasia
Pure red cell aplasia is a primary marrow disorder in 
which only erythroid progenitors are suppressed. In 
severe cases, red cell progenitors are completely absent 
from the marrow. It may occur in association with neo-
plasms, particularly thymoma and large granular lympho-
cytic leukemia (Chapter 13), drug exposures, autoimmune 
disorders, and parvovirus infection (see later). With the 
exception of those with parvovirus infection, it is likely that 
most cases have an autoimmune basis. When a thymoma 
is present, resection leads to hematologic improvement in 
about half of the patients. In patients without thymoma, 
immunosuppressive therapy is often beneficial. Plasma­
pheresis may also be helpful in unusual patients with 
pathogenic autoantibodies, such as neu­tralizing antibodies 
to erythropoietin that appear de novo or following the 
administration of recombinant erythropoietin.
A special form of red cell aplasia occurs in individuals 
infected with parvovirus B19, which preferentially infects 
and destroys red cell progenitors. Normal individuals clear 
parvovirus infections within 1 to 2 weeks; as a result, the 
aplasia is transient and clinically unimportant. However, 
in persons with moderate to severe hemolytic anemias, 
even a brief cessation of erythropoiesis results in rapid 
worsening of the anemia, producing an aplastic crisis. In 
those who are severely immunosuppressed (e.g., persons 
with advanced HIV infection), an ineffective immune 
response sometimes permits the infection to persist, leading 
to chronic red cell aplasia and a moderate to severe anemia.
Other Forms of Marrow Failure
Myelophthisic anemia describes a form of marrow failure 
in which space-occupying lesions replace normal marrow 
elements. The commonest cause is metastatic cancer, most 
often carcinomas arising in the breast, lung, and prostate. 
However, any infiltrative process (e.g., granulomatous 
disease) involving the marrow can produce identical find-
ings. Myelophthisic anemia is also a feature of the spent 
phase of myeloproliferative disorders (Chapter 13). All of 
the responsible diseases cause marrow distortion and 
fibrosis, which act to displace normal marrow elements 
and disturb mechanisms that regulate the egress of red 
cells and granulocytes from the marrow. The latter effect 
causes the abnormal release of nucleated erythroid precur-
sors and immature granulocytic forms (leukoerythroblas­
tosis) into peripheral smears, and the appearance of 
teardrop-shaped red cells, which are believed to be deformed 
during their tortuous escape from the fibrotic marrow.
Chronic renal failure, whatever its cause, is almost 
invariably associated with an anemia that tends to be 
roughly proportional to the severity of the uremia. The 
basis of anemia in renal failure is multifactorial, but the 
  KEY CONCEPTS
Megaloblastic Anemia
■ Caused by deficiencies of folate or vitamin B12 that lead to 
inadequate synthesis of thymidine and defective DNA 
replication
■ Results in enlarged abnormal hematopoietic precursors 
(megaloblasts), ineffective hematopoiesis, macrocytic 
anemia, and (in most cases) pancytopenia
■ B12 deficiency also associated with neurologic damage, 
particularly in the posterior and lateral tracts of the spinal 
cord
Iron Deficiency Anemia
■ Caused by chronic bleeding or inadequate iron intake; 
results in insufficient hemoglobin synthesis and hypochro-
mic, microcytic red cells
Anemia of Chronic Disease
■ Caused by inflammatory cytokines, which increase hepci-
din levels and thereby sequester iron in macrophages, and 
also suppress erythropoietin production
Aplastic Anemia
■ Caused by bone marrow failure (hypocellularity) due to 
diverse causes, including exposures to toxins and radia-
tion, idiosyncratic reactions to drugs and viruses, and 
inherited defects in telomerase and DNA repair
Pure Red Cell Aplasia
■ Acute: Parvovirus B19 infection (may persist in immuno-
suppressed patients)
■ Chronic: Associated with thymoma, large granular lympho-
cytic leukemia, presence of neutralizing antibodies against 
erythropoietin, and other autoimmune phenomenon
Other Causes of Underproduction Anemias
■ Marrow replacement (tumors, granulomatous disease; 
so-called myelophthisic anemias), renal failure, endocrine 
disorders, liver failure
656
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
derangement of coagulation, alone or in combination. 
Before discussing specific bleeding disorders, it is helpful 
to review the common laboratory tests used in the evalua-
tion of a bleeding diathesis. The normal hemostatic 
response involves the blood vessel wall, the platelets, and 
the clotting cascade (Chapter 4). Tests used to evaluate 
different aspects of hemostasis are the following:
•	 Prothrombin time (PT). This test assesses the extrinsic and 
common coagulation pathways. The clotting of plasma 
after addition of an exogenous source of tissue throm-
boplastin (e.g., brain extract) and Ca2+ ions is measured 
in seconds. A prolonged PT can result from deficiency 
or dysfunction of factor V, factor VII, factor X, pro-
thrombin, or fibrinogen.
•	 Partial thromboplastin time (PTT). This test assesses the 
intrinsic and common clotting pathways. The clotting of 
plasma after addition of kaolin, cephalin, and Ca2+ ions 
is measured in seconds. Kaolin activates the contact-
dependent factor XII, and cephalin substitutes for plate-
let phospholipids. Prolongation of the PTT can be due 
to deficiency or dysfunction of factors V, VIII, IX, X, XI, 
or XII, prothrombin, or fibrinogen, or to interfering anti-
bodies to phospholipid (Chapter 4).
•	 Platelet counts. These are obtained on anticoagulated 
blood using an electronic particle counter. The reference 
range is 150 × 103 to 300 × 103 platelets/µL. Abnormal 
platelet counts are best confirmed by inspection of a 
peripheral blood smear, in that clumping of platelets 
can cause spurious “thrombocytopenia” during auto-
mated counting, and high counts may be indicative of 
a myeloproliferative disorder, such as essential throm-
bocythemia (Chapter 13).
•	 Tests of platelet function. At present, no single test pro-
vides an adequate assessment of the complex functions 
of platelets. Specialized tests that can be useful in par-
ticular clinical settings include tests of platelet aggrega-
tion, which measure the ability of platelets to aggregate 
in response to agonists like thrombin; and quantitative 
and qualitative tests of von Willebrand factor, which 
plays an important role in platelet adhesion to the extra-
cellular matrix (Chapter 4). An older test, the bleeding 
time, has some value but is time-consuming and diffi-
cult to standardize and is therefore performed infre-
quently. Newer instrument-based assays that provide 
quantitative measures of platelet function show promise 
but remain imperfect at predicting bleeding risk, pre-
sumably because of difficulties in simulating in vivo 
clotting in the laboratory.
More specialized tests are available to measure the 
levels of specific clotting factors, fibrinogen, fibrin split 
products, and the presence of circulating anticoagulants.
Bleeding Disorders Caused by Vessel  
Wall Abnormalities
Disorders within this category are relatively common, but 
do not usually cause serious bleeding problems. Most 
often, they present with small hemorrhages (petechiae and 
purpura) in the skin or mucous membranes, particularly 
the gingivae. On occasion, however, more significant 
hemorrhages occur into joints, muscles, and subperiosteal 
Polycythemia
Polycythemia denotes an abnormally high red cell count, 
usually with a corresponding increase in the hemoglobin 
level. It may be relative when there is hemoconcentration 
due to decreased plasma volume, or absolute when there 
is an increase in the total red cell mass. Relative polycythe-
mia results from dehydration, such as occurs with depriva-
tion of water, prolonged vomiting or diarrhea, or excessive 
use of diuretics. It is also associated with an obscure condi-
tion of unknown etiology called stress polycythemia, or 
Gaisböck syndrome. Affected individuals are usually 
hypertensive, obese, and anxious (“stressed”). Absolute 
polycythemia is primary when it results from an intrinsic 
abnormality of hematopoietic precursors and secondary 
when the red cell progenitors are responding to increased 
levels of erythropoietin. A pathophysiologic classification 
of polycythemia divided along these lines is given in 
Table 14-8.
The most common cause of primary polycythemia is 
polycythemia vera, a myeloproliferative disorder associated 
with mutations that lead to erythropoietin-independent 
growth of red cell progenitors (Chapter 13). Much less 
commonly, primary polycythemia results from familial 
mutations in the erythropoietin receptor that induce 
erythropoietin-independent receptor activation. One such 
individual won Olympic gold medals in cross-country 
skiing, having benefited from this natural form of blood 
doping! Secondary polycythemia may be caused by com-
pensatory or pathologic increases in erythropoietin secre-
tion. Causes of the latter include erythropoietin-secreting 
tumors and rare, but illustrative, inherited defects that lead 
to the stabilization of HIF-1α, a hypoxia-induced factor 
that stimulates the transcription of the erythro­poietin gene.
Bleeding Disorders:  
Hemorrhagic Diatheses
Excessive bleeding can result from (1) increased fragility 
of vessels, (2) platelet deficiency or dysfunction, and (3) 
Table 14-8  Pathophysiologic Classification of Polycythemia
Relative
Reduced plasma volume (hemoconcentration)
Absolute
Primary (Low Erythropoietin)
Polycythemia vera
Inherited erythropoietin receptor mutations (rare)
Secondary (High Erythropoietin)
Compensatory
Lung disease
High-altitude living
Cyanotic heart disease
Paraneoplastic
Erythropoietin-secreting tumors (e.g., renal cell carcinoma, hepatocellular 
carcinoma, cerebellar hemangioblastoma)
Hemoglobin mutants with high O2 affinity
Inherited defects that stabilize HIF-1α
Chuvash polycythemia (homozygous VHL mutations)
Prolyl hydroxylase mutations
HIF-1α, Hypoxia-induced factor 1α.
657
Bleeding disorders: hemorrhagic diatheses 
than 100,000 platelets/µL is generally considered to consti-
tute thrombocytopenia. Platelet counts in the range of 
20,000 to 50,000 platelets/µL can aggravate posttraumatic 
bleeding, while platelet counts less than 20,000 platelets/µL 
may be associated with spontaneous (nontraumatic) bleed-
ing. Bleeding resulting from thrombocytopenia is associ-
ated with a normal PT and PTT.
Platelets are critical for hemostasis, in that they form 
temporary plugs that stop bleeding and promote key reac-
tions in the coagulation cascade (Chapter 4). Spontaneous 
bleeding associated with thrombocytopenia most often 
involves small vessels. Common sites for such hemor-
rhages are the skin and the mucous membranes of the 
gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts. Most feared, 
however, is intracranial bleeding, which is a threat to any 
patient with a markedly depressed platelet count.
The causes of thrombocytopenia fall into four major 
categories (Table 14-9).
•	 Decreased platelet production. This can result from condi-
tions that depress marrow output generally (such as 
aplastic anemia and leukemia) or affect megakaryocytes 
somewhat selectively. Examples of the latter include 
certain drugs and alcohol, which may suppress platelet 
production through uncertain mechanisms when taken 
in large amounts; HIV, which may infect megakaryo-
cytes and inhibit platelet production; and myelodys-
plastic syndromes (Chapter 13), which may occasionally 
present with isolated thrombocytopenia.
locations, or take the form of menorrhagia, nosebleeds, 
gastrointestinal bleeding, or hematuria. The platelet count 
and tests of coagulation (PT, PTT) are usually normal, 
pointing by exclusion to the underlying problem.
The varied clinical conditions in which abnormalities in 
the vessel wall cause bleeding include the following:
•	 Infections often induce petechial and purpuric hemor-
rhages, particularly meningococcemia, other forms of 
septicemia, infective endocarditis, and several of the 
rickettsioses. The involved mechanisms include micro-
bial damage to the microvasculature (vasculitis) and 
disseminated intravascular coagulation. Failure to rec-
ognize meningococcemia as a cause of petechiae and 
purpura can be catastrophic for the patient.
•	 Drug reactions sometimes induce cutaneous petechiae 
and purpura without causing thrombocytopenia. In 
many instances the vascular injury is mediated by the 
deposition of drug-induced immune complexes in 
vessel walls, which leads to hypersensitivity (leukocyto-
clastic) vasculitis (Chapter 11).
•	 Scurvy and the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are associated 
with microvascular bleeding that results from collagen 
defects that weaken vessel walls. The same mechanism 
may account for the spontaneous purpura that are com-
monly seen in older adults and the skin hemorrhages 
that are seen with Cushing syndrome, in which the 
protein-wasting effects of excessive corticosteroid pro-
duction cause loss of perivascular supporting tissue.
•	 Henoch-Schönlein purpura is a systemic immune disorder 
of unknown cause that is characterized by a purpuric 
rash, colicky abdominal pain, polyarthralgia, and acute 
glomerulonephritis (Chapter 20). All these changes 
result from the deposition of circulating immune com-
plexes within vessels throughout the body and within 
the glomerular mesangial regions.
•	 Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (also known as 
Weber-Osler-Rendu syndrome) is an autosomal dominant 
disorder that can be caused by mutations in at least 
five different genes, most of which modulate TGF-β 
signaling. It is characterized by dilated, tortuous blood 
vessels with thin walls that bleed readily. Bleeding can 
occur anywhere, but it is most common under the 
mucous membranes of the nose (epistaxis), tongue, 
mouth, and eyes, and throughout the gastrointestinal 
tract.
•	 Perivascular amyloidosis can weaken blood vessel walls 
and cause bleeding. This complication is most common 
with amyloid light-chain (AL) amyloidosis (Chapter 6) 
and often manifests as mucocutaneous petechiae.
Among these conditions, serious bleeding is most often 
associated with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. The 
bleeding in each is nonspecific, and the diagnosis of these 
entities is based on the recognition of other more specific 
associated findings.
Bleeding Related to Reduced Platelet Number: 
Thrombocytopenia
Reduction in platelet number (thrombocytopenia) constitutes 
an important cause of generalized bleeding. A count less 
Table 14-9  Causes of Thrombocytopenia
Decreased Production of Platelets
Selective impairment of platelet production
Drug-induced: alcohol, thiazides, cytotoxic drugs
Infections: measles, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Nutritional deficiencies
B12, folate deficiency (megaloblastic leukemia)
Bone marrow failure
Aplastic anemia (see Table 14-7)
Bone marrow replacement
Leukemia, disseminated cancer, granulomatous disease
Ineffective hematopoiesis
Myelodysplastic syndromes (Chapter 13)
Decreased Platelet Survival
Immunologic destruction
Primary autoimmune
Chromic immune thrombocytopenic purpura
Acute immune thrombocytopenic purpura
Secondary autoimmune
Systemic lupus erythematosus, B-cell lymphoid neoplasms
Alloimmune: posttransfusion and neonatal
Drug-associated: quinidine, heparin, sulfa compounds
Infections: HIV, infectious mononucleosis (transient, mild), dengue fever
Nonimmunologic destruction
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Thrombotic microangiopathies
Giant hemangiomas
Sequestration
Hypersplenism
Dilution
Transfusions
658
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
Clinical Features
Chronic ITP occurs most commonly in adult women 
younger than 40 years of age. The female-to-male ratio is 
3 : 1. It is often insidious in onset and is characterized by 
bleeding into the skin and mucosal surfaces. Cutaneous 
bleeding is seen in the form of pinpoint hemorrhages (pete-
chiae), which are especially prominent in the dependent 
areas where the capillary pressure is higher. Petechiae can 
become confluent, giving rise to ecchymoses. Often there is 
a history of easy bruising, nosebleeds, bleeding from the 
gums, and hemorrhages into soft tissues from relatively 
minor trauma. The disease may manifest first with melena, 
hematuria, or excessive menstrual flow. Subarachnoid 
hemorrhage and intracerebral hemorrhage are serious and 
sometimes fatal complications, but fortunately they are 
rare in treated patients. Splenomegaly and lymphadenopa-
thy are uncommon in primary disease, and their presence 
should lead one to consider other diagnoses, such as ITP 
secondary to a B-cell neoplasm.
The clinical signs and symptoms are not specific but 
rather reflective of the thrombocytopenia. The findings of 
a low platelet count, normal or increased megakaryocytes 
in the bone marrow, and large platelets in the peripheral 
blood are taken as presumptive evidence of accelerated 
platelet destruction. The PT and PTT are normal. Tests for 
platelet autoantibodies are not widely available. Therefore, 
the diagnosis is one of exclusion and can be made only 
after other causes of thrombocytopenia (such as those 
listed in Table 14-9) have been ruled out.
Almost all patients respond to glucocorticoids (which 
inhibit phagocyte function), but many eventually relapse. 
Those with moderately severe thrombocytopenia (platelet 
counts > 30,000/mL) can be followed carefully, and some 
of these individuals may have spontaneous remissions 
over a period of a year or more. In individuals with severe 
thrombocytopenia, splenectomy normalizes the platelet 
•	 Decreased platelet survival. This important mechanism 
of thrombocytopenia can have an immunological or non-
immunologic basis. In immune thrombocytopenia, destruc-
tion is caused by the deposition of antibodies or immune 
complexes on platelets. Antibodies to platelets can rec-
ognize self-antigens (autoantibodies) or non-self anti-
gens (alloantibodies). Autoimmune thrombocytopenia 
is discussed in the following section. Alloantibodies can 
arise when platelets are transfused or cross the placenta 
from the fetus into the pregnant mother. In the latter case, 
IgG antibodies made in the mother can cause clinically 
significant thrombocytopenia in the fetus. This is remi-
niscent of hemolytic disease of the newborn, in which red 
cells are the target (Chapter 10). The most important 
nonimmunologic causes are disseminated intravascular 
coagulation and the thrombotic microangiopathies, in 
which unbridled, often systemic, platelet activation 
reduces platelet life span. Nonimmunologic destruction 
of platelets may also be caused by mechanical injury, such 
as in individuals with prosthetic heart valves.
•	 Sequestration. The spleen normally sequesters 30% to 
35% of the body’s platelets, but this can rise to 80% to 
90% when the spleen is enlarged, producing moderate 
degrees of thrombocytopenia.
•	 Dilution. Massive transfusions can produce a dilutional 
thrombocytopenia. With prolonged blood storage the 
number of viable platelets decreases; thus, plasma 
volume and red cell mass are reconstituted by transfu-
sion, but the number of circulating platelets is relatively 
reduced.
Chronic Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura (ITP)
Chronic ITP is caused by autoantibody mediated destruc-
tion of platelets. It can occur in the setting of a variety of 
predisposing conditions and exposures (secondary) or in 
the absence of any known risk factors (primary or idio-
pathic). The contexts in which chronic ITP occurs second-
arily are numerous and include individuals with systemic 
lupus erythematosus (Chapter 6), HIV infection, and B-cell 
neoplasms such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia (Chapter 
13). The diagnosis of primary chronic ITP is made only 
after secondary causes are excluded.
Pathogenesis.  The autoantibodies, most often directed 
against platelet membrane glycoproteins IIb-IIIa or Ib-IX, 
can be demonstrated in the plasma and bound to the plate-
let surface in about 80% of patients. In the overwhelming 
majority of cases, the antiplatelet antibodies are of the IgG 
class.
As in autoimmune hemolytic anemias, antiplatelet anti-
bodies act as opsonins that are recognized by IgG Fc recep-
tors expressed on phagocytes (Chapter 6), leading to 
increased platelet destruction. The thrombocytopenia is 
usually markedly improved by splenectomy, indicating 
that the spleen is the major site of removal of opsonized 
platelets. The splenic red pulp is also rich in plasma cells, 
and part of the benefit of splenectomy (a frequent treat-
ment for chronic ITP) may stem from the removal of a 
source of autoantibodies. In some instances the autoanti-
bodies may also bind to and damage megakaryocytes, 
leading to decreases in platelet production that further 
exacerbate the thrombocytopenia.
  MORPHOLOGY
The principal changes of thrombocytopenic purpura are 
found in the spleen, bone marrow, and blood, but they 
are not specific. Secondary changes related to the bleed-
ing diathesis may be found in any tissue or structure in 
the body.
The spleen is of normal size. Typically, there is congestion of 
the sinusoids and enlargement of the splenic follicles, often 
associated with prominent reactive germinal centers. In many 
instances scattered megakaryocytes are found within the 
sinuses, possibly representing a mild form of extramedullary 
hematopoiesis driven by elevated levels of thrombopoietin. The 
marrow reveals a modestly increased number of mega-
karyocytes. Some are apparently immature, with large, non-
lobulated, single nuclei. These findings are not specific but 
merely reflect accelerated thrombopoiesis, being found in most 
forms of thrombocytopenia resulting from increased platelet 
destruction. The importance of bone marrow examination is to 
rule out thrombocytopenias resulting from bone marrow failure 
or other primary bone marrow disorders. The secondary 
changes relate to the hemorrhages that are dispersed through-
out the body. The peripheral blood often reveals abnor-
mally large platelets (megathrombocytes), which are a sign 
of accelerated thrombopoiesis.
659
Bleeding disorders: hemorrhagic diatheses 
arteries may lead to vascular insufficiency and limb loss, 
and emboli from deep venous thrombosis can cause 
fatal pulmonary thromboembolism. The risk of severe 
HIT is lowered, but not completely eliminated, by the 
use of low-molecular-weight heparin preparations. 
Unfortunately, once severe HIT develops even low-
molecular-weight heparins exacerbate the thrombotic 
tendency and must be avoided.
HIV-Associated Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia is one of the most common hemato-
logic manifestations of HIV infection. Both impaired 
platelet production and increased destruction contribute. 
CD4 and CXCR4, the receptor and coreceptor, respectively, 
for HIV, are found on megakaryocytes, allowing these cells 
to be infected. HIV-infected megakaryocytes are prone to 
apoptosis and their ability to produce platelets is impaired. 
HIV infection also causes B-cell hyperplasia and dysregu-
lation, which predisposes to the development of autoanti-
bodies. In some instances the antibodies are directed 
against platelet membrane glycoprotein IIb-III complexes. 
As in other immune cytopenias, the autoantibodies opso-
nize platelets, promoting their destruction by mononuclear 
phagocytes in the spleen and elsewhere. The deposition of 
immune complexes on platelets may also contribute to the 
accelerated loss of platelets in some patients who are HIV 
infected.
Thrombotic Microangiopathies: Thrombotic 
Thrombocytopenic Purpura (TTP) and  
Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome (HUS)
The term thrombotic microangiopathy encompasses a spec-
trum of clinical syndromes that includes TTP and HUS. 
They are caused by insults that lead to excessive activation 
of platelets, which deposit as thrombi in small blood 
vessels.
According to its original description, TTP was defined 
as the pentad of fever, thrombocytopenia, microangio-
pathic hemolytic anemia, transient neurologic deficits, and 
renal failure. HUS is also associated with microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia but is distin-
guished by the absence of neurologic symptoms, the prom-
inence of acute renal failure, and its frequent occurrence in 
children. With time, experience, and increased mechanistic 
insight, however, these distinctions have blurred. Many 
adult patients with “TTP” lack one or more of the five 
criteria, and some patients with “HUS” have fever and 
neurologic dysfunction. 
In both conditions, intravascular thrombi cause a micro-
angiopathic hemolytic anemia and widespread organ dysfunc-
tion, and the attendant consumption of platelets leads to 
thrombocytopenia. It is believed that the varied clinical 
manifestations of TTP and HUS are related to differing 
proclivities for thrombus formation in tissues. While dis-
seminated intravascular coagulation (discussed later) and 
thrombotic microangiopathies share features such as 
microvascular occlusion and microangiopathic hemolytic 
anemia, they are pathogenically distinct. In TTP and HUS 
(unlike in disseminated intravascular coagulation), activa-
tion of the coagulation cascade is not of primary impor-
tance, and hence laboratory tests of coagulation, such as 
the PT and PTT, are usually normal.
count in about two thirds of patients, but with the atten-
dant increased risk of bacterial sepsis. Immunomodulatory 
agents such as intravenous immunoglobulin or anti-CD20 
antibody (rituximab) are often effective in patients who 
relapse after splenectomy or for whom splenectomy is 
contraindicated. Peptides that mimic the effects of throm-
bopoietin (so-called TPO-mimetics) are also effective in 
stimulating platelet production and improving platelet 
counts.
Acute Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura
Like chronic ITP, this condition is caused by autoantibod-
ies to platelets, but its clinical features and course are dis-
tinct. Acute ITP is mainly a disease of childhood occurring 
with equal frequency in both sexes. Symptoms appear 
abruptly, often 1 to 2 weeks after a self-limited viral illness, 
which appears to trigger the development of autoantibod-
ies through uncertain mechanisms. Unlike chronic ITP, 
acute ITP is self-limited, usually resolving spontaneously 
within 6 months. Glucocorticoids are given only if the 
thrombocytopenia is severe. In about 20% of children, 
usually those without a viral prodrome, thrombocytopenia 
persists; these less fortunate children have a childhood 
form of chronic ITP that follows a course similar to the 
adult disease.
Drug-Induced Thrombocytopenia
Drugs can induce thrombocytopenia through direct effects 
on platelets and secondary to immunologically mediated 
platelet destruction. The drugs most commonly implicated 
are quinine, quinidine, and vancomycin, all of which bind 
platelet glycoproteins and in one way or another create 
antigenic determinants that are recognized by antibodies. 
Much more rarely, drugs induce true autoantibodies 
through unknown mechanisms. Thrombocytopenia, which 
may be severe, is also a common consequence of platelet 
inhibitory drugs that bind glycoprotein IIb/IIIa; it is 
hypothesized that these drugs induce conformational 
changes in glycoprotein IIb/IIIa and create an immuno-
genic epitope.
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) has a distinctive 
pathogenesis and is of particular importance because of its 
potential for severe clinical consequences. Thrombocy­
topenia occurs in about 5% of persons receiving heparin 
and is of two types:
•	 Type I thrombocytopenia occurs rapidly after the onset 
of therapy and is of little clinical importance, sometimes 
resolving despite the continuation of therapy. It most 
likely results from a direct platelet-aggregating effect of 
heparin.
•	 Type II thrombocytopenia is less common but of much 
greater clinical significance. It occurs 5 to 14 days after 
therapy begins (or sooner if the person has been sensi-
tized to heparin) and, paradoxically, often leads to life-
threatening venous and arterial thrombosis. This severe 
form of HIT is caused by antibodies that recognize com-
plexes of heparin and platelet factor 4, which is a normal 
component of platelet granules. Binding of antibody to 
these complexes activates platelets and promotes throm-
bosis, even in the setting of thrombocytopenia. Unless 
therapy is immediately discontinued and an alternative 
nonheparin anticoagulant instituted, clots within large 
660
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
HUS makes its appearance. With appropriate supportive 
care complete recovery is possible, but irreversible renal 
damage and death can occur in more severe cases.
“Atypical” HUS is often associated with defects in com-
plement factor H, membrane cofactor protein (CD46), or 
factor I, three proteins that normally act to prevent exces-
sive activation of the alternative complement pathway. 
Deficiencies of these proteins can be caused by inherited 
defects or acquired inhibitory autoantibodies and are 
associated with a remitting, relapsing course. Unlike TTP, 
the basis for the platelet activation in typical and atypical 
HUS is unclear. Therapeutic antibodies that inhibit the 
activation of the complement factor C5 are effective in 
preventing thrombosis in patients with inherited defi­
ciencies of complement regulatory proteins, proving that 
excessive complement activation underlies the pathogen-
esis of this form of HUS. Similarly, immunosuppression 
can be beneficial to patients with inhibitory antibodies 
against complement regulatory factors. Typical HUS is 
treated supportively. Patients who survive the acute insult 
usually recover, but some have permanent renal damage 
and eventually require dialysis or renal transplantation. 
The impact of HUS and TTP on the kidneys is discussed 
further in Chapter 20.
Thrombotic microangiopathies resembling HUS can 
also be seen following exposures to other agents that 
damage endothelial cells (e.g., certain drugs and radiation 
therapy). The prognosis in these settings is guarded, 
because the HUS is often complicated by chronic, life-
threatening conditions.
Bleeding Disorders Related to Defective  
Platelet Functions
Qualitative defects of platelet function can be inherited or 
acquired. Several inherited disorders characterized by 
abnormal platelet function and normal platelet count have 
been described. A brief discussion of these rare diseases is 
warranted because they provide excellent models for inves-
tigating the molecular mechanisms of platelet function.
Inherited disorders of platelet function can be classi-
fied into three pathogenically distinct groups: (1) defects 
of adhesion, (2) defects of aggregation, and (3) disorders 
of platelet secretion (release reaction).
•	 Bernard-Soulier syndrome illustrates the consequences of 
defective adhesion of platelets to subendothelial matrix. 
Bernard-Soulier syndrome is caused by an inherited defi-
ciency of the platelet membrane glyco­protein complex 
Ib-IX. This glycoprotein is a receptor for vWF and is 
essential for normal platelet adhesion to the subendothe-
lial extracellular matrix (Chapter 4). Affected patients 
have a variable, often severe, bleeding tendency.
•	 Bleeding due to defective platelet aggregation is exempli-
fied by Glanzmann thrombasthenia, which is also trans-
mitted as an autosomal recessive trait. Thrombasthenic 
platelets fail to aggregate in response to adenosine 
diphosphate (ADP), collagen, epinephrine, or thrombin 
because of deficiency or dysfunction of glycoprotein IIb-
IIIa, an integrin that participates in “bridge formation” 
between platelets by binding fibrinogen. The associated 
bleeding tendency is often severe.
Although certain features of the various thrombotic 
microangiopathies overlap, the triggers for the pathogenic 
platelet activation are distinctive and provide a more 
satisfying and clinically relevant way of thinking about 
these disorders; these are summarized in Table 14-10. 
TTP is usually associated with a deficiency in a plasma 
enzyme called ADAMTS13, also designated “vWF 
metalloprotease.” ADAMTS13 normally degrades very 
high-molecular-weight multimers of von Willebrand factor 
(vWF). In its absence, these multimers accumulate in 
plasma and tend to promote platelet activation and aggre-
gation. Superimposition of endothelial cell injury (caused 
by some other condition) may further promote the forma-
tion of platelet microaggregates, thus initiating or exacer-
bating clinically evident TTP.
The deficiency of ADAMTS13 can be inherited or 
acquired. In the acquired form, an autoantibody that inhib-
its the metalloprotease activity of ADAMTS13 is present. 
Less commonly, patients inherit an inactivating mutation 
in ADAMTS13. In those with hereditary ADAMTS13 defi-
ciency, the onset is often delayed until adolescence and the 
symptoms are episodic. Thus, factors other than ADAMTS13 
(e.g., some superimposed vascular injury or prothrombotic 
state) must be involved in triggering full-blown TTP.
TTP is an important diagnosis to consider in any patient 
presenting with thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia, because delays in diagnosis can be fatal. 
With plasma exchange, which removes autoantibodies and 
provides functional ADAMTS13, TTP (which once was 
uniformly fatal) can be treated successfully in more than 
80% of patients.
In contrast, HUS is associated with normal levels of 
ADAMTS13 and is initiated by several other distinct 
defects. “Typical” HUS is strongly associated with infec-
tious gastroenteritis caused by Escherichia coli strain 
O157:H7, which elaborates a Shiga-like toxin. This toxin is 
absorbed from the inflamed gastrointestinal mucosa into 
the circulation, where it alters endothelial cell function in 
some manner that results in platelet activation and aggre-
gation. Children and older adults are at highest risk. Those 
affected present with bloody diarrhea, and a few days later 
Table 14-10  Thrombotic Microangiopathies: Causes and Associations
Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura
Deficiency of ADAMTS13
Inherited
Acquired (autoantibodies)
Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
Typical: Escherichia coli strain O157:H7 infection
Endothelial damage by Shiga-like toxin
Atypical: alternative complement pathway inhibitor deficiencies 
(complement factor H, membrane cofactor protein (CD46), or factor I)
Inherited
Acquired (autoantibodies)
Miscellaneous associations
Drugs (cyclosporine, chemotherapeutic agents)
Radiation, bone marrow transplantation
Other infections (HIV, pneumococcal sepsis)
Conditions associated with autoimmunity (systemic lupus erythematosus, HIV 
infection, lymphoid neoplasms)
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus.
661
Bleeding disorders: hemorrhagic diatheses 
who oozes blood for days after a tooth extraction or who 
develops a hemarthrosis after minor stress on a knee joint.
Hereditary deficiencies typically affect a single clotting 
factor. The most common and important inherited defi-
ciencies of coagulation factors affect factor VIII (hemophilia 
A), and factor IX (hemophilia B). Deficiencies of vWF (von 
Willebrand disease) are also discussed here, as this factor 
influences both coagulation and platelet function. Rare 
inherited deficiencies of each of the other coagulation 
factors have also been described.
Acquired deficiencies usually involve multiple coagulation 
factors and can be based on decreased protein synthesis or 
a shortened half-life. Vitamin K deficiency (Chapter 9) 
results in the impaired synthesis of factors II, VII, IX, X and 
protein C. Many of these factors are made in the liver and 
are therefore deficient in severe parenchymal liver disease. 
Alternatively, in disseminated intravascular coagulation, 
multiple coagulation factors are consumed and are there-
fore deficient. Acquired deficiencies of single factors occur, 
but they are rare. These are usually caused by inhibitory 
autoantibodies.
The Factor VIII-vWF Complex
The two most common inherited disorders of bleeding, 
hemophilia A and von Willebrand disease, are caused by 
qualitative or quantitative defects involving factor VIII and 
vWF, respectively. Before we discuss these disorders it will 
be helpful to review the structure and function of these two 
proteins, which exist together in the plasma as part of a 
single large complex.
Factor VIII and vWF are encoded by separate genes and 
are synthesized in different cells. Factor VIII is an essential 
cofactor of factor IX, which converts factor X to factor Xa 
(Fig. 14-26; Chapter 4). It is made in several tissues; 
sinusoidal endothelial cells and Kupffer cells in the liver 
seem to be major sources. Once factor VIII reaches the 
•	 Disorders of platelet secretion are characterized by the 
defective release of certain mediators of platelet activa-
tion, such as thromboxanes and granule-bound ADP. 
The biochemical defects underlying these so-called 
storage pool disorders are varied, complex, and beyond 
the scope of our discussion.
Among the acquired defects of platelet function, two are 
clinically significant. The first is caused by ingestion of 
aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Aspirin 
is a potent, irreversible inhibitor of the enzyme cyclooxy-
genase, which is required for the synthesis of thromboxane 
A2 and prostaglandins (Chapter 3). These mediators play 
important roles in platelet aggregation and subsequent 
release reactions (Chapter 4). The antiplatelet effects of 
aspirin form the basis for its use in the prophylaxis of coro-
nary thrombosis (Chapter 12). Uremia (Chapter 20) is the 
second condition exemplifying an acquired defect in plate-
let function. The pathogenesis of platelet dysfunction 
in uremia is complex and involves defects in adhesion, 
granule secretion, and aggregation.
Hemorrhagic Diatheses Related to Abnormalities 
in Clotting Factors
Inherited or acquired deficiencies of virtually every coag-
ulation factor have been reported as causes of bleeding 
diatheses. Bleeding due to isolated coagulation factor 
deficiencies most commonly manifests as large posttrau-
matic ecchymoses or hematomas, or prolonged bleeding 
after a laceration or any form of surgical procedure. 
Unlike bleeding seen with thrombocytopenia, bleeding 
due to coagulation factor deficiencies often occurs into the 
gastrointestinal and urinary tracts and into weight-bearing 
joints (hemarthrosis). Typical stories include the patient 
Figure 14-26  Structure and function of factor VIII-von Willebrand factor (vWF) complex. Factor VIII is synthesized in the liver and kidney, and vWF is made in 
endothelial cells and megakaryocytes. The two associate to form a complex in the circulation. vWF is also present in the subendothelial matrix of normal blood 
vessels and the α-granules of platelets. Following endothelial injury, exposure of subendothelial vWF causes adhesion of platelets, primarily via the glycoprotein 
lb (GpIb) platelet receptor. Circulating vWF and vWF released from the α-granules of activated platelets can bind exposed subendothelial matrix, further 
contributing to platelet adhesion and activation. Activated platelets form hemostatic aggregates; fibrinogen participates in aggregation through bridging 
interactions with the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (GpIIb/IIIa) platelet receptor. Factor VIII takes part in the coagulation cascade as a cofactor in the activation of factor 
X on the surface of activated platelets. 
Factor VIII
Clotting
cascade
Activated, aggregated
platelets
X
Xa
Endothelium
vWF
GpIb
GpIIb/IIIa
Fibrinogen
Circulating vWF
with Factor VIII
Subendothelial vWF
Platelet
Endothelial defect
Collagen
Platelet
662
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
with mild disease. Type 3 (an autosomal recessive 
disorder) is associated with very low levels of vWF 
and correspondingly severe clinical manifestations. 
Because a severe deficiency of vWF has a marked effect 
on the stability of factor VIII, some of the bleeding char-
acteristics resemble those seen in hemophilia. Type 1 
disease is associated with a spectrum of mutations, 
including point substitutions that interfere with matura-
tion of the vWF protein or that result in rapid clearance 
from the plasma. Type 3 disease is usually caused by 
deletions or frameshift mutations involving both alleles.
•	 Type 2 von Willebrand disease is characterized by 
qualitative defects in vWF; there are several subtypes, 
of which type 2A is the most common. It is inherited as 
an autosomal dominant disorder. vWF is expressed in 
normal amounts, but missense mutations are present 
that lead to defective multimer assembly. Large and 
intermediate multimers, representing the most active 
forms of vWF, are missing from plasma. Type 2 von 
Willebrand disease accounts for 25% of all cases and is 
associated with mild to moderate bleeding.
Patients with von Willebrand disease have defects in 
platelet function despite a normal platelet count. The 
plasma level of active vWF, measured as the ristocetin 
cofactor activity, is reduced. Because vWF stabilizes factor 
VIII, a deficiency of vWF gives rise to a secondary decrease 
in factor VIII levels. This may be reflected by a prolonga-
tion of the PTT in von Willebrand disease types 1 and 3. 
However, except in rare type 3 patients, adverse complica-
tions typical of severe factor VIII deficiency, such as bleed-
ing into the joints, are not seen.
Even within families in which a single defective vWF 
allele is segregating, wide variability in clinical expression 
is common. This is due in part to modifying genes that 
influence circulating levels of vWF, which show a wide 
range in normal populations. Persons with von Willebrand 
disease facing hemostatic challenges (dental work, surgery) 
can be treated with desmopressin, which stimulates vWF 
release, or with infusions of plasma concentrates contain-
ing factor VIII and vWF.
Hemophilia A (Factor VIII Deficiency)
Hemophilia A, the most common hereditary disease asso-
ciated with life-threatening bleeding, is caused by muta-
tions in factor VIII, an essential cofactor for factor IX in 
the coagulation cascade. Hemophilia A is inherited as an 
X-linked recessive trait and thus affects mainly males and 
homozygous females. Rarely, excessive bleeding occurs in 
heterozygous females, presumably as a result of inactiva-
tion of the X chromosome bearing the normal factor VIII 
allele by chance in most cells (unfavorable lyonization). 
About 30% of patients have no family history; their disease 
is caused by new mutations.
Hemophilia A exhibits a wide range of clinical severity 
that correlates well with the level of factor VIII activity. 
Those with less than 1% of normal levels have severe 
disease; those with 2% to 5% of normal levels have mod-
erately severe disease; and those with 6% to 50% of normal 
levels have mild disease. The varying degrees of factor VIII 
deficiency are largely explained by heterogeneity in the 
causative mutations. As with β-thalassemia, the genetic 
lesions include deletions, nonsense mutations that create 
stop codons, and mutations that cause errors in mRNA 
circulation, it binds to vWF, which is produced by endo-
thelial cells and, to a lesser degree, by megakaryocytes, 
which are the source of the vWF that is found in platelet 
α-granules. vWF stabilizes factor VIII, which has a half-life 
of about 2.4 hours when free and 12 hours when bound to 
vWF in the circulation.
Circulating vWF exists as multimers containing as 
many as 100 subunits that can exceed 20 × 106 daltons in 
molecular mass. In addition to factor VIII, these multimers 
interact with several other proteins involved in hemostasis, 
including collagen, heparin, and possibly platelet mem-
brane glycoproteins. The most important function of vWF 
is to promote the adhesion of platelets to the subendothe-
lial matrix. This occurs through bridging interactions 
between platelet glycoprotein Ib-IX, vWF, and matrix com-
ponents such as collagen. Some vWF is secreted from endo-
thelial cells directly into the subendothelial matrix, where 
it lies ready to promote platelet adhesion if the endothelial 
lining is disrupted (Fig. 14-26). Endothelial cells and plate-
lets also release vWF into the circulation. Upon vascular 
injury, this second pool of vWF binds collagen in the sub-
endothelial matrix to further augment platelet adhesion. 
vWF multimers may also promote platelet aggregation by 
binding to activated GpIIb/IIIa integrins; this activity may 
be of particular importance under conditions of high shear 
stress (such as occurs in small vessels).
Factor VIII and vWF protein levels are measured by 
immunological techniques. Factor VIII function is mea-
sured specifically by performing coagulation assays with 
mixtures of patient plasma and factor VIII-deficient plasma. 
vWF function is assessed using the ristocetin agglutination 
test. This assay is performed by mixing the patient’s plasma 
with formalin-fixed platelets and ristocetin, a small mole-
cule that binds and “activates” vWF. Ristocetin induces 
multivalent vWF multimers to bind platelet glycoprotein 
Ib-IX and form interplatelet “bridges.” The resulting 
clumping (agglutination) of platelets is measured in a 
device called an aggregometer. Thus, the degree to which 
patient plasma promotes ristocetin-dependent platelet 
agglutination reflects the vWF activity of the sample.
Von Willebrand Disease
Von Willebrand disease is the most common inherited 
bleeding disorder of humans, affecting about 1% of 
adults in the United States. The bleeding tendency is 
usually mild and often goes unnoticed until some hemo-
static stress, such as surgery or a dental procedure, reveals 
its presence. The most common presenting symptoms are 
spontaneous bleeding from mucous membranes (e.g., epi-
staxis), excessive bleeding from wounds, or menorrhagia. 
It is usually transmitted as an autosomal dominant disor-
der, but rare autosomal recessive variants also exist.
Von Willebrand disease is clinically and molecularly 
heterogeneous; several hundred vWF variants have been 
described, few of which have been formally proven to be 
disease-causing. Three broad categories of von Willebrand 
disease are recognized, each with a range of phenotypes:
•	 Type 1 and type 3 von Willebrand disease are associ-
ated with quantitative defects in vWF. Type 1, an auto-
somal dominant disorder characterized by a mild to 
moderate vWF deficiency, accounts for about 70% of all 
cases. Incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity 
are commonly observed, but it generally is associated 
663
Bleeding disorders: hemorrhagic diatheses 
complication of many different disorders. Sometimes the 
coagulopathy is localized to a specific organ or tissue. As 
a consequence of the thrombotic diathesis there is con-
sumption of platelets, fibrin, and coagulation factors and, 
secondarily, activation of fibrinolysis. DIC can present with 
signs and symptoms relating to the tissue hypoxia and 
infarction caused by the myriad microthrombi; with hem-
orrhage caused by the depletion of factors required for 
hemostasis and the activation of fibrinolytic mechanisms; 
or both.
Etiology and Pathogenesis.  At the outset, it must be 
emphasized that DIC is not a primary disease. It is a coagu-
lopathy that occurs in the course of a variety of clinical 
conditions. In discussing the general mechanisms underly-
ing DIC, it is useful to briefly review the normal process of 
blood coagulation and clot removal (Chapter 4).
Clotting in vivo is thought to be initiated by exposure 
of tissue factor, which combines with factor VII to activate 
both factor X directly and to activate factor IX. Activation 
of factor X leads to the generation of thrombin, the central 
player in clotting. At sites where the endothelium is dis-
rupted, thrombin converts fibrinogen to fibrin, feeds back 
to activate factors IX, VIII, and V, stimulates fibrin cross-
linking, inhibits fibrinolysis, and activates platelets, all of 
which augment the formation of a stable clot. To prevent 
runaway clotting, this process must be sharply limited to 
the site of tissue injury. Remarkably, as thrombin is swept 
away in the bloodstream and encounters uninjured vessels, 
it is converted to an anticoagulant through binding to 
thrombomodulin, a protein found on the surface of endothe-
lial cells. The thrombin-thrombomodulin complex acti-
vates protein C, which is an important inhibitor of factor 
V and factor VIII. Other activated coagulation factors are 
removed from the circulation by the liver, and as you will 
recall, the blood also contains several potent fibrinolytic 
factors, such as plasmin. These and additional checks and 
balances normally ensure that just enough clotting occurs 
at the right place and time.
From this brief review it should be clear that DIC 
could result from pathologic activation of coagulation 
or the impairment of clot-inhibiting mechanisms. Because 
the latter rarely constitute primary mechanisms of DIC, we 
will focus on the abnormal initiation of clotting.
Two major mechanisms trigger DIC: (1) release of 
tissue factor or other, poorly characterized procoaagu-
lants, into the circulation, and (2) widespread injury to 
the endothelial cells. Procoagulants such as tissue factor 
can be derived from a variety of sources, such as the pla-
centa in obstetric complications or tissues injured by 
trauma or burns. Mucus released from certain adenocarci-
nomas may also act as procoagulants by directly activate 
factor X.
Endothelial injury can initiate DIC in several ways. 
Injuries that cause endothelial cell necrosis expose the 
subendothelial matrix, leading to the activation of platelets 
and the coagulation pathway. However, even subtle endo-
thelial injuries can unleash procoagulant activity. One 
mediator of endothelial injury is TNF, which is implicated 
in DIC occurring with sepsis. TNF induces endothelial cells 
to express tissue factor on their cell surfaces and to decrease 
the expression of thrombomodulin, shifting the checks and 
balances that govern hemostasis towards coagulation. 
In addition, TNF up-regulates the expression of adhesion 
splicing. The most severe deficiencies result from an inver-
sion involving the X chromosome that completely abol-
ishes the synthesis of factor VIII. Less commonly, severe 
hemophilia A is associated with point mutations in factor 
VIII that impair the function of the protein. In such cases 
factor VIII protein levels may be normal by immunoassay. 
Mutations permitting some active factor VIII to be synthe-
sized are associated with mild to moderate disease. The 
disease in such patients may be modified by other genetic 
factors that influence factor VIII expression levels, which 
vary widely in normal individuals.
In all symptomatic cases there is a tendency toward easy 
bruising and massive hemorrhage after trauma or opera-
tive procedures. In addition, “spontaneous” hemorrhages 
frequently occur in regions of the body that are susceptible 
to trauma, particularly the joints, where they are known as 
hemarthroses. Recurrent bleeding into the joints leads to 
progressive deformities that can be crippling. Petechiae are 
characteristically absent.
Patients with hemophilia A have a prolonged PTT and 
a normal PT, results that point to an abnormality of the 
intrinsic coagulation pathway. Factor VIII-specific assays 
are required for diagnosis. As explained in Chapter 4, the 
bleeding diathesis reflects the pre-eminent role of the factor 
VIIIa/factor IXa complex in activation of factor X in vivo. 
The precise explanation for the tendency of hemophiliacs 
to bleed at particular sites (joints, muscles, and the central 
nervous system) remains uncertain.
Hemophilia A is treated with infusions of recombinant 
factor VIII. About 15% of patients with severe hemophilia 
A develop antibodies that bind and inhibit factor VIII, 
probably because the protein is perceived as foreign, 
having never been “seen” by the immune system. These 
antibody inhibitors can be a very difficult therapeutic chal-
lenge. Before the development of recombinant factor VIII 
therapy, thousands of hemophiliacs received plasma-
derived factor VIII concentrates containing HIV, and many 
developed AIDS (Chapter 6). The risk of HIV transmission 
has been eliminated but tragically too late for an entire 
generation of hemophiliacs. Efforts to develop somatic 
gene therapy for hemophilia are ongoing.
Hemophilia B (Christmas Disease, Factor IX Deficiency)
Severe factor IX deficiency produces a disorder clinically 
indistinguishable from factor VIII deficiency (hemophilia 
A). This should not be surprising, given that factors VIII 
and IX function together to activate factor X. A wide spec-
trum of mutations involving the gene that encodes factor 
IX is found in hemophilia B. Like hemophilia A, it is inher-
ited as an X-linked recessive trait and shows variable clini-
cal severity. In about 15% of these patients, factor IX protein 
is present but is nonfunctional. As with hemophilia A, the 
PTT is prolonged and the PT is normal. Diagnosis of 
Christmas disease (named after the first patient identified 
with this condition, and not the holiday) is possible only 
by assay of the factor levels. The disease is treated with 
infusions of recombinant factor IX.
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC)
DIC is an acute, subacute, or chronic thrombohemor-
rhagic disorder characterized by the excessive activation 
of coagulation and the formation of thrombi in the 
microvasculature of the body. It occurs as a secondary 
664
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
hemolytic anemia, which results from the fragmentation 
of red cells as they squeeze through the narrowed 
microva­sculature.
•	 Consumption of platelets and clotting factors and the 
activation of plasminogen, leading to a hemorrhagic dia-
thesis. Plasmin not only cleaves fibrin, but it also digests 
factors V and VIII, thereby reducing their concentration 
further. In addition, fibrin degradation products result-
ing from fibrinolysis inhibit platelet aggregation, fibrin 
polymerization, and thrombin. 
molecules on endothelial cells, thereby promoting the 
adhesion of leukocytes, which can damage endothelial 
cells by releasing reactive oxygen species and preformed 
proteases. Widespread endothelial injury may also be pro-
duced by deposition of antigen-antibody complexes (e.g., 
systemic lupus erythematosus), temperature extremes 
(e.g., heat stroke, burns), or microorganisms (e.g., menin-
gococci, rickettsiae). Even subtle endothelial injury can 
unleash procoagulant activity by enhancing membrane 
expression of tissue factor.
DIC is most likely to be associated with obstetric com-
plications, malignant neoplasms, sepsis, and major trauma. 
The triggers in these conditions are often multiple and 
interrelated. For example, in bacterial infections endotoxins 
can inhibit the endothelial expression of thrombomodulin 
directly or indirectly by stimulating immune cells to make 
TNF, and can also activate factor XII. Antigen-antibody 
complexes formed in response to the infection can activate 
the classical complement pathway, giving rise to comple-
ment fragments that secondarily activate both platelets 
and granulocytes. In massive trauma, extensive surgery, and 
severe burns, the major trigger is the release of procoagu-
lants such as tissue factor. In obstetric conditions, procoagu-
lants derived from the placenta, dead retained fetus, or 
amniotic fluid may enter the circulation. Hypoxia, acidosis, 
and shock, which often coexist in very ill patients, can also 
cause widespread endothelial injury, and supervening 
infections can com­plicate the problems further. Among 
cancers, acute promy­elocytic leukemia and adenocarcinomas of 
the lung, pancreas, colon, and stomach are most frequently 
associated with DIC.
The possible consequences of DIC are twofold (Fig. 
14-27).
•	 Widespread deposition of fibrin within the microcircula-
tion. This leads to ischemia of the more severely affected 
or more vulnerable organs and a microangiopathic 
Figure 14-27  Pathophysiology of disseminated intravascular coagulation. 
Massive tissue
destruction
Products of
conception
Activation of
plasmin
Microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia
Proteolysis of
clotting factors
Fibrin split products
Inhibition of thrombin, platelet
aggregation, and fibrin polymerization
Endothelial
injury
Platelet
aggregation
Consumption of
clotting factors
and platelets
Sepsis
Fibrinolysis
Bleeding
Ischemic tissue
damage
Vascular
occlusion
Widespread
microvascular
thrombosis
Release of tissue
factor
  MORPHOLOGY
Thrombi are most often found in the brain, heart, lungs, 
kidneys, adrenals, spleen, and liver, in decreasing order of 
frequency, but any tissue can be affected. Affected kidneys may 
have small thrombi in the glomeruli that evoke only reactive 
swelling of endothelial cells or, in severe cases, microinfarcts or 
even bilateral renal cortical necrosis. Numerous fibrin 
thrombi may be found in alveolar capillaries, sometimes associ-
ated with pulmonary edema and fibrin exudation, creating 
“hyaline membranes” reminiscent of acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (Chapter 15). In the central nervous system, fibrin 
thrombi can cause microinfarcts, occasionally complicated by 
simultaneous hemorrhage, which can sometimes lead to vari-
able neurologic signs and symptoms. The manifestations in the 
endocrine glands are of considerable interest. In meningococ-
cemia, fibrin thrombi within the microcirculation of the adrenal 
cortex are the probable basis for the massive adrenal  
hemorrhages seen in Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome 
(Chapter 24). An unusual form of DIC occurs in association with 
giant hemangiomas (Kasabach-Merritt syndrome), in which 
thrombi form within the neoplasm because of stasis and recur-
rent trauma to fragile blood vessels.
665
Bleeding disorders: hemorrhagic diatheses 
Complications of Transfusion
Blood products are often rightly called the gift of life, 
permitting people to survive traumatic injuries and proce-
dures such as hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and 
complex surgical procedures that would otherwise prove 
fatal. Over 5 million red cell transfusions are given in US 
hospitals each year. Thanks to improved screening of 
donors, blood products (packed red blood cells, platelets, 
and fresh-frozen plasma) are safer than ever before. 
Nevertheless, complications still occur. Most are minor 
and transient. The most common is referred to as a febrile 
nonhemolytic reaction, which takes the form of fever and 
chills, sometimes with mild dyspnea, within 6 hours of a 
transfusion of red cells or platelets. These reactions 
are thought to be caused by inflammatory mediators 
derived from donor leukocytes. The frequency of these 
reactions increases with the storage age of the product and 
is decreased by measures that limit donor leukocyte con-
tamination. Symptoms respond to antipyretics and are 
short-lived.
Other transfusion reactions are uncommon or rare, 
but can have severe and sometimes fatal consequences, 
and therefore merit discussion.
Allergic Reactions
Severe, potentially fatal allergic reactions may occur when 
blood products containing certain antigens are given to 
previously sensitized recipients. These are most likely to 
occur in patients with IgA deficiency, which has a fre-
quency of 1 : 300 to 1 : 500 people. In this instance, the reac-
tion is triggered by IgG antibodies that recognize IgA in 
the infused blood product. Fortunately, most patients with 
IgA deficiency do not develop such antibodies, and these 
severe reactions are rare, occurring in 1 in 20,000 to 1 in 
50,000 transfusions. Urticarial allergic reactions may be trig-
gered by the presence an allergen in the donated blood 
product that is recognized by IgE antibodies in the recipi-
ent. These are considerably more common, occurring in 1% 
to 3% of transfusions, but are generally mild. In most 
instances symptoms respond to antihistamines and do not 
require discontinuation of the transfusion.
Hemolytic Reactions
Acute hemolytic reactions are usually caused by pre-
formed IgM antibodies against donor red cells that fix 
Clinical Features.  The onset can be fulminant, as in endo-
toxic shock or amniotic fluid embolism, or insidious and 
chronic, as in cases of carcinomatosis or retention of a dead 
fetus. Overall, about 50% of the affected are obstetric 
patients having complications of pregnancy. In this setting 
the disorder tends to be reversible with delivery of the 
fetus. About 33% of the affected patients have carcinoma-
tosis. The remaining cases are associated with the various 
entities previously listed.
It is almost impossible to detail all the potential clinical 
presentations, but a few common patterns are worthy 
of description. These include microangiopathic hemolytic 
anemia; dyspnea, cyanosis, and respiratory failure; convul-
sions and coma; oliguria and acute renal failure; and 
sudden or progressive circulatory failure and shock. In 
general, acute DIC, associated with obstetric complications 
or major trauma, for example, is dominated by a bleeding 
diathesis, whereas chronic DIC, such as occurs in cancer 
patients, tends to present with thrombotic complications. 
The diagnosis is based on clinical observation and labo­
ratory studies, including measurement of fibrinogen 
levels, platelets, the PT and PTT, and fibrin degradation 
products.
The prognosis is highly variable and largely depends on 
the underlying disorder. The only definitive treatment is 
to remove or treat the inciting cause. The management 
requires meticulous maneuvering between the Scylla of 
thrombosis and the Charybdis of bleeding diathesis. 
Administration of anticoagulants or procoagulants has 
been advocated in specific settings, but not without 
controversy.
  KEY CONCEPTS
Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura
■ Caused by autoantibodies against platelet antigens
■ May be triggered by drugs, infections, or lymphomas, or 
may be idiopathic
Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura and 
Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
■ Both manifest with thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia, and renal failure; fever and CNS involve-
ment are more typical of TTP.
■ TTP: Caused by acquired or inherited deficiencies of 
ADAMTS 13, a plasma metalloprotease that cleaves very-
high-molecular-weight multimers of von Willebrand factor 
(vWF). Deficiency of ADAMTS 13 results in abnormally 
large vWF multimers that activate platelets.
■ Hemolytic uremic syndrome: caused by deficiencies of 
complement regulatory proteins or agents that damage 
endothelial cells, such as a Shiga-like toxin elaborated 
by E. coli strain O157:H7. The abnormalities initiate plate­
let activation, platelet aggregation, and microvascular 
thrombosis.
Von Willebrand Disease
■ Autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in 
vWF, a large protein that promotes the adhesion of plate-
lets to subendothelial collagen
■ Typically causes a mild to moderate bleeding disorder 
resembling that associated with thrombocytopenia
Hemophilia
■ Hemophilia A: X-linked disorder caused by mutations in 
factor VIII. Affected males typically present with severe 
bleeding into soft tissues and joints and have a PTT.
■ Hemophilia B: X-linked disorder caused by mutations 
in coagulation factor IX. It is clinically identical to hemo-
philia A.
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
■ Syndrome in which systemic activation of the coagulation 
leads to consumption of coagulation factors and platelets
■ Can produce bleeding, vascular occlusion and tissue 
hypoxemia, or both
■ Common triggers: sepsis, major trauma, certain cancers, 
obstetric complications
666
C H A P T E R  14	 Red Blood Cell and Bleeding Disorders 
bilateral pulmonary infiltrates that do not respond to 
diuretics are seen on chest imaging. Other associated find-
ings include fever, hypotension and hypoxemia. The treat-
ment is largely supportive and the outcome is guarded; 
mortality is 5% in uncomplicated cases and up to 67% in 
those who were severely ill. TRALI is important to recog-
nize, because donor products that induce the complication 
in one patient are much more likely to do so in a second. 
Indeed, recent measures to exclude multiparous women 
from plasma donation have resulted in the incidence of 
TRALI being cut in half.
Infectious Complications
Virtually any infectious agent can be transmitted through 
blood products, but bacterial and viral infections are most 
likely to be so. Most bacterial infections are caused by skin 
flora, indicating that the contamination occurred at the 
time that the product is taken from the donor. Significant 
bacterial contamination (sufficient to produce symptoms) 
is much more common in platelet preparations than red 
cell preparations, due in large part to the fact that platelets 
(unlike red cells) must be stored at room temperature, con-
ditions that are favorable for bacterial growth. Rates of 
bacterial infection secondary to platelet transfusion can be 
as high as 1 in 5000, with infections secondary to red cell 
transfusions being several orders of magnitude less fre-
quent. Many of the symptoms (fever, chills, hypotension) 
resemble those of hemolytic and non-hemolytic transfu-
sion reactions, and it may be necessary to start broad-
spectrum antibiotics prospectively in symptomatic patients 
while awaiting laboratory results.
Advances in donor selection, donor screening, and 
infectious disease testing have dramatically decreased the 
incidence of viral transmission by blood products. However 
on rare occasions when the donor is acutely infected but 
the virus is not yet detectable with current nucleic acid 
testing technology, there can be transfusion-related trans-
mission of viruses such as HIV, hepatitis C, and hepatitis 
B. Rates of transmission of HIV, hepatitis C, and hepatitis 
B are estimated to be 1 in 2 million, 1 in 1 million, and 1 
in 500,000, respectively. There also remains a low risk of 
“exotic” infectious agents such as West Nile virus, trypano-
somiasis, and babesiosis.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Red Cell Disorders
An X, Mohandas N: Disorders of the red cell membrane. Br J Haematol 
141:367, 2008. [An excellent overview of inherited red cell membrane 
defects.]
Ganz T, Nemeth E: Hepcidin and disorders of iron metabolism. Annu 
Rev Med 62:347, 2011. [A review focused on disorders of iron metabolism 
that are mediated by altered hepcidin levels, including the anemia of 
chronic inflammation.]
Higgs DR, Engel JD, Stamatoyannopoulos G: Thalassemia. Lancet 
379:373, 2012. [A review of the molecular pathogenesis of thalassemia 
syndromes and current approaches to therapy.]
Kassim AA, Debaun MR: Sickle cell disease, vasculopathy, and thera-
peutics. Annu Rev Med epublished 11/30/2012. [A thorough discus-
sion of the role of vasculopathy in tissue damage in sickle cell disease.]
Parker CJ: Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Curr Opin Hematol 
19:141, 2012. [Discussion of the natural history of PNH and the thera-
peutic impact of antibodies that inhibit the C5b–C9 membrane attack 
complex.]
Platt OS: Hydroxyurea for the treatment of sickle cell disease. N Engl 
J Med 358:1362, 2008. [A review focused on the beneficial effects of 
hydroxyurea in sickle cell disease.]
complement. They most commonly stem from an error in 
patient identification or tube labeling that allows a patient 
to receive an ABO incompatible unit of blood. Pre-existing 
high affinity “natural” IgM antibodies, usually against 
polysaccharide blood group antigens A or B, bind to red 
cells and rapidly induce complement mediated lysis, intra-
vascular hemolysis, and hemoglobinuria. Fever, shaking 
chills, and flank pain appear rapidly. The direct Coombs 
test is typically positive, unless all of the donor red cells 
have lysed. The signs and symptoms are due to comple-
ment activation rather than intravascular hemolysis per se, 
as osmotic lysis of red cells (e.g., by mistakenly infusing 
red cells and 5% dextrose in water simultaneously) pro-
duces hemoglobinuria without any of the other symptoms 
of a hemolytic reaction. In severe cases the process may 
rapidly progress to DIC, shock, acute renal failure, and 
occasionally death.
Delayed hemolytic reactions are caused by antibodies 
that recognize red cell antigens that the recipient was 
sensitized to previously, for example, through a prior 
blood transfusion. These are typically caused by IgG anti-
bodies to foreign protein antigens and are associated with 
a positive direct Coombs test and laboratory features of 
hemolysis (e.g., low haptoglobin and elevated LDH). 
Antibodies to antigens such as Rh, Kell, and Kidd often 
induce sufficient complement activation to cause severe 
and potentially fatal reactions identical to those resulting 
from ABO mismatches. Other antibodies that do not fix 
complement typically result in red cell opsonization, extra-
vascular hemolysis, and spherocytosis, and are associated 
with relatively minor signs and symptoms.
Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury
TRALI is a severe, frequently fatal complication in which 
factors in a transfused blood product trigger the activa-
tion of neutrophils in the lung microvasculature. The 
incidence of TRALI is low, probably less than 1 per 10,000 
transfusions, but it may occur more frequently in patients 
with preexisting lung disease. Though its pathogenesis 
is incompletely understood, current models favor a “two 
hit” hypothesis. The first is a priming event that leads to 
increased sequestration and sensitization of neutrophils 
in the microvasculature of the lung. It is postulated that 
this event may involve endothelial activation, for example 
by inflammatory mediators. The primed neutrophils are 
then activated by a factor present in the transfused blood 
product, which constitutes the second hit.
A variety of factors have been implicated as “second 
hits”, but the leading candidates are antibodies in the 
transfused blood product that recognize antigens expressed 
on neutrophils. By far the most common antibodies associ-
ated with TRALI are those that bind major histocompat­
ibility complex (MHC) antigens, particularly MHC class I 
antigens. These antibodies are often found in multiparous 
women, who generate such antibodies in response to 
foreign MHC antigens expressed by the fetus. Rarely, 
donor antibodies to neutrophil-specific antigens trigger 
TRALI. Although TRALI has been associated with virtu-
ally all plasma-containing blood products, it is more likely 
to occur following transfusion of products containing high 
levels of donor antibodies, such as fresh frozen plasma and 
platelets. The presentation is dramatic, sudden onset respi-
ratory failure, during or soon after a transfusion. Diffuse 
667
Suggested readings
Young NS, Bacigalupo A, Marsh JC: Aplastic anemia: pathophysiol-
ogy and treatment. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 16:S119, 2010. 
[A discussion of the role of the immune system and telomerase mutations 
in aplastic anemia.]
Bleeding Disorders
Arepally GM, Ortel TL: Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Annu 
Rev Med 61:77, 2010. [A discussion of pathogenesis, clinical features, 
diagnostic criteria, and therapeutic approaches in HIT.]
De Meyer SF, Deckmyn H, Vanhoorelbeke K: von Willebrand factor 
to the rescue. Blood 113:5049, 2009. [An update on the molecular 
pathogenesis and treatment of vWD.]
Noris M, Remuzzi G: Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. N Engl J 
Med 361:1676, 2009. [An article focused on the role of excessive activa-
tion of the alternative complement pathway in some forms of HUS.]
Pawlinski R, Mackman N: Cellular sources of tissue factor in endo­
toxemia and sepsis. Thromb Res 125(S1):S70, 2010. [An overview of 
the role of cellular procoagulants in DIC associated with bacterial 
infection.]
Stasi R: Immune thrombocytopenia: pathophysiologic and clinical 
update. Semin Thromb Hemost 38:454, 2012. [Discussion of the role of 
T cells in immune thrombocytopenia and treatment with immunomodu-
latory agents and growth factors.]
Zhou Z, Nguyen TC, Guchhait P, et al: Von Willebrand factor, 
ADAMTS-13, and thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura. Semin 
Thromb Hemost 36:71, 2010. [A review focused on the role of vWF 
deregulation and ADAMTS 13 deficiency in TTP.]
669
Congenital Anomalies  670
Atelectasis (Collapse)  670
Pulmonary Edema  671
Hemodynamic Pulmonary Edema  671
Edema Caused by Microvascular (Alveolar) 
Injury  672
Acute Lung Injury and Acute 
Respiratory Distress Syndrome 
(Diffuse Alveolar Damage)  672
Acute Interstitial Pneumonia  674
Obstructive and Restrictive Lung 
Diseases  674
Obstructive Lung Diseases  674
Emphysema  675
Other Forms of Emphysema  678
Chronic Bronchitis  678
Asthma  679
Bronchiectasis  683
Chronic Diffuse Interstitial (Restrictive) 
Diseases  684
Fibrosing Diseases  684
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis  684
Nonspecific Interstitial Pneumonia  686
Cryptogenic Organizing Pneumonia  687
Pulmonary Involvement in Autoimmune 
Diseases  687
Pneumoconioses  687
Complications of Therapies  692
Granulomatous Diseases  693
Sarcoidosis  693
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis  694
Pulmonary Eosinophilia  695
Smoking-Related Interstitial Diseases  695
Desquamative Interstitial Pneumonia  695
Respiratory Bronchiolitis-Associated Interstitial 
Lung Disease  696
Pulmonary Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis  696
Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis  696
Surfactant Dysfunction Disorders  697
Diseases of Vascular Origin  697
Pulmonary Embolism and Infarction  697
Pulmonary Hypertension  699
Diffuse Pulmonary Hemorrhage 
Syndromes  701
Goodpasture Syndrome  701
Idiopathic Pulmonary Hemosiderosis  701
Polyangiitis With Granulomatosis  701
Pulmonary Infections  702
Community-Acquired Bacterial 
Pneumonias  702
Streptococcus pneumoniae  702
Haemophilus influenzae  703
Moraxella catarrhalis  703
Staphylococcus aureus  703
Klebsiella pneumoniae  703
Pseudomonas aeruginosa  703
Legionella pneumophila  703
Mycoplasma pneumoniae  704
Community-Acquired Viral Pneumonia  705
Influenza Infections  706
Human Metapneumovirus  706
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome  707
Health Care-Associated Pneumonia  707
Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia  707
Aspiration Pneumonia  708
Lung Abscess  708
Chronic Pneumonia  709
Histoplasmosis  709
Blastomycosis  709
Coccidioidomycosis  710
Pneumonia in the Immunocompromised 
Host  711
Pulmonary Disease in Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus Infection  711
Lung Transplantation  711
Tumors  712
Carcinomas  712
Neuroendocrine Proliferations and 
Tumors  719
Miscellaneous Tumors  720
Metastatic Tumors  721
Pleura  721
Pleural Effusion  721
Inflammatory Pleural Effusions  722
Noninflammatory Pleural Effusions  722
Pneumothorax  722
Pleural Tumors  722
Solitary Fibrous Tumor  723
Malignant Mesothelioma  723
C H A P T E R 
15 
The Lung
Aliya N. Husain
CHAPTER CONTENTS
See TARGETED THERAPY available online at 
www.studentconsult.com 
The lungs are ingeniously constructed to carry out their 
cardinal function, the exchange of gases between inspired 
air and blood. Developmentally, the respiratory system 
is an outgrowth from the ventral wall of the foregut. 
The midline trachea develops two lateral outpocketings, 
the lung buds. The lung buds eventually divide into 
branches called lobar bronchi, three on the right and two on 
the left, thus giving rise to three lobes on the right and two 
on the left.
The lobar bronchi allow passage of air from the outside 
into the lung. They have firm cartilaginous walls that 
provide mechanical support, and are lined with columnar 
ciliated epithelium with abundant subepithelial glands 
that produce mucus, which impedes the entry of microbes. 
The mainstem bronchus is more vertical and directly in line 
with the trachea. Consequently, aspirated foreign materi-
als, such as vomitus, blood, and foreign bodies, tend to 
enter the right lung more often than the left. The right and 
670
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
left lobar bronchi branch dichotomously, giving rise to pro-
gressively smaller airways. Accompanying the branching 
airways is the double arterial supply to the lungs, derived 
from the pulmonary and bronchial arteries.
Progressive branching of the bronchi forms bronchioles, 
which are distinguished from bronchi by the lack of carti-
lage and submucosal glands within their walls. Further 
branching of bronchioles leads to the terminal bronchioles, 
which are less than 2 mm in diameter. The part of the lung 
distal to the terminal bronchiole is called the acinus; it is 
roughly spherical, with a diameter of about 7 mm. An 
acinus is composed of respiratory bronchioles (each of which 
gives off several alveoli from its sides), alveolar ducts, and 
alveolar sacs, the blind ends of the respiratory passages, 
whose walls are formed entirely of alveoli, which are the 
site of gas exchange (see Fig. 15-6). A cluster of three to five 
terminal bronchioles, each with its appended acinus, is 
referred to as the pulmonary lobule.
Except for the vocal cords, which are covered by strati-
fied squamous epithelium, the entire respiratory tree, 
including the larynx, trachea, and bronchioles, is lined by 
pseudostratified, tall, columnar, ciliated epithelial cells. 
The bronchial mucosa also contains a population of neuro-
endocrine cells that have neurosecretory-type granules and 
can release a variety of factors, including serotonin, calci-
tonin, and gastrin-releasing peptide (bombesin). Numerous 
mucus-secreting goblet cells and submucosal glands are 
dispersed throughout the walls of the trachea and bronchi 
(but not the bronchioles).
The microscopic structure of the alveolar walls (or alve-
olar septa) consists of the following (Fig. 15-1):
•	 An intertwining network of anastomosing capillaries 
lined with endothelial cells
•	 Basement membrane and surrounding interstitial tissue, 
which separate the endothelial cells from the alveolar 
lining epithelial cells. In thin portions of the alveolar 
septum, the basement membranes of epithelium and 
endothelium are fused, whereas in thicker portions 
they are separated by an interstitial space (pulmonary 
interstitium) containing fine elastic fibers, small bundles 
of collagen, a few fibroblast-like interstitial cells, smooth 
muscle cells, mast cells, and rare lymphocytes and 
monocytes.
•	 Alveolar epithelium, a continuous layer of two cell types: 
flattened, platelike type I pneumocytes, covering 95% of 
the alveolar surface, and rounded type II pneumocytes. 
Type II cells synthesize surfactant (which forms a very 
thin layer over the alveolar cell membranes) and are 
involved in the repair of alveolar epithelium through 
their ability to give rise to type I cells.
•	 Alveolar macrophages, loosely attached to the epithelial 
cells or lying free within the alveolar spaces
The alveolar walls are perforated by numerous pores of 
Kohn, which permit the passage of bacteria and exudate 
between adjacent alveoli (see Fig. 15-34B).
Congenital Anomalies
Developmental anomalies of the lung are rare; the more 
common of these include the following:
•	 Pulmonary hypoplasia is the defective development of 
both lungs (one may be more affected than the other) 
resulting in decreased weight, volume, and acini for 
body weight and gestational age. It is caused by abnor-
malities that compress the lung or impede normal lung 
expansion in utero, such as congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia and oligohydramnios. Severe hypoplasia is fatal 
in the early neonatal period.
•	 Foregut cysts arise from abnormal detachments of primi-
tive foregut and are most often located in the hilum 
or middle mediastinum. Depending on the wall struc-
ture, these cysts are classified as bronchogenic (most 
common), esophageal, or enteric. A bronchogenic 
cyst is rarely connected to the tracheobronchial tree. 
Microscopically, the cyst is lined by ciliated pseu-
dostratified columnar epithelium. The wall contains 
bronchial glands, cartilage, and smooth muscle. They 
usually present due to compression of nearby structures 
or are found incidentally.
•	 Pulmonary sequestration refers to a discrete area of lung 
tissue that (1) lacks any connection to the airway system 
and (2) has a abnormal blood supply arising from the 
aorta or its branches. Extralobar sequestrations are exter-
nal to the lung and most commonly come to attention 
in infants as mass lesions. They may be associated 
with other congenital anomalies. Intralobar sequestrations 
occur within the lung. They usually present in older 
children, often due to recurrent localized infection or 
bronchiectasis.
Other less common congenital abnormalities include 
tracheal and bronchial anomalies (atresia, stenosis, tra-
cheoesophageal fistula), vascular anomalies, congenital 
pulmonary airway malformation and congenital lobar 
overinflation (emphysema).
Atelectasis (Collapse)
Atelectasis refers either to incomplete expansion of the 
lungs (neonatal atelectasis) or to the collapse of previously 
Figure 15-1  Microscopic structure of the alveolar wall. Note that the base-
ment membrane (yellow) is thin on one side and widened where it is continu-
ous with the interstitial space. Portions of interstitial cells are shown. 
Type I
pneumocyte
Type I
pneumocyte
Type II pneumocyte
Endothelium
Endothelium
Interstitial
cell
Interstitium
ALVEOLAR SPACE
ALVEOLAR
SPACE
CAPILLARY
LUMEN
671
Pulmonary edema
Pulmonary Edema
Pulmonary edema (leakage of excessive interstitial fluid 
which accumulates in alveolar spaces) can result from 
hemodynamic disturbances (hemodynamic or cardio-
genic pulmonary edema) or from direct increases in capil-
lary permeability, as a result of microvascular injury 
(Table 15-1). A general consideration of edema is given in 
Chapter 3, and pulmonary congestion and edema are 
described briefly in the context of congestive heart failure 
(Chapter 11). Whatever the clinical setting, pulmonary con-
gestion and edema produce heavy, wet lungs. Therapy and 
outcome depend on the underlying etiology.
Hemodynamic Pulmonary Edema
Hemodynamic pulmonary edema is due to increased 
hydrostatic pressure, as occurs most commonly in left-
sided congestive heart failure. Fluid accumulates initially 
in the basal regions of the lower lobes because hydrostatic 
pressure is greatest in these sites (dependent edema). 
Histologically, the alveolar capillaries are engorged, and 
an intra-alveolar transudate appears as finely granular pale 
pink material. Alveolar microhemorrhages and hemosiderin-
laden macrophages (“heart failure” cells) may be present. In 
long-standing pulmonary congestion (e.g., as seen in mitral 
stenosis), hemosiderin-laden macrophages are abundant, 
and fibrosis and thickening of the alveolar walls cause the 
soggy lungs to become firm and brown (brown induration). 
These changes not only impair normal respiratory function 
but also predispose to infection.
Figure 15-2  Various forms of acquired atelectasis. Dashed lines indicate 
normal lung volume. 
Resorption
Compression
Contraction
inflated lung, producing areas of relatively airless pulmo-
nary parenchyma. The main types of acquired atelectasis, 
which is encountered principally in adults, are the follow-
ing (Fig. 15-2).
•	 Resorption atelectasis stems from complete obstruction 
of an airway. Over time, air is resorbed from the depen-
dent alveoli, which collapse. Since lung volume is 
diminished, the mediastinum shifts toward the atelec-
tatic lung. Airway obstruction is most often caused 
by excessive secretions (e.g., mucus plugs) or exudates 
within smaller bronchi, as may occur in bronchial 
asthma, chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis, and postop-
erative states. Aspiration of foreign bodies and, rarely, 
fragments of bronchial tumors may also lead to airway 
obstruction and atelectasis.
•	 Compression atelectasis results whenever significant 
volumes of fluid (transudate, exudate or blood), tumor, 
or air (pneumothorax) accumulate within the pleural 
cavity. With compression atelectasis, the mediastinum 
shifts away from the affected lung.
•	 Contraction atelectasis occurs when focal or general-
ized pulmonary or pleural fibrosis prevents full lung 
expansion.
Significant atelectasis reduces oxygenation and predis-
poses to infection. Except in cases caused by contraction, 
atelectasis is a reversible disorder.
Table 15-1  Classification and Causes of Pulmonary Edema
Hemodynamic Edema
Increased hydrostatic pressure (increased pulmonary venous pressure)
Left-sided heart failure (common)
Volume overload
Pulmonary vein obstruction
Decreased oncotic pressure (less common)
Hypoalbuminemia
Nephrotic syndrome
Liver disease
Protein-losing enteropathies
Lymphatic obstruction (rare)
Edema Due to Alveolar Wall Injury (Microvascular or Epithelial Injury)
Direct Injury
Infections: bacterial pneumonia
Inhaled gases: high concentration oxygen, smoke
Liquid aspiration: gastric contents, near-drowning
Radiation
Indirect Injury
Septicemia
Blood transfusion related
Burns
Drugs and chemicals: chemotherapeutic agents (bleomycin), other medications 
(methadone, amphotericin B), heroin, cocaine, kerosene, paraquat
Shock, trauma
Edema of Undetermined Origin
High altitude
Neurogenic (central nervous system trauma)
672
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
inflammation and endothelial damage lies at the heart 
of ALI/ARDS.
•	 Accumulation of intraalveolar fluid and formation of hyaline 
membranes. Endothelial activation and injury make pul-
monary capillaries leaky, allowing interstitial and 
intraalveolar edema fluid to form. Damage and necrosis 
of type II alveolar pneumocytes leads to surfactant 
abnormalities, further compromising alveolar gas 
exchange. Ultimately, the inspissated protein-rich 
edema fluid and debris from dead alveolar epithelial 
cells organize into hyaline membranes, a characteristic 
feature of ALI/ARDS.
•	 Resolution of injury is impeded in ALI/ARDS due to 
epithelial necrosis and inflammatory damage that 
impairs the ability of remaining cells to assist with 
edema resorption. Eventually, however, if the inflam-
matory stimulus lessens, macrophages remove intraal-
veolar debris and release fibrogenic cytokines such as 
transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) and platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF). These factors stimulate 
fibroblast growth and collagen deposition, leading to 
fibrosis of alveolar walls. Bronchiolar stem cells prolifer-
ate to replace pneumocytes. Endothelial restoration 
occurs through proliferation of uninjured capillary 
endothelium.
Edema Caused by Microvascular (Alveolar) Injury
Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is due to injury to the 
alveolar septa. Primary injury to the vascular endothelium 
or damage to alveolar epithelial cells (with secondary 
microvascular injury) produces an inflammatory exudate 
that leaks into the interstitial space and, in more severe 
cases, into the alveoli. In most forms of pneumonia the 
edema remains localized and is overshadowed by the man-
ifestations of infection. When diffuse, however, alveolar 
edema is an important contributor to a serious and often 
fatal condition, acute respiratory distress syndrome (discussed 
below).
Acute Lung Injury and Acute  
Respiratory Distress Syndrome  
(Diffuse Alveolar Damage)
Acute lung injury (ALI) (also called noncardiogenic pul-
monary edema) is characterized by the abrupt onset of 
significant hypoxemia and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates 
in the absence of cardiac failure. Acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome (ARDS) is a manifestation of severe ALI. 
Both ARDS and ALI are associated with inflammation-
associated increases in pulmonary vascular permeability, 
edema and epithelial cell death. The histologic manifesta-
tion of these diseases is diffuse alveolar damage (DAD).
ALI is a well-recognized complication of diverse condi-
tions, including both direct injuries to the lungs and sys-
temic disorders (Table 15-2). In many cases, a combination 
of predisposing conditions is responsible (e.g., shock, 
oxygen therapy, and sepsis). Nonpulmonary organ dys-
function may also be present in severe cases.
Pathogenesis.  ALI/ARDS is initiated by injury of pneu-
mocytes and pulmonary endothelium, setting in motion a 
viscous cycle of increasing inflammation and pulmonary 
damage (Fig. 15-3).
•	 Endothelial activation is an important early event. In some 
instances, endothelial activation is secondary to pneu-
mocyte injury, which is sensed by resident alveolar mac-
rophages. In response, these immune sentinels secrete 
mediators such as TNF that act on the neighboring 
endothelium. Alternatively, circulating inflammatory 
mediators may activate pulmonary endothelium directly 
in the setting of severe tissue injury or sepsis. Some of 
these mediators injure endothelial cells, while others 
(notably cytokines) activate endothelial cells to express 
increased levels of adhesion molecules, procoagulant 
proteins and chemokines.
•	 Adhesion and extravasation of neutrophils. Neutrophils 
adhere to the activated endothelium and migrate into 
the interstitium and the alveoli, where they degranulate 
and release inflammatory mediators, including pro­
teases, reactive oxygen species, and cytokines. Macro­
phage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) released into 
the local milieu also helps to sustain the ongoing proin-
flammatory response. The result is increased recruit-
ment and adhesion of leukocytes, causing more 
endothelial injury, and local thrombosis. This cycle of 
Table 15-2  Conditions Associated with Development of Acute Respiratory 
Distress Syndrome
Infection
Sepsis*
Diffuse pulmonary infections*
Viral, Mycoplasma, and Pneumocystis pneumonia; miliary tuberculosis
Gastric aspiration*
Physical/Injury
Mechanical trauma, including head injuries*
Pulmonary contusions
Near-drowning
Fractures with fat embolism
Burns
Ionizing radiation
Inhaled Irritants
Oxygen toxicity
Smoke
Irritant gases and chemicals
Chemical Injury
Heroin or methadone overdose
Acetylsalicylic acid
Barbiturate overdose
Paraquat
Hematologic Conditions
Transfusion associated lung injury (TRALI)
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Pancreatitis
Uremia
Cardiopulmonary Bypass
Hypersensitivity Reactions
Organic solvents
Drugs
*More than 50% of cases of acute respiratory distress syndrome are associated with these 
four conditions.
673
Acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome (diffuse alveolar damage) 
Epidemiologic studies have shown that ALI/ARDS is 
more common and associated with a worse prognosis in 
chronic alcoholics and in smokers. Genetic studies have 
identified a number of genes that increase the risk of ARDS, 
including variants that map to genes linked to inflamma-
tion and coagulation.
Figure 15-3  The normal alveolus (left side) compared with the injured alveolus in the early phase of acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome. 
(Modified with permission from Matthay MA, Ware LB, Zimmerman GA: The acute respiratory distress syndrome. J Clin Invest 122:2731, 2012.) IL-1, inter-
leukin-1; MIF, migration inhibitory factor; PAF, platelet activating factor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
ACUTE LUNG INJURY
NORMAL ALVEOLUS
Sloughed bronchial epithelium
Necrotic type I cell
Inactivated
surfactant
Edema fluid
Cellular debris
Hyaline
membrane
Fibroblast
Procollagen
Injured, swollen
endothelial cells
Edema
Interstitium
Endothelial cell
Capillary
Type II cell
Type I cell
Surfactant
layer
Alveolar
macrophage
Basement membrane
Bronchial epithelium
Alveolus
TNF
Chemokines
Fibrin
IL-1
TNF
MIF
PAF
Proteases
Leukotrienes
Neutrophil
sequestration
and migration
into alveolus
  MORPHOLOGY
In the acute stage, the lungs are heavy, firm, red, and boggy. 
They exhibit congestion, interstitial and intra-alveolar edema, 
inflammation, fibrin deposition, and diffuse alveolar damage. 
The alveolar walls become lined with waxy hyaline mem-
branes (Fig. 15-4) that are morphologically similar to those 
seen in hyaline membrane disease of neonates (Chapter 10). 
Alveolar hyaline membranes consist of fibrin-rich edema fluid 
mixed with the cytoplasmic and lipid remnants of necrotic epi-
thelial cells. In the organizing stage, type II pneumocytes prolif-
erate, and granulation tissue forms in the alveolar walls and 
spaces. In most cases the granulation tissue resolves, leaving 
minimal functional impairment. Sometimes, however, fibrotic 
thickening (scarring) of the alveolar septa ensues. Fatal cases 
often have superimposed bronchopneumonia.
Clinical Course.  Individuals who develop ALI are usually 
hospitalized for one of the predisposing conditions listed 
earlier. Profound dyspnea and tachypnea herald ALI, fol-
lowed by increasing cyanosis and hypoxemia, respiratory 
failure, and the appearance of diffuse bilateral infiltrates on 
radiographic examination. Hypoxemia may be refractory 
Figure 15-4  Diffuse alveolar damage (acute respiratory distress syndrome). 
Some of the alveoli are collapsed, while others are distended. Many are lined 
by hyaline membranes (arrows). 
674
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
varies from 33% to 74%, with most deaths occurring within 
1 to 2 months. Recurrences and chronic interstitial disease 
may occur in the survivors.
Obstructive and Restrictive  
Lung Diseases
Obstructive lung diseases (or airway diseases) are char-
acterized by an increase in resistance to airflow due to 
partial or complete obstruction at any level from the 
trachea and larger bronchi to the terminal and respiratory 
bronchioles. These are contrasted with restrictive dis-
eases, which are characterized by reduced expansion of 
lung parenchyma and decreased total lung capacity. The 
distinction between these chronic noninfectious diffuse 
pulmonary diseases is based primarily on pulmonary func-
tion tests. In individuals with diffuse obstructive disorders, 
pulmonary function tests show decreased maximal airflow 
rates during forced expiration, usually expressed as the 
forced expiratory volume at 1 second (FEV1) over the 
forced ventilatory capacity (FVC). An FEV1/FVC ratio of 
less than 0.7 generally indicates airway obstruction. 
Expiratory airflow obstruction may be caused by a variety 
of conditions (Table 15-3) that are ideally distinguished by 
distinct pathologic changes and different mechanisms of 
airflow obstruction. As discussed later, however, such neat 
distinctions are not always possible. In contrast, restrictive 
diseases are associated with proportionate decreases in 
both total lung capacity and FEV1, leading to normal 
FEV1/FVC ratio. Restrictive defects occur in two broad 
kinds of conditions: (1) chest wall disorders (e.g., severe 
obesity, pleural diseases, kyphoscoliosis, and neuromuscu-
lar diseases such as poliomyelitis) and (2) chronic interstitial 
and infiltrative diseases, such as pneumoconioses and inter-
stitial fibrosis.
Obstructive Lung Diseases
Common obstructive lung diseases include emphysema, 
chronic bronchitis, asthma, and bronchiectasis, each 
of which has distinct pathologic features and clinical 
characteristics (Table 15-3). Emphysema and chronic bron-
chitis are often clinically grouped together and referred 
to as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), since 
the majority of patients have features of both, almost 
certainly because they share a major trigger—cigarette 
Table 15-3  Disorders Associated with Airflow Obstruction: The Spectrum of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Clinical Term
Anatomic Site
Major Pathologic Changes
Etiology
Signs/Symptoms
Chronic bronchitis
Bronchus
Mucous gland hyperplasia, hypersecretion
Tobacco smoke, air pollutants
Cough, sputum production
Bronchiectasis
Bronchus
Airway dilation and scarring
Persistent or severe infections
Cough, purulent sputum, fever
Asthma
Bronchus
Smooth muscle hyperplasia, excess 
mucus, inflammation
Immunologic or undefined causes
Episodic wheezing, cough, dyspnea
Emphysema
Acinus
Airspace enlargement; wall destruction
Tobacco smoke
Dyspnea
Small-airway disease, 
bronchiolitis*
Bronchiole
Inflammatory scarring/obliteration
Tobacco smoke, air pollutants, 
miscellaneous
Cough, dyspnea
*Can be seen with any form of obstructive lung disease or as an isolated finding.
  KEY CONCEPTS
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
■ ARDS is a clinical syndrome of progressive respiratory 
insufficiency caused by diffuse alveolar damage in the 
setting of sepsis, severe trauma, or diffuse pulmonary 
infection.
■ Damage to endothelial and alveolar epithelial cells, with 
inflammation, are the key initiating events and the basis of 
lung damage.
■ The characteristic histologic picture is that of hyaline mem-
branes lining alveolar walls. Edema, scattered neutrophils 
and macrophages, and epithelial necrosis are also present.
to oxygen therapy due to ventilation perfusion mis­
matching (described below), and respiratory acidosis can 
develop. Early in the course, the lungs become stiff due to 
loss of functional surfactant.
The functional abnormalities in ALI are not evenly dis-
tributed throughout the lungs. The lungs have areas that 
are infiltrated, consolidated, or collapsed (and thus poorly 
aerated and poorly compliant) and regions that have nearly 
normal levels of compliance and ventilation. Poorly aerated 
regions continue to be perfused, producing ventilation-
perfusion mismatch and hypoxemia.
There are no proven specific treatments; however, due 
to improvements in therapy for sepsis, mechanical ventila-
tion, and supportive care, the mortality rate among the 
200,000 ALI/ARDS cases seen yearly in the United States 
has decreased from 60% to about 40%, with the majority of 
deaths attributable to sepsis or multiorgan failure and, in 
some cases, direct lung injury. Most survivors recover pul-
monary function but many have persistent impairment in 
physical and cognitive functions. In a minority of patients, 
the exudate and diffuse tissue destruction result in scar-
ring, interstitial fibrosis, and chronic pulmonary disease.
Acute Interstitial Pneumonia
Acute interstitial pneumonia is a term that is used to 
describe widespread ALI of unknown etiology associated 
with a rapidly progressive clinical course. It is sometimes 
referred to as idiopathic ALI-DAD. It is an uncommon 
disorder that occurs at a mean age of 59 years and has no 
sex predilection. Patients present with acute respiratory 
failure often following an illness of less than 3 weeks’ dura-
tion that resembles an upper respiratory tract infection. 
The radiographic and pathologic features are identical to 
those of the organizing stage of ALI. The mortality rate 
675
Obstructive lung diseases
most common form, constituting more than 95% of clini-
cally significant cases.
•	 Centriacinar (centrilobular) emphysema. In this type of 
emphysema the central or proximal parts of the acini, 
formed by respiratory bronchioles, are affected, whereas 
distal alveoli are spared (Figs. 15-6B and 15-7A). Thus, 
both emphysematous and normal airspaces exist 
within the same acinus and lobule. The lesions are more 
common and usually more severe in the upper lobes, 
particularly in the apical segments. Inflammation 
around bronchi and bronchioles is common. In severe 
centriacinar emphysema, the distal acinus may also 
be involved, making differentiation from panacinar 
emphysema difficult. Centriacinar emphysema occurs 
predominantly in heavy smokers, often in association 
with chronic bronchitis (COPD).
•	 Panacinar (panlobular) emphysema. In this type, the 
acini are uniformly enlarged from the level of the respi-
ratory bronchiole to the terminal blind alveoli (Figs. 
15-6C and 15-7B). The prefix “pan” refers to the entire 
acinus, not the entire lung. In contrast to centriacinar 
emphysema, panacinar emphysema tends to occur more 
commonly in the lower zones and in the anterior margins 
of the lung, and it is usually most severe at the bases. 
This type of emphysema is associated with α1-antitrypsin 
deficiency (Chapter 17).
•	 Distal acinar (paraseptal) emphysema. In this type, the 
proximal portion of the acinus is normal, and the distal 
part is predominantly involved. The emphysema is 
more striking adjacent to the pleura, along the lobular 
smoking. In addition, small-airway disease, a variant of 
chronic bronchiolitis, is now known to con­tribute to 
obstruction both in emphysema and chronic bronchitis. 
While asthma is distinguished from chronic bronchitis and 
emphysema by the presence of reversible bronchospasm, 
some patients with otherwise typical asthma also develop 
an irreversible component (Fig. 15-5). Conversely, some 
patients with otherwise typical COPD have a reversible 
component. It is clinically common to label such patients 
as having COPD/asthma.
COPD is a major public health problem. It is the fourth 
leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the United 
States and is projected to rank fifth by 2020 as a worldwide 
burden of disease. There is a clear-cut association between 
heavy cigarette smoking and emphysema, and women 
and African Americans are more susceptible than other 
groups. About 35-50% of heavy smokers develop COPD; 
conversely 80% of COPD is due to smoking. Other risk 
factors include environmental and occupational pollutants, 
airway hyperresponsiveness and genetic polymorphisms. 
Recognizing that there is overlap between various forms 
of COPD, it is still useful to discuss each individually in 
order to highlight the pathophysiologic basis of different 
causes of airflow obstruction.
Emphysema
Emphysema is characterized by irreversible enlargement 
of the airspaces distal to the terminal bronchiole, accom-
panied by destruction of their walls without obvious 
fibrosis. Small airway fibrosis (distinct from chronic bron-
chitis) has recently been to shown to be present in patients 
with emphysema; it is a significant contributor to airflow 
obstruction. Emphysema is classified according to its ana-
tomic distribution within the lobule. Recall that the lobule 
is a cluster of acini, the terminal respiratory units. Based 
on the segments of the respiratory units that are involved, 
emphysema is classified into four major types: (1) centriaci-
nar, (2) panacinar, (3) paraseptal, and (4) irregular. Of these, 
only the first two cause clinically significant airflow 
obstruction (Fig. 15-6). Centriacinar emphysema is the 
Figure 15-5  Schematic representation of overlap between chronic obstruc-
tive lung diseases. 
Small airway disease
EMPHYSEMA
Alveolar wall destruction
Overinflation
CHRONIC BRONCHITIS
Productive cough
Airway inflammation
ASTHMA
Reversible obstruction
Bronchial hyperresponsiveness
triggered by allergens, infection, etc.
Chronic injury (e.g., smoking)
Figure 15-6  Clinically signficant patterns of emphysema. A, Structure of the 
normal acinus. B, Centriacinar emphysema with dilation that initially affects 
the respiratory bronchioles. C, Panacinar emphysema with initial distention 
of the alveolus and alveolar duct. 
NORMAL ACINUS
A
B
C
Respiratory
bronchiole
Respiratory
bronchiole
Alveolar
duct
Alveolar
duct
Alveolus
Alveolus
Centriacinar emphysema
Panacinar emphysema
676
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
cells from the circulation (chemotactic factors), amplify 
the inflammatory process (proinflammatory cytokines) 
and induce structural changes (growth factors).
•	 Protease-antiprotease imbalance. Several proteases are 
released from the inflammatory cells and epithelial 
cells that break down connective tissue components. In 
patients who develop emphysema, there is a relative 
deficiency of protective antiproteases, which in some 
instances has a genetic basis (further discussed later).
•	 Oxidative stress. Substances in tobacco smoke, alveolar 
damage, and inflammatory cells all produce oxidants, 
which may beget more tissue damage and inflamma-
tion. The role of oxidants is supported by mouse models 
in which the NRF2 gene is inactivated. NRF2 encodes a 
transcription factor that serves as a sensor for oxidants 
in alveolar epithelial cells and many other cells types. 
Intracellular oxidants activate NRF2, which upregulates 
the expression of multiple genes that protect cells from 
oxidant damage. Mice without NRF2 are significantly 
more sensitive to tobacco smoke than normal mice, and 
genetic variants in NRF2, NRF2 regulators, and NRF2 
target genes are all associated with smoking-related 
lung disease in humans.
•	 Infection. Although infection is not thought to play a role 
in the initiation of tissue destruction, bacterial and/or 
viral infections may exacerbate the associated inflam-
mation and chronic bronchitis.
The idea that proteases are important is based in 
part on the observation that patients with a genetic defi-
ciency of the antiprotease α1-antitrypsin have a markedly 
enhanced tendency to develop pulmonary emphysema, 
which is compounded by smoking. About 1% of all 
patients with emphysema have this defect. α1-antitrypsin, 
normally present in serum, tissue fluids, and macrophages, 
is a major inhibitor of proteases (particularly elastase) 
secreted by neutrophils during inflammation. α1-antitrypsin 
is encoded by the proteinase inhibitor (Pi) locus on chro-
mosome 14. The Pi locus is polymorphic, and approxi-
mately 0.012% of the US population is homozygous for 
the Z allele, a genotype that is associated with markedly 
decreased serum levels of α1-antitrypsin. More than 80% 
of these individuals develop symptomatic panacinar 
emphysema, which occurs at an earlier age and is of greater 
connective tissue septa, and at the margins of the lobules. 
It occurs adjacent to areas of fibrosis, scarring, or atelec-
tasis and is usually more severe in the upper half of the 
lungs. The characteristic findings are of multiple, con-
tinuous, enlarged airspaces from less than 0.5 cm to 
more than 2.0 cm in diameter, sometimes forming 
cystlike structures. This type of emphysema probably 
underlies many cases of spontaneous pneumothorax in 
young adults.
•	 Airspace enlargement with fibrosis (irregular emphy-
sema). Irregular emphysema, so named because the 
acinus is irregularly involved, is almost invariably asso-
ciated with scarring. In most instances it occurs in small 
foci and is clinically insignificant.
Pathogenesis.  Inhaled cigarette smoke and other noxious 
particles cause lung damage and inflammation, which 
results in parenchymal destruction (emphysema) and 
airway disease (bronchiolitis and chronic bronchitis). 
Factors that influence the development of emphysema 
include the following (Fig. 15-8):
•	 Inflammatory mediators and leukocytes. A wide variety of 
mediators have been shown to be increased in the 
affected parts (including leukotriene B4, IL-8, TNF, and 
others) These mediators are released by resident epithe-
lial cells and macrophages, and attract inflammatory 
Figure 15-7  A, Centriacinar emphysema. Central areas show marked emphysematous damage (E), surrounded by relatively spared alveolar spaces. 
B, Panacinar emphysema involving the entire pulmonary lobule. 
E
E
Figure 15-8  Pathogenesis of emphysema. See text for details. 
Smoking or air pollutant
+
genetic predisposition
Alveolar wall descrution
Protease-
antiprotease
imbalance
Congenital
1-antitrypsin
deficiency
Inflammatory
cells, release of
inflammatory
mediators
Oxidative stress,
increased
apoptosis and
senescence
677
Obstructive lung diseases
Weight loss is common and can be so severe as to suggest 
an occult cancer. Classically, the patient with severe 
emphysema is barrel-chested and dyspneic, with obvi-
ously prolonged expiration, sits forward in a hunched-over 
position, and breathes through pursed lips. Impaired expira-
tory airflow, best measured through spirometry, is the key 
to diagnosis.
In individuals with severe emphysema, cough is often 
slight, overdistention is severe, diffusion capacity is low, 
and blood gas values are relatively normal at rest. Such 
patients may overventilate and remain well oxygenated, 
and therefore are somewhat ingloriously designated pink 
puffers (Table 15-4). Development of cor pulmonale and 
eventually congestive heart failure, related to secondary 
pulmonary hypertension, is associated with a poor prog-
nosis. Death in most patients with emphy­sema is due to 
(1) coronary artery disease, (2) respiratory failure, (3) right-
sided heart failure, or (4) massive collapse of the lungs 
secondary to pneumothorax. Treatment options include 
smoking cessation, oxygen therapy, long-acting broncho-
dilators with inhaled corticosteroids, physical therapy, bul-
lectomy, and, in selected patients, lung volume reduction 
surgery and lung transplantation. α1-AT replacement 
therapy is being evaluated.
severity if the individual smokes. It is postulated that any 
injury (e.g., that induced by smoking) that increases the 
activation and influx of neutrophils into the lung leads to 
local release of proteases, which in the absence of α1-
antitrypsin activity result in excessive digestion of elastic 
tissue and emphysema.
Several other genetic variants have been linked to risk 
of emphysema. Among these are variants associated with 
the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, which are hypothe-
sized to influence the addictiveness of tobacco smoke and 
thus the behavior of smokers. Not surprisingly, the same 
variants are also linked to lung cancer risk, emphasizing 
the importance of smoking in both of these diseases.
A number of factors contribute to airway obstruction in 
emphysema. Small airways are normally held open by the 
elastic recoil of the lung parenchyma, and the loss of elastic 
tissue in the walls of alveoli that surround respiratory 
bronchioles reduces radial traction and thus causes the 
respiratory bronchioles to collapse during expiration. This 
leads to functional airflow obstruction despite the absence 
of mechanical obstruction. In addition, even young smokers 
often have small airway inflammation associated with the 
following changes:
•	 Goblet cell hyperplasia, with mucus plugging of the 
lumen
•	 Inflammatory infiltrates in bronchial walls consisting of 
neutrophils, macrophages, B cells (sometimes forming 
follicles), and T cells
•	 Thickening of the bronchiolar wall due to smooth 
muscle hypertrophy and peribronchial fibrosis
Together these changes narrow the bronchiolar lumen 
and contribute to airway obstruction.
Clinical Course.  Symptoms do not appear until at least 
one third of the functioning pulmonary parenchyma is 
damaged. Dyspnea usually appears first, beginning insidi-
ously but progressing steadily. In some patients, cough or 
wheezing is the chief complaint, easily confused with 
asthma. Cough and expectoration are extremely variable 
and depend on the extent of the associated bronchitis. 
  MORPHOLOGY
Advanced emphysema produces voluminous lungs, often over-
lapping the heart and hiding it when the anterior chest wall is 
removed. Generally, the upper two thirds of the lungs are more 
severely affected. Large apical blebs or bullae are more char-
acteristic of irregular emphysema secondary to scarring and of 
distal acinar emphysema. Large alveoli can easily be seen on 
the cut surface of fixed lungs (Fig. 15-7).
Microscopically, abnormally large alveoli are separated 
by thin septa with only focal centriacinar fibrosis. There 
is loss of attachments of the alveoli to the outer wall of small 
airways. The pores of Kohn are so large that septa appear to 
be floating or protrude blindly into alveolar spaces with a club-
shaped end. Prolonged vasoconstriction leads to changes of 
pulmonary arterial hypertension. As alveolar walls are destroyed, 
there is a decrease in the capillary bed area. With advanced 
disease, there are even larger abnormal airspaces and possibly 
blebs or bullae, which often deform and compress the respira-
tory bronchioles and vasculature of the lung. Inflammatory 
changes in small airways were described earlier.
Table 15-4  Emphysema and Chronic Bronchitis
Predominant 
Bronchitis
Predominant 
Emphysema
Age (yr)
40-45
50-75
Dyspnea
Mild; late
Severe; early
Cough
Early; copious sputum
Late; scanty sputum
Infections
Common
Occasional
Respiratory insufficiency
Repeated
Terminal
Cor pulmonale
Common
Rare; terminal
Airway resistance
Increased
Normal or slightly 
increased
Elastic recoil
Normal
Low
Chest radiograph
Prominent vessels; 
large heart
Hyperinflation; small 
heart
Appearance
Blue bloater
Pink puffer
  KEY CONCEPTS
Emphysema
■ Emphysema is a chronic obstructive airway disease 
characterized by permanent enlargement of air spaces 
distal to terminal bronchioles. It is a component of COPD 
(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) along with chronic 
bronchitis.
■ Subtypes include centriacinar (most common, smoking 
related), panacinar (seen in α1-antitrypsin deficiency), distal 
acinar and irregular.
■ Smoking and inhaled pollutants cause ongoing accumula-
tions of inflammatory cells, releasing elastases and oxi-
dants, which destroy the alveolar walls.
■ Most patients with emphysema also have some degree of 
chronic bronchitis, which is to be expected since cigarette 
smoking is an underlying risk factor for both.
678
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
Other Forms of Emphysema
The following are conditions to which the term emphy-
sema is applied because they are associated with lung 
overinflation or focal emphysematous change
•	 Compensatory hyperinflation. This term is sometimes 
used to designate dilation of alveoli in response to loss 
of lung substance elsewhere. It is best exemplified by 
the hyperexpansion of residual lung parenchyma fol-
lowing surgical removal of a diseased lung or lobe.
•	 Obstructive overinflation. In this condition the lung 
expands because air is trapped within it. A common 
cause is subtotal obstruction of the airways by a tumor 
or foreign object. Another example is congenital lobar 
overinflation in infants, probably resulting from hypopla-
sia of bronchial cartilage and sometimes associated 
with other congenital cardiac and lung abnormalities. 
Overinflation in obstructive lesions occurs either (1) 
because the obstructive agent acts as ball valve, allow-
ing air to enter on inspiration while preventing its 
exodus on expiration, or (2) because collaterals bring in 
air behind the obstruction. These collaterals consist of 
the pores of Kohn and other direct accessory bronchio-
loalveolar connections (the canals of Lambert). Obstructive 
overinflation can be a life-threatening emergency, 
because the affected portion distends sufficiently to 
compress the remaining lung.
•	 Bullous emphysema. This is a descriptive term for large 
subpleural blebs or bullae (spaces greater than 1 cm in 
diameter in the distended state) that can occur in any 
form of emphysema (Fig. 15-9). These localized accen-
tuations of emphysema occur near the apex, sometimes 
near old tuberculous scarring. On occasion, rupture of 
the bullae may give rise to pneumothorax.
•	 Interstitial emphysema. Entrance of air into the connec-
tive tissue stroma of the lung, mediastinum, or subcu-
taneous tissue produces interstitial emphysema. In most 
instances, alveolar tears in pulmonary emphysema 
provide the avenue of entrance of air into the stroma of 
the lung, but rarely, chest wounds that allow entry of 
air or fractured ribs that puncture the lung substance 
underlie this disorder. Alveolar tears are usually caused 
by rapid increases in pressure within alveolar sacs, such 
as occurs when there is a combination of coughing and 
bronchiolar obstruction. Premature children on positive 
pressure ventilation adults who are being artificially 
ventilated are most at risk.
Chronic Bronchitis
Chronic bronchitis is defined clinically as persistent 
cough with sputum production for at least 3 months in at 
least 2 consecutive years, in the absence of any other 
identifiable cause. Common in habitual smokers and 
inhabitants of smog-laden cities, chronic bronchitis is one 
end of the spectrum of COPD, with emphysema being the 
other. Most patients lie somewhere in between, having 
features of both. When chronic bronchitis persists for years, 
it may accelerate decline in lung function, lead to cor pul-
monale and heart failure, or cause atypical metaplasia and 
dysplasia of the respiratory epithelium, providing a rich 
soil for cancerous transformation.
Pathogenesis.  The primary or initiating factor in the 
genesis of chronic bronchitis is exposure to noxious or 
irritating inhaled substances such as tobacco smoke (90% 
of patients are smokers) and dust from grain, cotton, and 
silica.
•	 Mucus hypersecretion. The earliest feature of chronic 
bronchitis is hypersecretion of mucus in the large 
airways, associated with hypertrophy of the submuco-
sal glands in the trachea and bronchi. The basis for 
mucus hypersecretion is incompletely understood, but 
it appears to involve inflammatory mediators such as 
histamine and IL-13. With time, there is also a marked 
increase in goblet cells in small airways—small bronchi 
and bronchioles—leading to excessive mucus produc-
tion that contributes to airway obstruction. It is thought 
that both the submucosal gland hypertrophy and the 
increase in goblet cells are protective reactions against 
tobacco smoke or other pollutants (e.g., sulfur dioxide 
and nitrogen dioxide).
•	 Inflammation. Inhalants that induce chronic bronchitis 
cause cellular damage, eliciting both acute and chronic 
inflammatory responses involving neutrophils, lym-
phocytes, and macrophages. Long-standing inflamma-
tion and accompanying fibrosis involving small airways 
(small bronchi and bronchioles, less than 2 to 3 mm in 
diameter) can also lead to chronic airway obstruction. 
This feature is similar to that described earlier in emphy-
sema and is a common denominator in COPD.
•	 Infection. Infection does not initiate chronic bronchitis, 
but is probably significant in maintaining it and may be 
critical in producing acute exacerbations.
It should be recognized that cigarette smoke predis-
poses to chronic bronchitis in several ways. Not only does 
it damage airway lining cells, leading to chronic inflamma-
tion, but it also interferes with the ciliary action of the 
respiratory epithelium, preventing the clearance of mucus 
and increasing the risk of infection.
Figure 15-9  Bullous emphysema. Note the large subpleural bullae (upper 
left). 
679
Obstructive lung diseases
These symptoms are usually associated with widespread 
but variable bronchoconstriction and airflow limitation 
that is at least partly reversible, either spontaneously or 
with treatment. Some of the stimuli that trigger attacks in 
patients would have little or no effect in subjects with 
normal airways. Rarely, a state of unremitting attacks, 
called acute severe asthma (formerly known as status asth-
maticus), may prove fatal; usually, such patients have had 
a long history of asthma. Between the attacks, patients may 
be virtually asymptomatic. Of note, there has been a sig-
nificant increase in the incidence of asthma in the Western 
world over the past 40 to 50 years, which may be reaching 
a plateau now. More recently, although treatment for 
asthma has improved substantially, the prevalence of 
asthma continues to increase in low and middle income 
countries and in some ethnic groups in which prevalence 
was previously low.
Asthma may be categorized as atopic (evidence of 
allergen sensitization and immune activation, often in a 
patient with allergic rhinitis or eczema) or non-atopic (no 
evidence of allergen sensitization). In either type, episodes 
of bronchospasm can have diverse triggers, such as respi-
ratory infections (especially viral infections), exposure to 
irritants (e.g., smoke, fumes), cold air, stress, and exercise. 
There is some evidence that sub-classifying asthma accord-
ing to its clinical features and underlying biology is clini-
cally useful. One example is early-onset allergic asthma 
associated with TH2 helper T cell inflammation, a feature 
seen in about half of the patients. This form of asthma 
responds well to corticosteroids. However, there is no 
current consensus as to definitions and diagnostic criteria. 
Asthma may also be classified according to the agents 
or events that trigger bronchoconstriction. These include 
seasonal, exercise-induced, drug-induced (e.g., aspirin), 
and occupational asthma, and asthmatic bronchitis in 
smokers.
Atopic Asthma.  This most common type of asthma is a 
classic example of IgE-mediated (type I) hypersensitivity 
reaction, discussed in detail in Chapter 6. The disease 
usually begins in childhood and is triggered by environ-
mental allergens, such as dusts, pollens, cockroach or 
animal dander, and foods, which most frequently act in 
synergy with other proinflammatory environmental cofac-
tors, most notable respiratory viral infections. A positive 
family history of asthma is common, and a skin test with 
the offending antigen in these patients results in an imme-
diate wheal-and-flare reaction. Atopic asthma may also be 
diagnosed based on high total serum IgE levels or evidence 
of allergen sensitization by serum radioallergosorbent tests 
(called RAST), which can detect the presence of IgE anti-
bodies that are specific for individual allergens.
Non-Atopic Asthma.  Individuals with non-atopic asthma 
do not have evidence of allergen sensitization and skin test 
results are usually negative. A positive family history of 
asthma is less common in these patients. Respiratory infec-
tions due to viruses (e.g., rhinovirus, parainfluenza virus 
and respiratory syncytial virus) are common triggers in 
non-atopic asthma. Inhaled air pollutants, such as smoking, 
sulfur dioxide, ozone, and nitrogen dioxide, may also con-
tribute to the chronic airway inflammation and hyperreac-
tivity in some cases. As already mentioned, in some 
instances attacks may be triggered by seemingly innocuous 
events, such as exposure to cold and even exercise.
Clinical Features.  The cardinal symptom of chronic bron-
chitis is a persistent cough productive of sparse sputum. 
For many years no other respiratory functional impairment 
is present, but eventually dyspnea on exertion develops. 
With the passage of time, and usually with continued 
smoking, other elements of COPD may appear, including 
hypercapnia, hypoxemia, and mild cyanosis (“blue bloat-
ers”). Differentiation of pure chronic bronchitis from that 
associated with emphysema can be made in the classic case 
(Table 15-4), but, as has been mentioned, many patients 
with COPD have both conditions. Long-standing severe 
chronic bronchitis commonly leads to cor pulmonale and 
cardiac failure. Death may also result from further impair-
ment of respiratory function due to superimposed acute 
infections.
Asthma
Asthma is a chronic disorder of the conducting airways, 
usually caused by an immunological reaction, which 
is marked by episodic bronchoconstriction due to 
increased airway sensitivity to a variety of stimuli; 
inflammation of the bronchial walls; and increased 
mucus secretion. The disease is manifested by recurrent 
episodes of wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness, and 
cough, particularly at night and/or in the early morning. 
  KEY CONCEPTS
Chronic Bronchitis
■ Chronic bronchitis is defined as persistent productive 
cough for at least 3 consecutive months in at least 2 con-
secutive years.
■ Cigarette smoking is the most important risk factor; air 
pollutants also contribute.
■ The dominant pathologic features are mucus hypersecre-
tion and persistent inflammation.
■ Histologic examination demonstrates enlargement of 
mucous-secreting glands, goblet cell hyperplasia, chronic 
inflammation, and bronchiolar wall fibrosis.
  MORPHOLOGY
Grossly, there is hyperemia, swelling, and edema of the mucous 
membranes, frequently accompanied by excessive mucinous 
or mucopurulent secretions. Sometimes, heavy casts of secre-
tions and pus fill the bronchi and bronchioles. The characteristic 
features are mild chronic inflammation of the airways (predomi-
nantly lymphocytes) and enlargement of the mucus-secreting 
glands of the trachea and bronchi. Although the numbers of 
goblet cells increase slightly, the major change is in the size 
of mucous glands (hyperplasia). This increase can be 
assessed by the ratio of the thickness of the mucous gland layer 
to the thickness of the wall between the epithelium and the 
cartilage (Reid index). The Reid index (normally 0.4) is increased 
in chronic bronchitis, usually in proportion to the severity and 
duration of the disease. The bronchial epithelium may exhibit 
squamous metaplasia and dysplasia. There is marked narrow-
ing of bronchioles caused by mucus plugging, inflammation, 
and fibrosis. In the most severe cases, there may be obliteration 
of lumen due to fibrosis (bronchiolitis obliterans).
680
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
Drug-Induced Asthma.  Several pharmacologic agents pro­
voke asthma. Aspirin-sensitive asthma is an uncommon 
type, occurring in individuals with recurrent rhinitis 
and nasal polyps. These individuals are exquisitely sensi-
tive to small doses of aspirin as well as other nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory medications, and they experience not 
only asthmatic attacks but also urticaria. Aspirin (and 
other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) triggers 
asthma in these patients by inhibiting the cyclooxygenase 
pathway of arachidonic acid metabolism, leading to 
a rapid decrease in prostaglandin E2. Normally prosta­
glandin E2 inhibits enzymes that generate proinflamma-
tory mediators such as leukotrienes B4, C4, D4 and E4, which 
are believed to have central roles in aspirin-induced 
asthma.
Occupational Asthma.  This form of asthma may be trig-
gered by fumes (epoxy resins, plastics), organic and chemi-
cal dusts (wood, cotton, platinum), gases (toluene), or 
other chemicals (formaldehyde, penicillin products). Only 
minute quantities of chemicals are required to induce the 
attack, which usually occurs after repeated exposure. The 
underlying mechanisms vary according to stimulus and 
include type I reactions, direct liberation of bronchocon-
strictor substances, and hypersensitivity responses of 
unknown origin.
Pathogenesis.  Atopic asthma is caused by a TH2 and IgE 
response to environmental allergens in genetically pre-
disposed individuals. Airway inflammation is central to 
disease pathophysiology and causes airway dysfunction 
partly through the release of potent inflammatory media-
tors and partly through remodeling of the airway wall. As 
the disease becomes more severe, there is increased local 
secretion of growth factors, which induce mucus gland 
hypertrophy, smooth muscle proliferation, angiogenesis, 
fibrosis and nerve proliferation. Varying combinations of 
these processes help explain the different asthma subtypes, 
their response to treatment and their natural history over 
a person’s lifetime.
The contributions of the immune response, genetics and 
environment are discussed separately below, although 
they are closely intertwined.
TH2 Responses, IgE and Inflammation.  A fundamental abnor-
mality in asthma is an exaggerated TH2 response to nor-
mally harmless environmental antigens (Fig 15-10). TH2 
cells secrete cytokines that promote inflammation and 
stimulate B cells to produce IgE and other antibodies. 
These cytokines include IL-4, which stimulates the produc-
tion of IgE; IL-5, which activates locally recruited eosino-
phils; and IL-13, which stimulates mucus secretion from 
bronchial submucosal glands and also promotes IgE pro-
duction by B cells. The T cells and epithelial cells secrete 
chemokines that recruit more T cells and eosinophils, thus 
exacerbating the reaction. As in other allergic reactions 
(Chapter 6), IgE binds to the Fc receptors on submucosal 
mast cells, and repeat exposure to the allergen triggers the 
mast cells to release granule contents and produce cyto-
kines and other mediators, which collectively induce the 
early-phase (immediate hypersensitivity) reaction and the late-
phase reaction.
The early reaction is dominated by bronchoconstric-
tion, increased mucus production, variable degrees of 
vasodi­lation, and increased vascular permeability. Bron­
choconstriction is triggered by direct stimulation of sub­
epithelial vagal (parasympathetic) receptors through 
both central and local reflexes triggered by mediators pro-
duced by mast cells and other cells in the reaction. The 
late-phase reaction is dominated by recruitment of leuko-
cytes, notably eosinophils, neutrophils, and more T cells. 
Although TH2 cells are the dominant T cell type involved 
in the disease, other T cells that contribute to the inflam-
mation include TH17 (IL-17 producing) cells, which recruit 
neutrophils.
Many mediators produced by leukocytes and epithelial 
cells have been implicated in the asthmatic response. The 
long list of “suspects” in acute asthma can be ranked based 
on the clinical efficacy of pharmacologic intervention with 
antagonists of specific mediators.
•	 Mediators whose role in bronchospasm is clearly sup-
ported by efficacy of pharmacologic intervention are: 
(1) leukotrienes C4, D4, and E4, which cause prolonged 
bronchoconstriction as well as increased vascular per-
meability and increased mucus secretion, and (2) acetyl-
choline, released from intrapulmonary parasympathetic 
nerves, which can cause airway smooth muscle constric-
tion by directly stimulating muscarinic receptors.
•	 A second group includes agents present at the “scene 
of the crime” but whose actual role in acute allergic 
asthma seems relatively minor on the basis of lack 
of efficacy of potent antagonists or synthesis inhib­
itors: (1) histamine, a potent bronchoconstrictor; (2) pros-
taglandin D2, which elicits bronchoconstriction and 
vasodila­tation; and (3) platelet-activating factor, which 
causes aggregation of platelets and release of serotonin 
from their granules. These mediators might yet prove 
important in certain types of chronic or nonallergic 
asthma.
•	 Finally, a large third group comprises the “suspects” 
for whom specific antagonists or inhibitors are not avail-
able or have been insufficiently studied as yet. Several 
promising focused therapies for asthma that target the 
IL-13/IL-4 signal transduction pathways are in develop-
ment, including anti-IL-13 monoclonal antibodies and 
IL-4 receptor antagonists. Other targets include IL-1, 
TNF, IL-6, chemokines (e.g., eotaxin, also known as 
CCL11), neuropeptides, nitric oxide, bradykinin, and 
endothelins.
It is thus clear that multiple mediators contribute to the 
acute asthmatic response. Moreover, the composition of 
this “mediator soup” might vary among individuals or 
different types of asthma. The appreciation of the impor-
tance of inflammatory cells and mediators in asthma has 
led to greater emphasis on anti-inflammatory drugs, such 
as corticosteroids, in its treatment.
Genetic Susceptibility.  Susceptibility to atopic asthma is 
multigenic and often associated with increased inci­dence 
of other allergic disorders, such as allergic rhinitis (hay 
fever) and eczema. The genetic polymorphisms linked to 
asthma and other allergic disorders were described in 
Chapter 6. Suffice it to say here that many of these are 
likely to influence immune responses and the subsequent 
inflammatory reaction. Some of the stronger or more inter-
esting associations include the following:
681
Obstructive lung diseases
T cell
receptor
Pollen
Antigen
(allergen)
Dendritic
cell
Mucosal
lining
Goblet
cell
Mucus
Mucus
Mast cell
Increased vascular
permeability
and edema
Eosinophil
Neutrophil
Mast cell
Lymphocyte (CD4+, TH2)
Eosinophil
Eosinophil
Basement
membrane
Macro-
phage
Glands
Smooth
muscle
Glands
Cartilage
Smooth
muscle
Lamina
propria
Basement
membrane
Epithelium
Smooth
muscle
Basophil
Eosinophil
Neutrophil
Major basic
protein
Eosinophil
           cationic protein
Antigen
Mucosal lining
Mucus
Goblet cell
Mucus
Goblet cell
Vagal afferent nerve
Vagal efferent nerve
Eotaxin
IL-5
IgE Fc
receptor
IgE antibody
IL-5
C
D
B
A
E
IL-4
Activation
Eosinophil recruitment
AIRWAY IN ASTHMA
IMMEDIATE PHASE (MINUTES)
LATE PHASE (HOURS)
NORMAL AIRWAY
TRIGGERING OF ASTHMA
Mast cell
IgE
B cell
TH2
cell
TH2
TH2
TH2
TH2
B
Release of granules
and mediators
Figure 15-10  A and B, Comparison of a normal airway and an airway involved by asthma. The asthmatic airway is marked by accumulation of mucus in 
the bronchial lumen secondary to an increase in the number of mucus-secreting goblet cells in the mucosa and hypertrophy of submucosal glands; intense 
chronic inflammation due to recruitment of eosinophils, macrophages, and other inflammatory cells; thickened basement membrane; and hypertrophy  
and hyperplasia of smooth muscle cells. C, Inhaled allergens (antigen) elicit a TH2-dominated response favoring IgE production and eosinophil recruitment. 
D, On re-exposure to antigen (Ag), the immediate reaction is triggered by Ag-induced cross-linking of IgE bound to Fc receptors on mast cells. These 
cells release preformed mediators that directly and via neuronal reflexes induce bronchospasm, increased vascular permeability, mucus production, and 
recruitment of leukocytes. E, Leukocytes recruited to the site of reaction (neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils; lymphocytes and monocytes) release addi-
tional mediators that initiate the late phase of asthma. Several factors released from eosinophils (e.g., major basic protein, eosinophil cationic protein) also 
cause damage to the epithelium. 
682
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
•	 One susceptibility locus for asthma is located on chro-
mosome 5q, near the gene cluster encoding the cyto-
kines IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, and IL-13 and the IL-4 
receptor. Among the genes in this cluster, polymor-
phisms in the IL13 gene have the strongest and most 
consistent associations with asthma or allergic disease.
•	 Particular class II HLA alleles are linked to production 
of IgE antibodies against some antigens, such as ragweed 
pollen.
•	 Polymorphisms in the gene encoding ADAM33, a metal-
loproteinase, may be linked to increased proliferation of 
bronchial smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts, thus con-
tributing to bronchial hyperreactivity and subepithelial 
fibrosis.
•	 β2-adrenergic receptor gene variants are associated with 
differential in vivo airway hyper-responsiveness and in 
vitro response to β-agonist stimulation.
•	 IL-4 receptor gene variants are associated with atopy, 
elevated total serum IgE, and asthma.
•	 Variants in several members of the mammalian family 
of chitinases, enzymes that cleave chitin, a polysaccha-
ride contained in many human parasites and the cell 
walls of fungi, have been associated with asthma. 
Increased serum levels and lung expression of YKL-40 
(a chitinase-like glycoprotein expressed and secreted 
by a variety of cells) are correlated with disease sever-
ity, airway remodeling, and decreased pulmonary 
function.
Environmental Factors.  Asthma is a disease of industrial-
ized societies where the majority of people live in cities. 
This likely has two main explanations. Firstly, industrial-
ized environments contain many airborne pollutants 
that can serve as allergens to initiate the TH2 response. 
Secondly, city life tends to limit the exposure of very young 
children to certain antigens, particularly microbial anti-
gens, and exposure to such antigens seems to protect 
children from asthma and atopy. This protective effect is 
even more apparent if the microbial exposure occurred 
throughout the mother’s pregnancy. The idea that micro-
bial exposure during early development reduces the later 
incidence of allergic (and some autoimmune) diseases has 
been popularized as the hygiene hypothesis. Although the 
underlying mechanisms of this protective effect are unclear, 
it has spurred trials of probiotics and putative allergens 
given to children to decrease their risk of later developing 
allergies.
Infections themselves are not a cause or trigger for 
asthma, but young children with aeroallergen sensitization 
who develop lower respiratory tract viral infections (rhi-
novirus type C, respiratory syncytial virus) have a 10- to 
30-fold increased risk of developing persistent and/or 
severe asthma. Both viral and bacterial infections (identi-
fied by cultures and non-culture tools) are associated with 
acute exacerbations of the disease.
Over time, repeated bouts of allergen exposure and 
immune reactions result in structural changes in the bron-
chial wall, referred to as “airway remodeling.” These changes, 
described later in greater detail, include hypertrophy and 
hyperplasia of bronchial smooth muscle, epithelial injury, 
increased airway vascularity, increased subepithelial 
mucus gland hypertrophy, and deposition of subepithelial 
collagen.
  MORPHOLOGY
In patients dying of acute severe asthma (status asthmaticus) 
the lungs are distended by overinflation and contain small areas 
of atelectasis. The most striking gross finding is occlusion of 
bronchi and bronchioles by thick, tenacious mucus plugs, 
which often contain shed epithelium. A characteristic finding in 
sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage specimens is Curschmann 
spirals, which may result from extrusion of mucus plugs from 
subepithelial mucous gland ducts or bronchioles. Also present 
are numerous eosinophils and Charcot-Leyden crystals; the 
latter are composed of an eosinophil protein called galectin-10. 
The other characteristic histologic findings of asthma, collec-
tively called “airway remodeling” (Fig. 15-10B, and 15-11), 
include:
•	 Thickening of airway wall
•	 Subbasement membrane fibrosis (due to deposition of type 
I and III collagen)
•	 Increased vascularity
•	 An increase in the size of the submucosal glands and number 
of airway goblet cells
•	 Hypertrophy and/or hyperplasia of the bronchial wall muscle
While acute airflow obstruction is primarily attributed to mus-
cular bronchoconstriction, acute edema, and mucus plugging, 
airway remodeling may also contribute to chronic irreversible 
airway obstruction as well.
Clinical Course.  A classic acute asthmatic attack lasts up 
to several hours. In some patients, however, the cardinal 
symptoms of chest tightness, dyspnea, wheezing, and 
coughing (with or without sputum production) are present 
at a low level constantly. In its most severe form, status 
asthmaticus, the paroxysm persists for days and even weeks, 
sometimes causing airflow obstruction that is so extreme 
that marked cyanosis or even death ensues.
The diagnosis is based on demonstration of an increase 
in airflow obstruction (from baseline levels), difficulty 
with exhalation (prolonged expiration, wheeze), periph-
eral blood eosinophilia, and the finding of eosinophils, 
Curschmann spirals, and Charcot-Leyden crystals in the 
sputum (particularly in patients with atopic asthma). In 
the usual case with intervals of freedom from respiratory 
difficulty, the disease is more discouraging and disabling 
than lethal, and most individuals with asthma are able to 
maintain a productive life. Therapy is based on severity of 
the disease. Up to 50% of childhood asthma remits in ado-
lescence only to return in adulthood in a significant number 
of patients. In other cases there is a variable decline in 
baseline lung function.
  KEY CONCEPTS
Asthma
■ Asthma is characterized by reversible bronchoconstriction 
caused by airway hyperresponsiveness to a variety of 
stimuli.
■ Atopic asthma is caused by a TH2 and IgE-mediated 
immunologic reaction to environmental allergens and is 
characterized by acute-phase (immediate) and late-phase 
683
Obstructive lung diseases
Bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis is a disorder in which destruction of 
smooth muscle and elastic tissue by chronic necrotizing 
infections leads to permanent dilation of bronchi and 
bronchioles. Because of better control of lung infections, 
bronchiectasis is now uncommon. It may still develop in 
association with a variety of conditions, including the 
following:
•	 Congenital or hereditary conditions, including cystic fibro-
sis, intralobar sequestration of the lung, immuno­
deficiency states, and primary ciliary dyskinesia and 
Kartagener syndromes
•	 Infections, including necrotizing pneumonia caused by 
bacteria, viruses, or fungi; this may be a single severe 
episode or recurrent infections
•	 Bronchial obstruction, due to tumor, foreign bodies, or 
mucus impaction; in each instance the bronchiectasis is 
localized to the obstructed lung segment
•	 Other conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis, 
systemic lupus erythematosus, inflammatory bowel 
disease, COPD, and posttransplantation (chronic lung 
rejection, and chronic graft-versus-host disease after 
bone marrow transplantation)
•	 One fourth to one half of cases are idiopathic, lacking the 
aforementioned associations.
Pathogenesis.  Obstruction and infection are the major 
conditions associated with bronchiectasis, and it is likely 
that both are necessary for the development of full-fledged 
lesions. After bronchial obstruction, normal clearing mech-
anisms are impaired, resulting in pooling of secretions 
distal to the obstruction and secondary infection and 
inflammation. Conversely, severe infections of the bronchi 
lead to inflammation, often with necrosis, fibrosis, and 
eventually dilation of airways.
Both mechanisms are readily apparent in a severe form 
of bronchiectasis that is associated with cystic fibrosis 
(Chapter 10). In cystic fibrosis the primary defect in ion 
transport leads to defective mucociliary action and airway 
obstruction by thick viscous secretions. This sets the stage 
for chronic bacterial infections, which cause widespread 
damage to airway walls. With destruction of supporting 
smooth muscle and elastic tissue, the bronchi become 
markedly dilated, while smaller bronchioles are progres-
sively obliterated as a result of fibrosis (bronchiolitis 
obliterans).
In primary ciliary dyskinesia, an autosomal recessive syn-
drome with a frequency of 1 in 15,000 to 40,000 births, 
ciliary dysfunction due to defects in ciliary motor proteins 
(e.g., mutations involving dynein) contributes to the reten-
tion of secretions and recurrent infections that in turn lead 
to bronchiectasis. Ciliary function is necessary during 
development to ensure proper rotation of the developing 
organs in the chest and abdomen; it is absence, their loca-
tion becomes a matter of chance. As a result, approximately 
half of the patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia have 
Kartagener syndrome, marked by situs inversus or a partial 
lateralizing abnormality associated with bronchiectasis 
and sinusitis. The lack of ciliary activity interferes with 
bacterial clearance, predisposes the sinuses and bronchi to 
infection, and affects cell motility during embryogenesis, 
resulting in the situs inversus. Males with this condition 
tend to be infertile, as a result of sperm dysmotility.
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis occurs in patients 
with asthma and cystic fibrosis who develop periods of 
exacerbation and remission that may lead to proximal 
bronchiectasis and fibrotic lung disease. It is a condition 
that results from a hypersensitivity reaction to the fungus 
Aspergillus fumigatus. Sensitization to Aspergillus in the 
allergic host leads to activation of TH2 helper T cells, which 
play a key role in recruiting eosinophils and other leuko-
cytes. Characteristically, there are high serum IgE levels, 
serum antibodies to Aspergillus, intense airway inflamma-
tion with eosinophils, and the formation of mucus plugs, 
which play a primary role in its pathogenesis.
reactions. The TH2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL13 are impor-
tant mediators. IL17 and IL9 are also being shown to be 
important in some asthmatics.
■ Triggers for nonatopic asthma are less clear but include 
viral infections and inhaled air pollutants, which can also 
trigger atopic asthma.
■ Eosinophils are key inflammatory cells found in almost all 
subtypes of asthma; other inflammatory cells include mast 
cells, neutrophils and T lymphocytes.
■ Airway remodeling (sub-basement membrane fibrosis, 
hypertrophy of bronchial glands, and smooth muscle 
hyperplasia) adds an irreversible component to the 
obstructive disease.
Figure 15-11  Bronchus from an asthmatic patient showing goblet cell hyper-
plasia (green arrowhead), subbasement membrane fibrosis (black arrow-
head), eosinophilic inflammation (yellow arrowhead), and muscle hypertrophy 
(blue arrowhead). 
  MORPHOLOGY
Bronchiectasis usually affects the lower lobes bilaterally, par-
ticularly air passages that are vertical, and is most severe in the 
more distal bronchi and bronchioles. When tumors or aspiration 
of foreign bodies lead to bronchiectasis, the involvement may 
be localized to a single lung segment. The airways are dilated, 
sometimes up to four times normal size. Characteristically, 
the bronchi and bronchioles are so dilated that they can be 
684
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
Clinical Course.  Bronchiectasis causes severe, persistent 
cough; expectoration of foul smelling, sometimes bloody 
sputum; dyspnea and orthopnea in severe cases; and, on 
occasion, hemoptysis, which may be massive. Symptoms 
are often episodic and are precipitated by upper respira-
tory tract infections or the introduction of new pathogenic 
agents. Paroxysms of cough are particularly frequent 
when the patient rises in the morning, as the change in 
position causes collections of pus and secretions to drain 
into the bronchi. Obstructive respiratory insufficiency can 
lead to marked dyspnea and cyanosis. However, due to 
current treatment with better antibiotics and physical 
therapy, outcome has improved considerably and life 
expectancy has almost doubled. Hence cor pulmonale, 
brain abscesses, and amyloidosis are less frequent compli-
cations of bronchiectasis currently than in the past.
Chronic Diffuse Interstitial  
(Restrictive) Diseases
Restrictive lung disorders occur in two general conditions: 
(1) chronic interstitial and infiltrative diseases, such as pneu-
moconioses and interstitial fibrosis of unknown etiology; 
and (2) chest wall disorders (e.g., neuromuscular diseases 
such as poliomyelitis, severe obesity, pleural diseases, and 
kyphoscoliosis), which are not discussed here.
Chronic interstitial pulmonary diseases are a hetero-
geneous group of disorders characterized predominantly 
by inflammation and fibrosis of the pulmonary inter­
stitium. Many of the entities are of unknown cause and 
pathogenesis, and some have an intra-alveolar as well as 
an interstitial component. There is frequent overlap in his-
tologic features among the different conditions. These dis-
orders account for about 15% of noninfectious diseases 
seen by pulmonary physicians.
In general, the clinical and pulmonary functional 
changes are those of restrictive lung disease. Patients have 
dyspnea, tachypnea, end-inspiratory crackles, and even-
tual cyanosis, without wheezing or other evidence of 
airway obstruction. The classic functional abnormalities 
are reductions in diffusion capacity, lung volume, and lung 
compliance. Chest radiographs show bilateral lesions that 
take the form of small nodules, irregular lines, or ground-
glass shadows, all corresponding to areas of interstitial fibro-
sis. Eventually, secondary pulmonary hypertension and 
right-sided heart failure associated with cor pulmonale 
may result. Although the entities can often be distinguished 
in the early stages, the advanced forms are hard to differ-
entiate because all result in scarring and gross destruction 
of the lung, often referred to as end-stage lung or honeycomb 
lung. Diffuse restrictive diseases are categorized based on 
histology and clinical features (Table 15-5).
Fibrosing Diseases
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) refers to a clinico-
pathologic syndrome marked by progressive interstitial 
pulmonary fibrosis and respiratory failure. In Europe the 
term cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis is more popular. IPF has 
Figure 15-12  Bronchiectasis in a patient with cystic fibrosis, who underwent 
lung transplantation. Cut surface of lung shows markedly distended periph-
eral bronchi filled with mucopurulent secretions. 
followed almost to the pleural surfaces. By contrast, in the 
normal lung, the bronchioles cannot be followed by eye beyond 
a point 2 to 3 cm from the pleural surfaces. On the cut surface 
of the lung, the dilated bronchi appear cystic and are filled with 
mucopurulent secretions (Fig. 15-12).
The histologic findings vary with the activity and chronicity of 
the disease. In the full-blown, active case there is an intense 
acute and chronic inflammatory exudation within the walls of 
the bronchi and bronchioles, associated with desquamation of 
the lining epithelium and extensive areas of ulceration. There 
may be pseudostratification of the columnar cells or squamous 
metaplasia of the remaining epithelium. In some instances 
necrosis destroys the bronchial or bronchiolar walls and forms 
a lung abscess. Fibrosis of the bronchial and bronchiolar walls 
and peribronchiolar fibrosis develop in the more chronic cases, 
leading to varying degrees of subtotal or total obliteration of 
bronchiolar lumens.
A large variety of bacteria can be found in the usual case  
of bronchiectasis. These include staphylococci, streptococci, 
pneumococci, enteric organisms, anaerobic and micro­
aerophilic bacteria, and (particularly in children) Haemophilus 
influenzae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In allergic broncho-
pulmonary aspergillosis, a few fungal hyphae can be seen on 
special stains within the mucoinflammatory contents of the 
dilated segmental bron­chi. In late stages the fungus may infil-
trate the bronchial wall.
685
Chronic diffuse interstitial (restrictive) diseases 
unknown, and it is not yet known whether such indi-
viduals also have telomere shortening in their alveolar 
epithelial cells. Other, rare familial forms of IPF are 
associated with mutations in genes encoding compo-
nents of surfactant; these mutations create folding 
defects in the affected proteins, leading to activation of 
the unfolded protein response in type II pneumocytes. 
This in turn appears to make pneumocytes more sensi-
tive to environmental insults, enhancing the consequent 
cellular dysfunction and injury. Finally, roughly one-
third of IPF cases are associated with a common genetic 
variant that greatly increases the secretion of MUC5B, a 
mucin that may make alveolar epithelial cells suscepti-
ble to injury or exaggerate downstream events that lead 
to fibrosis.
•	 Age. IPF is a disease of older individuals, rarely appear-
ing before the age of 50 years. Whether this association 
stems from aging-related telomere shortening or 
from other acquired changes associated with aging is 
unknown.
It is easy to imagine how some of the factors cited herein 
might combine to exacerbate alveolar epithelial cell damage 
and senescence, which seems to be the initiating event 
characteristic radiologic, pathologic, and clinical features. 
The histologic pattern of fibrosis is referred to as usual 
interstitial pneumonia (UIP), which can often be diagnosed 
based on its characteristic appearance in CT scans. The UIP 
pattern can also be seen in other diseases, notably connec-
tive tissue diseases, chronic hypersensitivity pneumonia, 
and asbestosis; these must be distinguished from IPF based 
on other clinical, laboratory, and histological features.
Pathogenesis.  While the cause of IPF remains unknown, it 
appears that the fibrosis arises in genetically predisposed 
individuals who are prone to aberrant repair of recurrent 
alveolar epithelial cell injuries caused by environmental 
exposures (Fig. 15-13). The implicated factors are as follows:
•	 Environmental factors. Most important among these is 
cigarette smoking, which increases the risk of IPF sev­
eral fold. IPF incidence is also increased in individuals 
who are exposed to metal fumes and wood dust, or who 
work in certain occupations, including farming, hair-
dressing, and stone-polishing. It is hypothesized that 
exposure to environmental irritants or toxins in each 
of these contexts causes recurrent alveolar epithelial 
cell damage. Gastric reflux has also been recently 
implicated.
•	 Genetic factors. The vast majority of individuals who 
smoke or who have other environmental exposures 
linked to IPF do not develop the disorder, indicating 
that additional factors are required for its development. 
Chief among the suspects are inherited genetic variants. 
One group of genetic lesions of particular interest is 
germline loss-of-function mutations in the TERT and 
TERC genes, which encode components of telomerase. 
You will recall that telomerase is an enzyme that main-
tains the ends of chromosomes (the telomeres) and 
thereby prevents cellular senescence. Up to 15% of 
familial IPF is associated with telomerase gene defects, 
and up to 25% of sporadic IPF cases are associated with 
abnormal telomerase shortening in peripheral blood 
lymphocytes; the cause of this shortening is currently 
Table 15-5  Major Categories of Chronic Interstitial Lung Disease
Fibrosing
Usual interstitial pneumonia (idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis)
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia
Connective tissue disease-associated
Pneumoconiosis
Drug reactions
Radiation pneumonitis
Granulomatous
Sarcoidosis
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Eosinophilic
Smoking Related
Desquamative interstitial pneumonia
Respiratory bronchiolitis-associated interstitial lung disease
Other
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia
Figure 15-13  Proposed pathogenic mechanisms in idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis. Environmental factors that are potentially injurious to alveolar epithe-
lium interact with genetic or aging-related factors that place epithelium at risk 
to create a persistent epithelial injury. Factors secreted from injured/activated 
epithelium, possibly augmented by factors released from innate and adaptive 
immune cells responding to “danger” signals produced by damaged epithe-
lium, activate interstitial fibroblasts. There is some evidence that these acti-
vated fibroblasts exhibit signaling abnormalities that lead to increased 
signaling through the PI3K/AKT pathway. The activated fibroblasts synthesize 
and deposit collagen, leading to interstitial fibrosis and eventual respiratory 
failure. 
Environmental factors:
 Smoking
 Occupational exposure
 Other irritants, toxins
 Viral infection
Persistent epithelial
injury/activation
At risk epithelium:
 Age
 Genetics:
  Telomerase mutations
  Surfactant mutations
  MUC5B variant
Pro-fibrogenic factors
Abnormal intracellular
signaling
Innate and adaptive
immune response
Fibrosis
Proliferation, collagen production
686
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
Clinical Course.  IPF begins insidiously with gradually 
increasing dyspnea on exertion and dry cough. Most patients 
are 55 to 75 years old at presentation. Hypoxemia, cyanosis, 
and clubbing occur late in the course. The progression 
in an individual patient is unpredictable. Usually there 
is a gradual deterioration in pulmonary status despite 
medical treatment with immunosuppressive drugs such as 
steroids, cyclophosphamide, or azathioprine. Other IPF 
patients have acute exacerbations of the underlying disease 
and follow a rapid downhill clinical course. The median 
survival is about 3 years after diagnosis. Lung transplanta-
tion is the only definitive therapy.
Nonspecific Interstitial Pneumonia
The concept of nonspecific interstitial pneumonia emerged 
when it was realized that there is a group of patients with 
diffuse interstitial lung disease whose lung biopsies lack 
the diagnostic features of any of the other well-characterized 
interstitial diseases. Despite its “nonspecific” name, this 
entity is important to recognize, since these patients have 
a much better prognosis than do those with usual intersti-
tial pneumonia. Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia may be 
idiopathic or associated with connective tissue disease.
Clinical Course.  Patients present with dyspnea and 
cough of several months’ duration. They are more likely to 
be female nonsmokers in their sixth decade of life. Key 
features on high-resolution computed tomography are 
bilateral, symmetric, predominantly lower lobe reticular 
opacities. Those having the cellular pattern are somewhat 
younger than those with the fibrosing pattern and have a 
better prognosis.
in IPF, but it must be admitted that the pathogenesis of 
IPF is complex and poorly understood. For example, it is 
unknown precisely how alveolar epithelial cell damage 
translates into interstitial fibrosis. One model holds that the 
injured epithelial cells are the source of profibrogenic 
factors such as TGF-β, whereas a second, nonmutually 
exclusive model proposes that innate and adaptive immune 
cells produce such factors as part of the host response to 
epithelial cell damage. Other work has described abnor-
malities in the fibroblasts themselves that involve changes 
in intracellular signaling and features reminiscent of epi-
thelial mesenchymal transition (Chapter 7), but a causal 
link to fibrosis has not been established.
  MORPHOLOGY
Grossly, the pleural surfaces of the lung are cobblestoned as a 
result of the retraction of scars along the interlobular septa. The 
cut surface shows firm, rubbery white areas of fibrosis, which 
occurs preferentially in the lower lobes, the subpleural regions, 
and along the interlobular septa. Microscopically, the hall-
mark is patchy interstitial fibrosis, which varies in intensity 
(Fig. 15-14) and age. The earliest lesions contain exuberant 
fibroblastic proliferation (fibroblastic foci). With time these 
areas become more collagenous and less cellular. Quite typical 
is the coexistence of both early and late lesions (Fig. 15-15). 
The dense fibrosis causes the destruction of alveolar architec-
ture and formation of cystic spaces lined by hyperplastic type 
II pneumocytes or bronchiolar epithelium (honeycomb fibro-
sis). With adequate sampling, these diagnostic histologic 
changes (i.e., areas of dense collagenous fibrosis with relatively 
normal lung and fibroblastic foci) can be identified even in 
advanced IPF. There is mild to moderate inflammation within 
the fibrotic areas, consisting of mostly lymphocytes admixed 
with a few plasma cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, and mast 
cells. Foci of squamous metaplasia and smooth muscle hyper-
plasia may be present, along with pulmonary arterial hyperten-
sive changes (intimal fibrosis and medial thickening). In acute 
exacerbations diffuse alveolar damage may be superimposed 
on these chronic changes.
Figure 15-14  Usual interstitial pneumonia. The fibrosis is more pronounced 
in the subpleural region. (Courtesy Dr. Nicole Cipriani, Department of 
Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill.)
Figure 15-15  Usual interstitial pneumonia. Fibroblastic focus with fibers 
running parallel to surface and bluish myxoid extracellular matrix. Honey­
combing is present on the left. 
  MORPHOLOGY
On the basis of its histology, nonspecific interstitial pneumonia 
is divided into cellular and fibrosing patterns. The cellular pattern 
consists primarily of mild to moderate chronic interstitial inflam-
mation, containing lymphocytes and a few plasma cells, in a 
uniform or patchy distribution. The fibrosing pattern consists of 
diffuse or patchy interstitial fibrotic lesions of roughly the same 
stage of development, an important distinction from usual inter-
stitial pneumonia. Fibroblastic foci, honeycombing, hyaline 
membranes and granulomas are absent.
687
Chronic diffuse interstitial (restrictive) diseases 
Cryptogenic Organizing Pneumonia
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia is synonymous with 
the popular term bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumo-
nia; however, the former is now preferred, since it conveys 
the essential features of a clinicopathologic syndrome of 
unknown etiology and avoids confusion with airway dis-
eases such as bronchiolitis obliterans. Patients present with 
cough and dyspnea and have patchy subpleural or peri-
bronchial areas of airspace consolidation radiographically. 
Histologically, cryptogenic organizing pneumonia is char-
acterized by the presence of polypoid plugs of loose orga-
nizing connective tissue (Masson bodies) within alveolar 
ducts, alveoli, and often bronchioles (Fig. 15-16). The con-
nective tissue is all of the same age, and the underlying 
lung architecture is normal. There is no interstitial fibrosis 
or honeycomb lung. Some patients recover spontaneously, 
but most need treatment with oral steroids for 6 months or 
longer for complete recovery.
It is important to recognize that organizing pneumonia 
with intra-alveolar fibrosis is most often seen as a response 
to infections or inflammatory injury of the lungs. These in-
clude viral and bacterial pneumonia, inhaled toxins, drugs, 
connective tissue disease, and graft-versus-host disease in 
bone marrow transplant recipients. The prognosis for these 
patients is dependent on the underlying disorder.
Pulmonary Involvement in Autoimmune Diseases
Many autoimmune diseases (also referred to a connective 
tissue diseases because of their frequent association with 
arthritis), most notably systemic lupus erythematosus, 
rheumatoid arthritis, progressive systemic sclerosis (sclero-
derma), and dermatomyositis-polymyositis, can involve 
the lung at some point in their course. Pulmonary involve-
ment can take different histologic patterns; nonspecific 
interstitial pneumonia, usual interstitial pneumonia, vas-
cular sclerosis, organizing pneumonia, and bronchiolitis 
are the most common.
•	 Rheumatoid arthritis: pulmonary involvement may 
occur in 30% to 40% of patients as (1) chronic pleuritis, 
with or without effusion; (2) diffuse interstitial pneu­
monitis and fibrosis; (3) intrapulmonary rheumatoid 
nodules; (4) follicular bronchiolitis; or (5) pulmonary 
hypertension
•	 Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma): diffuse interstitial fibro-
sis (nonspecific interstitial pattern more common than 
usual interstitial pattern) and pleural involvement
•	 Lupus erythematosus: patchy, transient parenchymal 
infiltrates, or occasionally severe lupus pneumonitis, as 
well as pleurisy and pleural effusions.
Pulmonary involvement in these diseases has a variable 
prognosis that is determined by the extent and histologic 
pattern of involvement.
Figure 15-16  Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia. Some alveolar spaces are filled with balls of fibroblasts (Masson bodies), while the alveolar walls are relatively 
normal. A, Low power. B, High power. 
A
B
  KEY CONCEPTS
Chronic Interstitial Lung Diseases
■ Diffuse interstitial fibrosis of the lung gives rise to restrictive 
lung diseases characterized by reduced lung compliance 
and reduced forced vital capacity (FVC). The ratio of FEV1 
to FVC is normal.
■ Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is prototypic of restrictive 
lung diseases. It is characterized by patchy interstitial 
fibrosis fibroblastic foci and formation of cystic spaces 
(honeycomb lung). This histologic pattern is known as 
usual interstitial pneumonia.
■ The cause of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is unknown, but 
genetic analyses point to roles for senescence of alveolar 
epithelium (due to telomere shortening), cell stress related 
to protein misfolding, abnormal signaling in alveolar fibro-
blasts, and altered mucin production. The resulting injury 
to alveolar epithelial cells set in motion event that lead 
to increase local production of fibrogenic cytokines such 
as TGF-β
■ The other diseases that cause diffuse interstitial fibrosis 
are heterogeneous poorly understood, but most have 
better prognoses that idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Pneumoconioses
The term pneumoconiosis, originally coined to describe 
the nonneoplastic lung reaction to inhalation of mineral 
dusts encountered in the workplace, now also includes 
diseases induced by organic as well as inorganic par­
ticulates and chemical fumes and vapors. A simplified 
688
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
•	 The amount of dust retained in the lungs is deter-
mined by the dust concentration in ambient air, the 
duration of exposure, and the effectiveness of clearance 
mechanisms. Any influence, such as cigarette smoking, 
that impairs mucociliary clearance significantly increases 
the accumulation of dust in the lungs.
•	 The most dangerous particles are from 1 to 5 µm in 
diameter, because particles of this size may reach the 
terminal small airways and air sacs and settle in their 
linings.
•	 The solubility and cytotoxicity of particles, which are 
influenced to a considerable extent by their size, modify 
the pulmonary response. In general, small particles 
composed of injurious substances of high solubility may 
produce rapid-onset lung damage. Such particles are 
more likely to cause acute lung injury. Larger particles 
are more likely to resist dissolution and may persist 
within the lung parenchyma for years. These tend to 
evoke fibrosing collagenous pneumoconioses, such as is 
characteristic of silicosis.
•	 Other particles may be taken up by epithelial cells or 
may cross the epithelial cell lining and interact directly 
with fibroblasts and interstitial macrophages. Some 
may reach the lymphatics by direct drainage or within 
classification is presented in Table 15-6. Where imple-
mented, regulations limiting worker exposure have 
resulted in a marked decrease in dust-associated diseases.
Although the pneumoconioses result from well-defined 
occupational exposure to specific airborne agents, ambient 
air pollution also has deleterious effects on the general 
population, especially in urban areas (Chapter 9), and can 
have serious, sometimes fatal effects on those with COPD 
or heart disease. Pollution increases the risk of asthma, 
especially in children. Efforts to reduce air pollution have 
been effective in the west, but industrialization in other 
parts of the world, particularly China, has produced dan-
gerous levels of air pollution. Even in the U.S. improve-
ments are possible, as some data suggest that even low 
levels of air pollution can have deleterious effects on health.
Pathogenesis.  The development of a pneumoconiosis 
depends on (1) the amount of dust retained in the lung and 
airways; (2) the size, shape, and buoyancy of the particles; 
(3) particle solubility and physiochemical reactivity; and 
(4) the possible additional effects of other irritants (e.g., 
concomitant tobacco smoking). In most cases, these parti-
cles stimulate resident innate immune cells in the lung, 
leading to the diseases discussed later. The following 
general principles apply to pneumoconioses:
Table 15-6  Lung Diseases Caused by Air Pollutants
Agent
Disease
Exposure
Mineral Dusts
Coal dust
Anthracosis
Macules
Progressive massive fibrosis
Caplan syndrome
Coal mining (particularly hard coal)
Silica
Silicosis
Caplan syndrome
Metal casting work, sandblasting, hard rock 
mining, stone cutting, others
Asbestos
Asbestosis
Pleural plaques
Caplan syndrome
Mesothelioma
Carcinoma of the lung, larynx, stomach, colon
Mining, milling, manufacturing, and installation 
and removal of insulation
Beryllium
Acute berylliosis
Beryllium granulomatosis
Lung carcinoma (?)
Mining, manufacturing
Iron oxide
Siderosis
Welding
Barium sulfate
Baritosis
Mining
Tin oxide
Stannosis
Mining
Organic Dusts That Induce Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
Moldy hay
Bagasse
Bird droppings
Farmer’s lung
Bagassosis
Bird-breeder’s lung
Farming
Manufacturing wallboard, paper
Bird handling
Organic Dusts That Induce Asthma
Cotton, flax, hemp
Byssinosis
Textile manufacturing
Red cedar dust
Asthma
Lumbering, carpentry
Chemical Fumes and Vapors
Nitrous oxide, sulfur dioxide, ammonia, benzene, insecticides
Bronchitis, asthma
Pulmonary edema
ARDS
Mucosal injury
Fulminant poisoning
Occupational and accidental exposure
ARDS, Acute respiratory distress syndrome.
689
Chronic diffuse interstitial (restrictive) diseases 
Clinical Course.  Coal workers’ pneumoconiosis is usually 
benign, causing little decrement in lung function. Even 
mild forms of complicated coal workers’ pneumoconiosis 
do not to affect lung function significantly. In a minority 
of cases (fewer than 10%), progressive massive fibrosis 
develops, leading to increasing pulmonary dysfunction, 
pulmonary hypertension, and cor pulmonale. Once pro-
gressive massive fibrosis develops, it may continue to 
worsen even if further exposure to dust is prevented. 
Unlike silicosis (discussed below), there is no convincing 
evidence that coal dust increases susceptibility to tubercu-
losis. There is also no compelling evidence that coal 
workers’ pneumoconiosis in the absence of smoking 
predisposes to cancer. Domestic indoor use of “smoky 
coal” (bituminous) for cooking and heating is, however, 
migrating macrophages and thereby initiate an immune 
response to components of the particulates or to self-
proteins modified by the particles or both.
•	 Finally, certain types of particles activate the inflamma-
some (Chapter 3) when phagocytosed by macrophages. 
These innate and adaptive immune responses amplify 
the intensity and the duration of the local reaction.
•	 Tobacco smoking worsens the effects of all inhaled 
mineral dusts, but particularly those caused by asbes-
tos. The effects of inhaled particles are not confined 
to the lung alone, since solutes from particles can enter 
the blood and lung inflammation invokes systemic 
responses.
In general, only a small percentage of exposed people 
develop occupational respiratory diseases, implying a 
genetic predisposition to their development. Many of the 
diseases listed in Table 15-6 are quite uncommon. Hence 
only a selected few that cause fibrosis of the lung are pre-
sented next.
Coal Workers’ Pneumoconiosis
Coal workers’ pneumoconiosis is lung disease caused by 
inhalation of coal particles and other admixed forms of 
dust. Dust reduction measures in coal mines around the 
globe have drastically reduced its incidence. The spectrum 
of lung findings in coal workers is wide, varying from 
asymptomatic anthracosis, to simple coal workers’ pneu-
moconiosis with little to no pulmonary dysfunction, to 
complicated coal workers’ pneumoconiosis, or progressive 
massive fibrosis, in which lung function is compromised. 
Contaminating silica in the coal dust can favor progressive 
disease. In most cases, carbon dust itself is the major culprit, 
and studies have shown that complicated lesions contain 
much more dust than simple lesions. Coal workers may 
also develop emphysema and chronic bronchitis indepen-
dent of smoking.
  MORPHOLOGY
Anthracosis is the most innocuous coal-induced pulmonary 
lesion in coal miners and is also seen to some degree in urban 
dwellers and tobacco smokers. Inhaled carbon pigment is 
engulfed by alveolar or interstitial macrophages, which then 
accumulate in the connective tissue along the lymphatics, 
including the pleural lymphatics, or in organized lymphoid tissue 
along the bronchi or in the lung hilus.
Simple coal workers’ pneumoconiosis is characterized by 
coal macules (1 to 2 mm in diameter) and somewhat larger 
coal nodules. Coal macules consist of carbon-laden macro-
phages; nodules also contain a delicate network of collagen 
fibers. Although these lesions are scattered throughout the 
lung, the upper lobes and upper zones of the lower lobes are 
more heavily involved. They are located primarily adjacent to 
respiratory bronchioles, the site of initial dust accumulation. In 
due course dilation of adjacent alveoli occurs, sometimes giving 
rise to centrilobular emphysema.
Complicated coal workers’ pneumoconiosis (progres-
sive massive fibrosis) occurs on a background of simple disease 
and generally requires many years to develop. It is characterized 
by intensely blackened scars 1 cm or larger, sometimes up to 
Figure 15-17  Progressive massive fibrosis superimposed on coal workers’ 
pneumoconiosis. The large, blackened scars are located principally in the 
upper lobe. Note the extensions of scars into surrounding parenchyma and 
retraction of adjacent pleura. (Courtesy Drs. Werner Laquer and Jerome 
Kleinerman, the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, 
Morgantown, W.Va.)
10 cm in greatest diameter. They are usually multiple (Fig. 
15-17). Microscopically the lesions consist of dense collagen 
and pigment. The center of the lesion is often necrotic, most 
likely due to local ischemia.
690
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
associated with an increased risk of lung cancer death for 
both women and men.
Silicosis
Silicosis is a common lung disease caused by inhalation 
of proinflammatory crystalline silicon dioxide (silica) 
that usually presents after decades of exposure as slowly 
progressing, nodular, fibrosing pneumoconiosis. Currently, 
silicosis is the most prevalent chronic occupational disease 
in the world. Both dose and race are important in develop-
ing silicosis (African Americans are at higher risk than 
whites). As shown in Table 15-6, workers in a large number 
of occupations are at risk, including individuals involved 
with the repair, rehabilitation or demolition of concrete 
structures such as buildings and roads. Less commonly, 
the disease occurs in workers producing stressed denim by 
sandblasting, stone carvers, and jewelers using chalk 
molds. Occasionally, heavy exposure over months to a few 
years can result in acute silicosis, a disorder characterized 
by the accumulation of abundant lipoproteinaceous mate-
rial within alveoli (identical morphologically to alveolar 
proteinosis, discussed later).
Pathogenesis.  Silica occurs in both crystalline and amor-
phous forms, but crystalline forms (including quartz, cris-
tobalite, and tridymite) are much more fibrogenic. Of these, 
quartz is most commonly implicated. After inhalation, the 
particles are phagocytosed by macrophages. The phagocy-
tosed silica crystals activate the inflammasome, leading to 
the release of inflammatory mediators, particularly IL-1 
and IL-18. The relatively benign response to silica in coal 
and hematite miners is thought to be due to coating of silica 
with other minerals, especially clay components, which 
render the silica less toxic. Although amorphous silicates 
are biologically less active than crystalline silica, heavy 
lung burdens of these minerals may also produce lesions.
Clinical Course.  Chest radiographs typically show a fine 
nodularity in the upper zones of the lung. Pulmonary func-
tions are either normal or only moderately affected early 
in the course, and most patients do not develop shortness 
of breath until progressive massive fibrosis supervenes. 
The disease may continue to worsen even if the patient is 
no longer exposed. Silicosis is slow to kill, but impaired 
pulmonary function may severely limit activity. It is associ-
ated with an increased susceptibility to tuberculosis. This 
may be because crystalline silica inhibits the ability of pul-
monary macrophages to kill phagocytosed mycobacteria. 
The onset of silicosis may be slow and insidious (10 to 30 
years after exposure; most common), accelerated (within 
10 years of exposure) or rapid (in weeks or months after 
intense exposure to fine dust high in silica; rare). Patients 
with silicosis have double the risk for developing lung 
cancer.
Asbestos-Related Diseases
Asbestos is a family of proinflammatory crystalline 
hydrated silicates that are associated with pulmonary 
  MORPHOLOGY
Silicosis is characterized grossly in its early stages by tiny, barely 
palpable, discrete pale to blackened (if coal dust is also present) 
nodules in the hilar lymph nodes and upper zones of the lungs. 
As the disease progresses, these nodules coalesce into hard, 
collagenous scars (Fig. 15-18). Some nodules may undergo 
central softening and cavitation due to superimposed tubercu-
losis or to ischemia. Fibrotic lesions may also occur in the hilar 
lymph nodes and pleura. Sometimes, thin sheets of calcification 
occur in the lymph nodes and are seen radiographically as 
eggshell calcification (i.e., calcium surrounding a zone 
lacking calcification). If the disease continues to progress, 
expansion and coalescence of lesions may produce progres-
sive massive fibrosis. Histologic examination reveals the hall-
mark lesion characterized by a central area of whorled collagen 
fibers with a more peripheral zone of dust-laden macrophages 
(Fig. 15-19). Examination of the nodules by polarized micros-
copy reveals the birefringent silicate particles (silica is weakly 
birefringent).
Figure 15-18  Advanced silicosis. Scarring has contracted the upper lobe into 
a small dark mass (arrow). Note the dense pleural thickening. (Courtesy 
Dr. John Godleski, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Mass.)
Figure 15-19  Several coalescent collagenous silicotic nodules. (Courtesy 
Dr. John Godleski, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Mass.)
691
Chronic diffuse interstitial (restrictive) diseases 
fibrosis, carcinoma, mesothelioma, and other cancers. Use 
of asbestos is tightly restricted in many developed coun-
tries; however, there is little, if any, control in less devel-
oped parts of the world. Asbestos-related diseases include:
•	 Localized fibrous plaques or, rarely, diffuse pleural 
fibrosis
•	 Pleural effusions, recurrent
•	 Parenchymal interstitial fibrosis (asbestosis)
•	 Lung carcinoma
•	 Mesotheliomas
•	 Laryngeal, ovarian and perhaps other extrapulmonary 
neoplasms, including colon carcinomas; increased risk 
for systemic autoimmune diseases and cardiovascular 
disease has been proposed
An increased incidence of asbestos-related cancer in 
family members of asbestos workers has alerted the general 
public to the potential hazards of even low-level exposure 
to asbestos. However, the necessity of expensive asbestos 
abatement programs for environments such as schools 
with low, but measurable, airborne asbestos fiber counts 
remains a matter of contention.
Pathogenesis.  The disease-causing capabilities of the 
different forms of asbestos depend on concentration, 
size, shape, and solubility. Asbestos occurs in two distinct 
geometric forms, serpentine and amphibole. The serpentine 
chrysotile form accounts for 90% of the asbestos used in 
industry. Amphiboles, even though less prevalent, are 
more pathogenic than chrysotiles, particularly with respect 
to induction of mesothelioma, a malignant tumor derived 
from the lining cells of pleural surfaces.
The greater pathogenicity of amphiboles is apparently 
related to their aerodynamic properties and solubility. 
Chrysotiles, with their more flexible, curled structure, are 
likely to become impacted in the upper respiratory pas-
sages and removed by the mucociliary elevator. Furthermore, 
once trapped in the lungs, chrysotiles are gradually leached 
from the tissues because they are more soluble than amphi-
boles. In contrast, the straight, stiff amphiboles may align 
themselves in the airstream and thus be delivered deeper 
into the lungs, where they can penetrate epithelial cells and 
reach the interstitium. Both amphiboles and serpentines are 
fibrogenic, and increasing doses are associated with a 
higher incidence of asbestos-related diseases.
In contrast to other inorganic dusts, asbestos can also 
act as a tumor initiator and promoter. Some of its onco-
genic effects are mediated by reactive free radicals gener-
ated by asbestos fibers, which preferentially localize in the 
distal lung, close to the mesothelial layers. Toxic chemicals 
adsorbed onto the asbestos fibers also likely contribute to 
the oncogenicity of the fibers. For example, the adsorption 
of carcinogens in tobacco smoke onto asbestos fibers may 
be the basis for the remarkable synergy between tobacco 
smoking and the development of lung carcinoma in asbes-
tos workers. Smoking also enhances the effect of asbestos 
by interfering with the mucociliary clearance of fibers. One 
study of asbestos workers found a fivefold increase of lung 
carcinoma with asbestos exposure alone, while asbestos 
exposure and smoking together led to a 55-fold increase in 
the risk.
As with silica crystals, once phagocytosed by macro-
phages asbestos fibers activate the inflammasome and 
stimulate the release of proinflammatory factors and 
fibrogenic mediators. The initial injury occurs at bifurca-
tions of small airways and ducts, where asbestos fibers 
land, penetrate and are directly toxic to pulmonary paren-
chymal cells. Macrophages, both alveolar and interstitial, 
attempt to ingest and clear the fibers. Long-term deposition 
of fibers and persistent release of mediators (e.g., reactive 
oxygen species, proteases, cytokines, and growth factors) 
eventually lead to generalized interstitial pulmonary 
inflammation and interstitial fibrosis.
  MORPHOLOGY
Asbestosis is marked by diffuse pulmonary interstitial fibro-
sis, which is indistinguishable from diffuse interstitial fibrosis 
resulting from other causes, except for the presence of multiple 
asbestos bodies. Asbestos bodies are golden brown, fusi-
form or beaded rods with a translucent center and consist 
of asbestos fibers coated with an iron-containing pro-
teinaceous material (Fig. 15-20). They arise when macro-
phages phagocytose asbestos fibers; the iron is presumably 
derived from phagocyte ferritin. Other inorganic particulates 
may become coated with similar iron-protein complexes and 
are called ferruginous bodies. Rare single asbestos bodies 
can be found in the lungs of normal people.
Asbestosis begins as fibrosis around respiratory bronchioles 
and alveolar ducts and extends to involve adjacent alveolar sacs 
and alveoli. The fibrous tissue distorts the architecture, creating 
enlarged airspaces enclosed within thick fibrous walls; eventu-
ally the affected regions become honeycombed. The pattern of 
fibrosis is similar to that seen in usual interstitial fibrosis, with 
fibroblastic foci and varying degrees of fibrosis, the only differ-
ence being the presence of numerous asbestos bodies. In con-
trast to coal workers’ pneumoconiosis and silicosis, asbestosis 
begins in the lower lobes and subpleurally. The middle and upper 
lobes of the lungs become affected as fibrosis progresses. The 
scarring may trap and narrow pulmonary arteries and arterioles, 
causing pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale.
Pleural plaques, the most common manifestation of asbes-
tos exposure, are well-circumscribed plaques of dense collagen 
(Fig. 15-21) that are often calcified. They develop most fre-
quently on the anterior and posterolateral aspects of the pari-
etal pleura and over the domes of the diaphragm. The size 
Figure 15-20  High-power detail of an asbestos body, revealing the typical 
beading and knobbed ends (arrow). 
692
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
Clinical Course.  The clinical findings in asbestosis are very 
similar to those caused by other diffuse interstitial lung 
diseases (discussed earlier). These rarely appear fewer than 
10 years after first exposure and are more common after 
20 to 30 years. Dyspnea is usually the first manifestation; 
at first, it is provoked by exertion, but later it is present 
even at rest. Cough associated with production of sputum, 
when present, is likely to be due to smoking rather than 
asbestosis. Chest x-ray studies reveal irregular linear densi-
ties, particularly in both lower lobes. With advancement of 
the pneumoconiosis, a honeycomb pattern develops. The 
disease may remain static or progress to respiratory failure, 
cor pulmonale, and death. Pleural plaques are usually 
asymptomatic and are detected on radiographs as circum-
scribed densities. Asbestosis complicated by lung or pleural 
cancer is associated with a particularly grim prognosis.
Complications of Therapies
Drug-Induced Lung Diseases.  An increasing number of 
prescription drugs have been found to cause a variety of 
both acute and chronic alterations in lung structure and 
function, interstitial fibrosis, bronchiolitis obliterans, and 
eosinophilic pneumonia. For example, cytotoxic drugs 
used in cancer therapy (e.g., bleomycin) cause pulmonary 
damage and fibrosis as a result of direct toxicity and 
by stimulating the influx of inflammatory cells into the 
alveoli. Amiodarone, a drug used to treat cardiac arrhyth-
mias, is preferentially concentrated in the lung and causes 
significant pneumonitis in 5% to 15% of patients receiving 
it. Cough induced by ace inhibitors is very common.
Illicit intravenous drug abuse most often causes lung 
infections. In addition, particulate matter is introduced into 
the lung microvasculature where granulomas and fibrosis 
occur.
Radiation-Induced Lung Diseases.  Radiation pneumonitis 
is a well-known complication of therapeutic radiation 
of thoracic tumors (lung, esophageal, breast, mediastinal). 
It most often involves the lung within the radiation 
port and occurs in both acute and chronic forms. Acute 
radiation pneumonitis (lymphocytic alveolitis or hypersensi-
tivity pneumonitis) occurs 1 to 6 months after irradiation 
in 3% to 44% of patients, depending on dose and age. It is 
manifest by fever, dyspnea out of proportion to the volume 
of lung irradiated, pleural effusion, and infiltrates that 
usually correspond to an area of previous irradiation. With 
steroid therapy, these symptoms may resolve completely 
in some patients, while in others there is progression to 
chronic radiation pneumonitis (pulmonary fibrosis). The 
latter is a consequence of the repair of injured endothelial 
and epithelial cells. It may also occur without antecedent 
pulmonary symptoms. Morphologic changes are those of 
  KEY CONCEPTS
Pneumoconioses
■ Pneumoconioses encompass a group of chronic fibrosing 
diseases of the lung resulting from exposure to organic 
and inorganic particulates, most commonly mineral dust.
■ Pulmonary alveolar macrophages play a central role in 
the pathogenesis of lung injury by promoting inflammation 
and producing reactive oxygen species and fibrogenic 
cytokines.
■ Coal dust-induced disease varies from asymptomatic 
anthracosis to simple coal workers’ pneumoconiosis (coal 
and number of pleural plaques do not correlate with the level 
of exposure to asbestos or the time since exposure. They do 
not contain asbestos bodies; however, only rarely do they occur 
in individuals who have no history or evidence of asbestos 
exposure. Uncommonly, asbestos exposure induces pleural 
effusions, which are usually serous but may be bloody. Rarely, 
diffuse visceral pleural fibrosis may occur and, in advanced 
cases, bind the lung to the thoracic wall.
Both lung carcinomas and mesotheliomas (pleural and peri-
toneal) develop in workers exposed to asbestos (see sections 
on lung cancer and pleural tumors).
Figure 15-21  Asbestos-related pleural plaques. Large, discrete fibrocalcific 
plaques are seen on the pleural surface of the diaphragm. (Courtesy  
Dr. John Godleski, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Mass.)
macules or nodules, and centrilobular emphysema), to 
progressive massive fibrosis (PMF), manifested by increas-
ing pulmonary dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, and 
cor pulmonale.
■ Silicosis is the most common pneumoconiosis in the 
world, and crystalline silica (e.g., quartz) is the usual culprit. 
The lung disease is progressive even after exposure stops.
■ The manifestations of silicosis can range from asymptom-
atic silicotic nodules to large areas of dense fibrosis; 
persons with silicosis also have an increased susceptibility 
to tuberculosis. There is two-fold increased risk of lung 
cancer.
■ Asbestos fibers come in two forms; the stiff amphiboles 
have a greater fibrogenic and carcinogenic potential than 
the serpentine chrysotiles.
■ Asbestos exposure is linked with six disease processes: 
(1) parenchymal interstitial fibrosis (asbestosis); (2) local-
ized pleural plaques (asymptomatic) or rarely diffuse 
pleural fibrosis; (3) recurrent pleural effusions; (4) lung 
cancer; (5) malignant pleural and peritoneal mesothelio-
mas; and (6) laryngeal cancer.
■ Cigarette smoking increases the risk of lung cancer in the 
setting of asbestos exposure; even family members of 
workers exposed to asbestos are at increased risk for 
cancer and mesothelioma.
693
Chronic diffuse interstitial (restrictive) diseases 
diffuse alveolar damage, including severe atypia of hyper-
plastic type II cells and fibroblasts. Epithelial cell atypia 
and foam cells within vessel walls are also characteristic of 
radiation damage.
Granulomatous Diseases
Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disease of 
unknown cause that may involve many different tissues 
and organs. Sarcoidosis presents in many clinical patterns, 
but bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy or lung involvement 
is most common, occuring 90% of cases. Eye and skin 
lesions are next in frequency. Since other diseases, includ-
ing mycobacterial and fungal infections and berylliosis, 
can also produce noncaseating granulomas, the diagnosis 
is one of exclusion.
Sarcoidosis usually occurs in adults younger than 40 
years of age, but can affect any age group. The prevalence 
is higher in women but varies widely in different countries 
and populations. In the United States the rates are highest 
in the Southeast and are 10 times higher in blacks than in 
whites. In contrast, the disease is rare among Chinese and 
Southeast Asians. Patterns of organ involvement also vary 
with race.
Pathogenesis.  Although the etiology of sarcoidosis re­
mains unknown, several lines of evidence suggest that it is 
a disease of disordered immune regulation in genetically 
predisposed individuals. It is not clear whether exposure 
to any environmental or infectious agent has a role in its 
pathogenesis.
Immunologic Factors.  There are several immunologic 
abnormalities in the local milieu of sarcoid granulomas 
that suggest the involvement of a cell-mediated immune 
response to an unidentified antigen. These abnormalities 
include:
•	 Intra-alveolar and interstitial accumulation of CD4+ 
T cells, resulting in CD4/CD8 T-cell ratios ranging 
from 5 : 1 to 15 : 1, suggesting pathogenic involvement 
of CD4+ helper T cells. There is oligoclonal expansion 
of T-cell subsets as determined by analysis of T-cell 
receptor rearrangement, consistent with an antigen-
driven proliferation.
•	 Increased levels of T cell-derived TH1 cytokines such as 
IL-2 and IFN-γ, which may be responsible for T-cell 
expansion and macrophage activation, respectively.
•	 Increased levels of several cytokines in the local envi-
ronment (IL-8, TNF, macrophage inflammatory protein 
1α) that favor recruitment of additional T cells and 
monocytes and contribute to the formation of granulo-
mas. TNF in particular is released at high levels by acti-
vated alveolar macrophages, and the TNF concentration 
in the bronchoalveolar fluid is a marker of disease 
activity.
•	 Impaired dendritic cell function.
Additionally, there are systemic immunologic abnor-
malities in individuals with sarcoidosis:
•	 Anergy to common skin test antigens such as Candida 
or tuberculosis purified protein derivative (PPD)
•	 Polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, another manifes-
tation of helper T-cell dysregulation
Genetic Factors.  Evidence of genetic influences include 
familial and racial clustering of cases and the association 
with certain HLA genotypes (e.g., HLA-A1 and HLA-B8).
  MORPHOLOGY
Virtually every organ in the body has been described as being 
affected by sarcoidosis, at least on rare occasions. Regardless 
of the tissue, involved tissues contain well-formed nonnecro-
tizing granulomas (Fig. 15-22) composed of aggregates of 
tightly clustered epithelioid macrophages, often with giant cells. 
Central necrosis is unusual. With chronicity the granulomas may 
become enclosed within fibrous rims or may eventually be 
replaced by hyaline fibrous scars. Laminated concretions  
composed of calcium and proteins known as Schaumann 
bodies and stellate inclusions known as asteroid bodies 
are found within giant cells in approximately 60% of the granu-
lomas. Though characteristic, these microscopic features are 
not pathognomonic of sarcoidosis, because asteroid and 
Schaumann bodies may be encountered in other granuloma-
tous diseases (e.g., tuberculosis).
The lungs are common sites of involvement. Macroscopically 
there is usually no demonstrable alteration, although in advanced 
cases the coalescence of granulomas produces small nodules 
that are palpable or visible as 1 to 2 cm, noncaseating, non-
cavitated consolidations. The lesions are distributed primarily 
along the lymphatics around bronchi and blood vessels, 
although alveolar lesions and pleural involvement are also seen. 
The relatively high frequency of granulomas in the bronchial 
submucosa accounts for the high diagnostic yield of broncho-
scopic biopsies. There seems to be a strong tendency for 
lesions to heal in the lungs, so varying stages of fibrosis and 
hyalinization are often found. Lymph nodes are involved in 
almost all cases, particularly the hilar and mediastinal nodes, 
but any other node in the body may be involved. Nodes are 
Figure 15-22  Bronchus with characteristic noncaseating sarcoidal granulo-
mas (asterisks), with many multinucleated giant cells (arrowheads). Note 
subepithelial location of granulomas. 
694
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
Clinical Course.  Because of its varying severity and incon-
stant tissue distribution, sarcoidosis may present with 
diverse features. It may be discovered unexpectedly on 
routine chest films as bilateral hilar adenopathy or may 
present with peripheral lymphadenopathy, cutaneous 
lesions, eye involvement, splenomegaly, or hepatomegaly. 
In the great majority of cases, however, individuals seek 
medical attention because of the insidious onset of respira-
tory abnormalities (shortness of breath, cough, chest pain, 
hemoptysis) or of constitutional signs and symptoms 
(fever, fatigue, weight loss, anorexia, night sweats).
Sarcoidosis follows an unpredictable course. It may be 
inexorably progressive, or marked by periods of activity 
interspersed with remissions, sometimes permanent, 
that may be spontaneous or induced by steroid therapy. 
Overall, 65% to 70% of affected patients recover with 
minimal or no residual manifestations. Twenty percent 
have permanent loss of some lung function or some per-
manent visual impairment. Of the remaining 10% to 15%, 
some die of cardiac or central nervous system damage, but 
most succumb to progressive pulmonary fibrosis and cor 
pulmonale.
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
The term hypersensitivity pneumonitis describes a spectrum 
of immunologically mediated, predominantly interstitial, 
lung disorders caused by intense, often prolonged expo-
sure to inhaled organic antigens. Affected individuals 
have an abnormal sensitivity or heightened reactivity to 
the causative antigen, which, in contrast to asthma, leads 
to pathologic changes that primarily involve the alveolar 
walls (thus the synonym “extrinsic allergic alveolitis”). It 
is important to recognize these diseases early in their 
course because progression to serious chronic fibrotic lung 
disease can be prevented by removal of the environmental 
agent.
Most commonly, hypersensitivity results from the inha-
lation of organic dust containing antigens made up of the 
spores of thermophilic bacteria, fungi, animal proteins, or 
bacterial products. Numerous syndromes are described, 
depending on the occupation or exposure of the individ-
ual. Farmer’s lung results from exposure to dusts generated 
from humid, warm, newly harvested hay that permits 
the rapid proliferation of the spores of thermophilic acti-
nomycetes. Pigeon breeder’s lung (bird fancier’s disease) is 
provoked by proteins from serum, excreta, or feathers of 
birds. Humidifier or air-conditioner lung is caused by ther-
mophilic bacteria in heated water reservoirs. Pet birds and 
moldy basements are easily missed unless asked about 
specifically.
Several lines of evidence suggest that hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis is an immunologically mediated disease:
•	 Bronchoalveolar lavage specimens from the acute 
phase show increased levels of proinflammatory che-
mokines such as macrophage inflammatory protein 1α 
and IL-8.
•	 Bronchoalveolar lavage specimens also consistently 
demonstrate increased numbers of both CD4+ and 
CD8+ T lymphocytes.
•	 Most patients have specific antibodies against the caus-
ative antigen in their serum.
•	 Complement and immunoglobulins have been demon-
strated within vessel walls by immunofluorescence.
•	 The presence of noncaseating granulomas in two thirds 
of the patients suggests that T-cell–mediated (type IV) 
hypersensitivity reactions against the implicated anti-
gens are also common and have a pathogenic role.
  KEY CONCEPTS
Sarcoidosis
■ Sarcoidosis is a multisystem disease of unknown etiology; 
the diagnostic histopathologic feature is the presence of 
noncaseating granulomas in various tissues.
■ Immunologic abnormalities include high levels of CD4+ 
T cells in the lung that secrete TH1-dependent cytokines 
such as IFN-γ and IL-2 locally.
■ Clinical manifestations include lymph node enlargement, 
eye involvement (sicca syndrome [dry eyes], iritis, or irido-
cyclitis), skin lesions (erythema nodosum, painless sub­
cutaneous nodules), and visceral (liver, skin, marrow) 
involvement. Lung involvement occurs in 90% of cases, 
with formation of granulomas and interstitial fibrosis.
characteristically enlarged, discrete, and sometimes calcified. 
The tonsils are affected in about one fourth to one third  
of cases.
The spleen is affected in about three fourths of cases, but it 
is enlarged in only one fifth. On occasion, granulomas may 
coalesce to form small nodules that are visible macroscopically. 
The liver is affected slightly less often than the spleen. It may 
be moderately enlarged and typically contains scattered granu-
lomas, more in portal triads than in the lobular parenchyma. 
Needle biopsy can be diagnostic.
The bone marrow is involved in about one fifth of cases. 
Radiologically visible bone lesions have a particular tendency to 
involve phalangeal bones of the hands and feet, creating small 
circumscribed areas of bone resorption within the marrow 
cavity and a diffuse reticulated pattern throughout the cavity, 
with widening of the bony shafts or new bone formation on the 
outer surfaces.
Skin lesions, encountered in one fourth of cases, assume 
a variety of appearances, including discrete subcutaneous 
nodules; focal, slightly elevated, erythematous plaques; or flat 
lesions that are slightly reddened and scaling, resembling those 
of systemic lupus erythematosus. Lesions may also appear on 
the mucous membranes of the oral cavity, larynx, and upper 
respiratory tract. Ocular involvement, seen in one fourth of 
cases, takes the form of iritis or iridocyclitis, either bilaterally or 
unilaterally. Consequently, corneal opacities, glaucoma, and 
total loss of vision may occur. These ocular lesions are fre-
quently accompanied by inflammation of the lacrimal glands 
and suppression of lacrimation. Bilateral sarcoidosis of the 
parotid, submaxillary, and sublingual glands constitutes the 
combined uveoparotid involvement designated as Mikulicz  
syndrome (Chapter 16). Muscle involvement is underdiag-
nosed, since it may be asymptomatic. Muscle weakness, 
aches, tenderness, and fatigue should prompt consideration of 
occult sarcoid myositis. which can be diagnosed by muscle 
biopsy. Sarcoid granulomas occasionally occur in the heart, 
kidneys, central nervous system (neurosarcoidosis, seen in 5% 
to15%), and endocrine glands, particularly in the pituitary, as 
well as in other body tissues.
695
Chronic diffuse interstitial (restrictive) diseases 
Clinical Features.  The clinical manifestations are varied. 
Acute attacks, which follow inhalation of antigenic dust in 
sensitized patients, consist of recurring episodes of fever, 
dyspnea, cough, and leukocytosis. Micronodular intersti-
tial infiltrates may appear in the chest radiograph, and 
pulmonary function tests show an acute restrictive disor-
der. Symptoms usually appear 4 to 6 hours after exposure 
and may last for 12 hours to several days. They recur with 
reexposure. If exposure is continuous and protracted, a 
chronic form of the disease supervenes, leading to pro­
gressive respiratory failure, dyspnea, and cyanosis and a 
decrease in total lung capacity and compliance—a picture 
similar to other forms of chronic interstitial disease.
Pulmonary Eosinophilia
Although relatively rare, there are several clinical and 
pathologic pulmonary entities that are characterized by 
an infiltration of eosinophils, recruited in part by elevated 
alveolar levels of eosinophil attractants such as IL-5.
Pulmonary eosinophilia is divided into the following 
categories:
•	 Acute eosinophilic pneumonia with respiratory failure. This 
is an acute illness of unknown cause. It has a rapid onset 
with fever, dyspnea, and hypoxemic respiratory failure. 
The chest radiograph shows diffuse infiltrates, and 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid contains more than 25% 
eosinophils. Histology shows diffuse alveolar damage 
and many eosinophils. There is a prompt response to 
corticosteroids.
•	 Secondary eosinophilia, which occurs in a number of para-
sitic, fungal, and bacterial infections; in hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis; in drug allergies; and in association with 
asthma, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, or 
vasculitis (Churg-Strauss syndrome)
•	 Idiopathic chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, characterized by 
focal areas of cellular consolidation of the lung substance 
distributed chiefly in the periphery of the lung fields. 
Prominent in these lesions are heavy aggregates of lym-
phocytes and eosinophils within both the septal walls 
and the alveolar spaces. Interstitial fibrosis and organiz-
ing pneumonia are often present. These patients have 
cough, fever, night sweats, dyspnea, and weight loss, all 
of which respond to corticosteroid therapy. Chronic 
eosinophilic pneumonia is diagnosed when other causes 
of chronic pulmonary eosinophilia are excluded.
Smoking-Related Interstitial Diseases
Smoking-related diseases can be grouped into obstructive 
diseases (emphysema and chronic bronchitis, already dis-
cussed) and restrictive or interstitial diseases. A majority 
of individuals with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis are 
smokers; however, the role of cigarette smoking in its 
pathogenesis has not been clarified yet. Desquamative 
interstitial pneumonia and respiratory bronchiolitis-
associated interstitial lung disease are also smoking-
associated interstitial lung diseases.
Desquamative Interstitial Pneumonia
Desquamative interstitial pneumonia is characterized by 
large collections of macrophages in the airspaces in a 
current or former smoker. The macrophages were origi-
nally thought to be desquamated pneumocytes, thus the 
misnomer “desquamative interstitial pneumonia.”
  MORPHOLOGY
Histologic changes are characteristically centered on bronchi-
oles. They include (1) interstitial pneumonitis, consisting primar-
ily of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages (eosinophils 
are rare); (2) noncaseating granulomas in two thirds of patients 
(Fig. 15-23); and (3) interstitial fibrosis with fibroblastic foci, 
honeycombing, and obliterative bronchiolitis (in late stages). In 
more than half of patients, there is also evidence of an intra-
alveolar infiltrate.
Figure 15-23  Hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Loosely formed interstitial granu-
lomas and chronic inflammation are characteristic. 
  MORPHOLOGY
The most striking finding is the accumulation of a large number 
of macrophages with abundant cytoplasm containing dusty 
brown pigment (smokers’ macrophages) in the airspaces 
(Fig. 15-24). Finely granular iron may be seen in the macro-
phage cytoplasm. Some of the macrophages contain lamellar 
Figure 15-24  Desquamative interstitial pneumonia. Medium-power detail 
of lung demonstrates the accumulation of large numbers of macrophages 
within the alveolar spaces and only mild fibrous thickening of the alveolar 
walls. 
696
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
dendritic cells with grooved, indented nuclei and abun-
dant cytoplasm. They are positive for S100, CD1a, and 
CD207 (langerin) and are negative for CD68.
More than 95% of affected patients are relatively young 
adult smokers who get better after smoking cessation, sug-
gesting that in some cases the lesions are a reactive inflam-
matory process. However, in other cases the Langerhans 
cells have acquired activating mutations in the serine/
threonine kinase BRAF, a feature consistent with a neo­
plastic process that is also commonly seen in Langerhans 
cell proliferations involving other tissues (Chapter 13). 
A neoplastic basis may explain why the disease progresses 
in some patients, sometimes even necessitating lung 
transplantation.
Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a rare disease 
caused by defects related to granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) or pulmonary macro-
phage dysfunction that results in the accumulation of sur-
factant in the intra-alveolar and bronchiolar spaces. PAP is 
characterized radiologically by bilateral patchy asymmet-
ric pulmonary opacifications. There are three distinct 
classes of disease—autoimmune (formerly called acquired), 
secondary, and congenital—each with a similar spectrum 
of histologic changes.
•	 Autoimmune PAP is caused by circulating neutralizing 
antibodies specific for GM-CSF. It occurs primarily in 
adults, represents 90% of all cases of PAP, and lacks any 
familial predisposition. Knockout of the GM-CSF gene 
in mice induces PAP, and these mice are “cured” by 
treatment with GM-CSF. Loss of GM-CSF signaling 
blocks the terminal differentiation of alveolar macro-
phages impairing their ability to catabolize surfactant.
•	 Secondary PAP is uncommon and is associated with 
diverse diseases, including hematopoietic disorders, 
malignancies, immunodeficiency disorders, lysinuric 
protein intolerance (an inborn error of amino acid 
metabolism), and acute silicosis and other inhalational 
syndromes. It is speculated that these diseases somehow 
impair macrophage maturation or function, again 
leading to inadequate clearance of surfactant from alve-
olar spaces.
•	 Hereditary PAP is extremely rare, occurs in neonates and 
is caused by mutations that disrupt genes involved in 
GM-CSF signaling (GM-CSF and GM-CSF receptor gene 
mutations).
Desquamative interstitial pneumonia usually presents 
in the fourth or fifth decade of life, and is now equally 
common in men and women. Virtually all patients are 
cigarette smokers. Presenting symptoms include an insidi-
ous onset of dyspnea and dry cough over weeks or months, 
often associated with clubbing of digits. Pulmonary func-
tion tests usually show a mild restrictive abnormality with 
a moderate reduction of the diffusing capacity of carbon 
dioxide. Patients with desquamative interstitial pneumo-
nia typically have an excellent response to steroid therapy 
and cessation of smoking but occasional patients may 
progress to interstitial fibrosis.
Respiratory Bronchiolitis-Associated Interstitial  
Lung Disease
Respiratory bronchiolitis-associated interstitial lung dis­
ease is marked by chronic inflammation and peribronchio-
lar fibrosis. It is a common histologic lesion in cigarette 
smokers. It is characterized by the presence of pigmented 
intraluminal macrophages within first- and second-order 
respiratory bronchioles. In its mildest form, it is most often 
an incidental finding in the lungs of smokers or ex-smokers. 
The term respiratory bronchiolitis-associated interstitial lung 
disease is used for patients who develop significant pulmo-
nary symptoms, abnormal pulmonary function, and 
imaging abnormalities.
Symptoms are usually mild, consisting of gradual onset 
of dyspnea and cough in patients who are typically current 
smokers in the fourth or fifth decade of life with average 
exposures of over 30 pack-years of cigarette smoking. 
Cessation of smoking usually results in improvement.
Pulmonary Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis
Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis is a rare disease 
characterized by focal collections of Langerhans cells (often 
accompanied by eosinophils). As these lesions progress 
scarring occurs, leading to airway destruction and alveolar 
damage that result in the appearance of irregular cystic 
spaces. Imaging of the chest shows characteristic cystic and 
nodular abnormalities. Langerhans cells are immature 
  MORPHOLOGY
The changes are patchy at low magnification and have a bron-
chiolocentric distribution. Respiratory bronchioles, alveolar 
ducts, and peribronchiolar spaces contain aggregates of dusty 
brown macrophages (smokers’ macrophages) similar to 
those seen in desquamative interstitial pneumonia. There is a 
patchy submucosal and peribronchiolar infiltrate of lymphocytes 
and histiocytes. Mild peribronchiolar fibrosis is also seen, which 
expands contiguous alveolar septa. Centrilobular emphysema 
is common but not severe. Desquamative interstitial pneumonia 
is often found in different parts of the same lung.
  MORPHOLOGY
The disease is characterized by a peculiar homogeneous, gran-
ular precipitate containing surfactant proteins within the alveoli, 
causing focal-to-confluent consolidation of large areas of the 
lungs with minimal inflammatory reaction (Fig. 15-25). As a 
consequence there is a marked increase in the size and weight 
of the lung. The alveolar precipitate is periodic acid-Schiff posi-
tive, and contains cholesterol clefts and surfactant proteins 
(which can be demonstrated by immunohistochemical stains). 
Ultrastructurally, the surfactant lamellae in type II pneumocytes 
are normal.
bodies (composed of surfactant) within phagocytic vacuoles, 
presumably derived from necrotic type II pneumocytes. The 
alveolar septa are thickened by a sparse inflammatory infiltrate 
of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and occasional eosinophils. The 
septa are lined by plump, cuboidal pneumocytes. Interstitial 
fibrosis, when present, is mild. Emphysema is often present.
697
Diseases of vascular origin
Diseases of Vascular Origin
Pulmonary Embolism and Infarction
Pulmonary embolism is an important cause of morbidity 
and mortality, particularly in patients who are bedridden, 
but also in a wide range of conditions that are associated 
with hypercoagulability. Blood clots that occlude the large 
pulmonary arteries are almost always embolic in origin. 
The usual source—thrombi in the deep veins of the leg 
(>95% of cases)—and the magnitude of the clinical problem 
were discussed in Chapter 4. Pulmonary embolism causes 
more than 50,000 deaths in the United States each year. Its 
incidence at autopsy has varied from 1% in the general 
population of hospital patients to 30% in patients dying 
after severe burns, trauma, or fractures. It is the sole or a 
major contributing cause of death in about 10% of adults 
who die acutely in hospitals. By contrast, large-vessel 
pulmonary thromboses are rare and develop only in the 
presence of pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary athero-
sclerosis, and heart failure.
Pathogenesis.  Pulmonary embolism usually occurs in 
patients with a predisposing condition that produces an 
increased tendency to clot (thrombophilia). Patients often 
have cardiac disease or cancer, or have been immobilized 
for several days or weeks prior to the appearance of a 
Adult patients, for the most part, present with cough 
and abundant sputum that often contains chunks of gelati-
nous material. Some have symptoms lasting for years, 
often with febrile illnesses. These patients are at risk for 
developing secondary infections with a variety of organ-
isms. Progressive dyspnea, cyanosis, and respiratory insuf-
ficiency may occur, but other patients follow a benign 
course, with eventual resolution of the lesions. Whole-lung 
lavage is the standard of care and provides benefit regard-
less of the underlying defect. GM-CSF therapy is safe and 
effective in more than half of the patients with autoim-
mune PAP while therapy directed at the underlying disor-
der may be helpful in secondary PAP.
Surfactant Dysfunction Disorders
Surfactant dysfunction disorders are diseases caused by 
mutations in genes encoding proteins involved in surfac-
tant trafficking or secretion. The mutated genes include the 
following:
•	 ATP-binding cassette protein member 3 (ABCA3) is the 
most frequently mutated gene in sufactant dysfunction 
disorders. It is an autosomal recessive disorder and 
usually presents in the first few months of life with 
rapidly progressive respiratory failure followed by 
death. Less commonly it comes to attention in older 
children and in adults with chronic interstitial lung 
disease.
•	 Surfactant protein C is the second most commonly 
mutated gene in sufactant dysfunction disorders. It is 
autosomal dominant with variable penetrance and 
severity in 45% and sporadic in 55%. It has a highly 
variable course.
•	 Surfactant protein B is the least commonly mutated gene 
and is associated with an autosomal recessive form of 
sufactant dysfunction disorder. Typically, the infant is 
full term and rapidly develops progressive respiratory 
distress shortly after birth. Death ensues between 3 and 
6 months of age.
Figure 15-25  Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. The alveoli are filled with a 
dense, amorphous, protein-lipid granular precipitate, while the alveolar walls 
are normal. 
  MORPHOLOGY
There is variable amount of intra-alveolar pink granular material, 
type II pneumocyte hyperplasia, interstitial fibrosis and alveolar 
simplification. Immunohistochemical stains show the lack of 
surfactant proteins C and B in their respective deficiencies. 
Ultrastructurally, abnormalities in lamellar bodies in type II  
pneumocytes can be seen in all three; small lamellar bodies  
with electron dense cores are diagnostic for ABCA3 mutation 
(Fig 15-26).
Figure 15-26  Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis associated with mutation 
of the ABC3 gene. An electron micrograph shows type 2 pneumocytes 
containing small surfactant lamellae with electron dense cores, an appear-
ance that is characteristic of cases associated with ABCA3 mutations. 
698
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
cardiopulmonary resuscitation in such instances, the 
patient frequently is said to have electromechanical dissocia-
tion, in which the electrocardiogram has a rhythm but no 
pulses are palpated because no blood is entering the pul-
monary arterial circulation. If the patient survives after a 
sizable pulmonary embolus, however, the clinical syn-
drome may mimic myocardial infarction, with severe chest 
pain, dyspnea, and shock. Small emboli are silent or induce 
only transient chest pain and cough. Pulmonary infarcts 
manifest as dyspnea, tachypnea, fever, chest pain, cough, 
and hemoptysis. An overlying fibrinous pleuritis may 
produce a pleural friction rub.
Findings on chest radiograph are variable and can be 
normal or disclose a pulmonary infarct, usually 12 to 36 
hours after it has occurred, as a wedge-shaped infiltrate. The 
diagnosis of pulmonary embolism is usually made with 
spiral computed tomographic angiography. Rarely, other 
diagnostic methods, such as ventilation perfusion scanning 
or pulmonary angiography are required. Deep vein throm-
bosis can be diagnosed with duplex ultrasonography. After 
the initial acute insult, emboli often resolve via contraction 
and fibrinolysis, particularly in the relatively young. If 
unresolved, over the course of time multiple small emboli 
may lead to pulmonary hypertension and chronic cor 
symptomatic embolism. Those with hip fractures are at 
particularly high risk. Hypercoagulable states, either 
primary (e.g., factor V Leiden, prothrombin mutations, and 
antiphospholipid syndrome) or secondary (e.g., obesity, 
recent surgery, cancer, oral contraceptive use, pregnancy), 
are important risk factors. Indwelling central venous lines 
can be a nidus for formation of right atrial thrombi, which 
can embolize to the lungs. Rarely pulmonary embolism 
may consist of fat, air, or tumor. Small bone marrow emboli 
are often seen in patients who die after chest compressions 
performed during resuscitative efforts.
The pathophysiologic response and clinical significance 
of pulmonary embolism depend on the extent to which 
pulmonary artery blood flow is obstructed, the size of 
the occluded vessels, the number of emboli, and the car-
diovascular health of the patient. Emboli have two deleteri-
ous pathophysiologic consequences: respiratory compromise 
due to the nonperfused, although ventilated, segment; 
and hemodynamic compromise due to increased resistance 
to pulmonary blood flow caused by the embolic obstruc-
tion. Sudden death often ensues, largely as a result of the 
blockage of blood flow through the lungs. Death may also 
be caused by acute right-sided heart failure (acute cor 
pulmonale).
  MORPHOLOGY
Large emboli lodge in the main pulmonary artery or its major 
branches or at the bifurcation as a saddle embolus (Fig. 15-27). 
Smaller emboli travel out into the more peripheral vessels, 
where they may cause hemorrhage or infarction. In patients with 
adequate cardiovascular function, the bronchial arterial supply 
sustains the lung parenchyma; in this instance, hemorrhage 
may occur, but there is no infarction. In those in whom the 
cardiovascular function is already compromised, such as 
patients with heart or lung disease, infarction may occur. 
Overall, about 10% of emboli cause infarction. About three 
fourths of infarcts affect the lower lobes, and in more than half, 
multiple lesions occur. They vary in size from barely visible to 
massive lesions involving large parts of a lobe. Typically, they 
extend to the periphery of the lung as a wedge with the apex 
pointing toward the hilus of the lung. In many cases, an occluded 
vessel is identified near the apex of the infarct. Pulmonary 
embolus can be distinguished from a postmortem clot by the 
presence of the lines of Zahn in the thrombus (Chapter 4).
The pulmonary infarct is classically hemorrhagic and appears 
as a raised, red-blue area in the early stages (Fig. 15-28).  
Often, the apposed pleural surface is covered by a fibrinous 
exudate. The red cells begin to lyse within 48 hours, and  
the infarct becomes paler and eventually red-brown as hemo-
siderin is produced. With the passage of time, fibrous replace-
ment begins at the margins as a gray-white peripheral zone  
and eventually converts the infarct into a contracted scar. 
Histologically, the hemorrhagic area shows ischemic necrosis 
of the alveolar walls, bronchioles, and vessels. If the infarct is 
caused by an infected embolus, the neutrophilic inflammatory 
reaction can be intense. Such lesions are referred to as septic 
infarcts, some which turn into abscesses.
Figure 15-27  Large saddle embolus from the femoral vein lying astride the 
main left and right pulmonary arteries. (From the teaching collection of the 
Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, 
Dallas, Tex.)
Figure 15-28  Acute hemorrhagic pulmonary infarct. 
Clinical Course.  A large pulmonary embolus is one of 
the few causes of virtually instantaneous death. During 
699
Diseases of vascular origin
pulmonale. Perhaps most important is that a small embolus 
may presage a larger one. In the presence of an underly­
ing predisposing condition, patients with a pulmonary 
embolus have a 30% chance of suffering a second embolus.
Prevention of pulmonary embolism is a major clinical 
challenge for which there is no easy solution. Prophylactic 
therapy includes early ambulation in postoperative and 
postpartum patients, elastic stockings and graduated com-
pression stockings for bedridden patients, and anticoagu-
lation in high-risk individuals. Treatment of pulmonary 
embolism includes anticoagulation and supportive mea-
sures; thrombolysis may have some benefit in those with 
severe complications (e.g., shock), but carries a high risk of 
bleeding. Those at risk of recurrent pulmonary embolism 
in whom anticoagulation is contraindicated may be fitted 
with an inferior vena cava filter (an “umbrella”) that 
catches clots before they reach the lungs.
Pulmonary Hypertension
Pulmonary hypertension is defined as a mean pulmonary 
artery pressure greater than or equal to 25 mm Hg at rest. 
Based on underlying mechanisms, the World Health 
Organization has classified pulmonary hypertension into 
five groups. These groups are: (1) pulmonary arterial 
hypertension, a diverse collection of disorders that all 
primarily impact small pulmonary muscular arteries; 
(2) pulmonary hypertension secondary to left-heart failure; 
(3) pulmonary hypertension stemming from lung paren-
chymal disease or hypoxemia; (4) chronic thromboembolic 
pulmonary hypertension; and (5) pulmonary hypertension 
of multifactorial basis.
Pathogenesis.  As can be gathered from the classification 
above, pulmonary hypertension has diverse causes. It is 
most frequently associated with structural cardiopulmo-
nary conditions that increase pulmonary blood flow, 
pulmonary vascular resistance, or left heart resistance to 
blood flow. Some of the more common causes are the 
following:
•	 Chronic obstructive or interstitial lung diseases (group 3). 
These diseases obliterate alveolar capillaries, increasing 
pulmonary resistance to blood flow and, secondarily, 
pulmonary blood pressure.
  KEY CONCEPTS
Pulmonary Embolism
■ Almost all large pulmonary artery thrombi are embolic in 
origin, usually arising from the deep veins of the lower leg.
■ Risk factors include prolonged bed rest, leg surgery, 
severe trauma, CHF, use of oral contraceptives (especially 
those with high estrogen content), disseminated cancer, 
and genetic diseases of hypercoagulability.
■ The vast majority (60% to 80%) of emboli are clinically 
silent, a minority (5%) cause acute cor pulmonale, shock, 
or death (typically from large “saddle emboli”), and the 
remaining cause pulmonary infarction.
■ Risk of recurrence is high.
•	 Antecedent congenital or acquired heart disease (group 2). 
Mitral stenosis, for example, causes an increase in left 
atrial pressure and pulmonary venous pressure that is 
eventually transmitted to the arterial side of the pulmo-
nary vasculature, leading to hypertension.
•	 Recurrent thromboemboli (group 4). Recurrent pulmonary 
emboli may cause pulmonary hypertension by reducing 
the functional cross-sectional area of the pulmonary 
vascular bed, which in turn leads to an increase in pul-
monary vascular resistance.
•	 Autoimmune diseases (group 1). Several of these dis-
eases (most notably systemic sclerosis) involve the pul-
monary vasculature and/or the interstitium, leading 
to increased vascular resistance and pulmonary 
hypertension.
•	 Obstructive sleep apnea (also group 3) is a common dis-
order that is associated with obesity and hypoxemia. 
It is now recognized to be a significant contributor to 
the development of pulmonary hypertension and cor 
pulmonale.
Uncommonly, pulmonary hypertension is encountered 
in patients in whom all known causes are excluded; this is 
referred to as idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
However, this is a bit of a misnomer, as up to 80% of “idio-
pathic” pulmonary hypertension (sometimes referred to as 
primary pulmonary hypertension) has a genetic basis, 
sometimes being inherited in familes as an autosomal 
dominant trait. Within these families, there is incomplete 
penetrance, and only 10% to 20% of the family members 
actually develop overt disease.
As is often the case, much has been learned about the 
pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension by investigating 
the molecular basis of the uncommon familial form of the 
disease. The first mutation to be discovered in familial 
pulmonary arterial hypertension was in the bone morpho-
genetic protein receptor type 2 (BMPR2). Inactivating 
germline mutations in the BMPR2 gene are found in 75% 
of the familial cases of pulmonary hypertension, and 25% 
of sporadic cases. Subsequently other mutations have been 
discovered that also converge on the BMPR2 pathway and 
affect intracellular signaling. It has also been demonstrated 
that BMPR2 is down-regulated in lungs from some idio-
pathic pulmonary arterial hypertension patients without 
mutation in its gene.
BMPR2 is a cell surface protein belonging to the TGF-β 
receptor superfamily, which binds a variety of cytokines, 
including TGF-β, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), 
activin, and inhibin. Although originally described in the 
context of bone growth, BMP-BMPR2 signaling is now 
known to be important for embryogenesis, apoptosis, and 
cell proliferation and differentiation. Details remain to be 
worked out, but it appears that haploinsufficiency for 
BMPR2 leads to dysfunction and proliferation of endothe-
lial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells. Because 
only 10% to 20% of individuals with BMPR2 mutations 
develop disease, it is likely that modifier genes and/or 
environmental triggers also contribute to the pathogenesis 
of the disorder. A two-hit model has been proposed 
whereby a genetically susceptible individual with a BMPR2 
mutation requires additional genetic or environmental 
insults to develop the disease (Fig. 15-29).
700
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
Figure 15-29  Pathogenesis of primary (idiopathic) pulmonary hypertension. 
See text for details. 
2q33
BMPR2 locus
Pulmonary vascular
thickening and occlusion
PRIMARY PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
Modifier genes
Environmental
triggers
Mutations
Figure 15-30  Vascular changes in pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
A, Atheroma formation, a finding usually limited to large vessels. B, Marked 
medial hypertrophy. C, Plexiform lesion of small arteries that is characteristic 
of advanced pulmonary hypertension. 
A
B
C
Clinical Course.  Idiopathic pulmonary hypertension is 
most common in women who are 20 to 40 years of age 
and is also seen occasionally in young children. Clinical 
signs and symptoms in all forms of pulmonary hyperten-
sion become evident only in advanced disease. In cases of 
idiopathic disease, the presenting features are usually 
dyspnea and fatigue, but some patients have chest pain of 
the anginal type. Over time, severe respiratory distress, 
cyanosis, and right ventricular hypertrophy occur, and 
death from decompensated cor pulmonale, often with 
superimposed thromboembolism and pneumonia, usually 
ensues within 2 to 5 years in 80% of patients.
Treatment choices depend on the underlying cause. For 
those with secondary disease, therapy is directed at the 
trigger (e.g, thromboembolic disease or hypoxemia). A 
variety of vasodilators have been used with varying success 
in those with group 1 or refractory disease belonging to 
other groups. Lung transplantation provides definitive 
treatment for selected patients.
  MORPHOLOGY
Regardless of their etiology, all forms of pulmonary hypertension 
are associated with medial hypertrophy of the pulmonary 
muscular and elastic arteries, pulmonary arterial athero-
sclerosis, and right ventricular hypertrophy. The presence 
of many organizing or recanalized thrombi favors recurrent pul-
monary emboli as the cause, and the coexistence of diffuse 
pulmonary fibrosis, or severe emphysema and chronic bronchi-
tis, points to chronic hypoxia as the initiating event. The vessel 
changes can involve the entire arterial tree, from the main pul-
monary arteries down to the arterioles (Fig. 15-30). In the most 
severe cases, atheromatous deposits form in the pulmonary 
artery and its major branches, resembling (but lesser in degree 
than) systemic atherosclerosis. The arterioles and small arteries 
(40 to 300 µm in diameter) are most prominently affected by 
striking medial hypertrophy and intimal fibrosis, sometimes  
narrowing the lumens to pinpoint channels. One extreme in  
the spectrum of pathologic changes is the plexiform lesion,  
so called because a tuft of capillary formations is present, pro-
ducing a network, or web, that spans the lumens of dilated  
thin-walled, small arteries and may extend outside the  
vessel. Plexiform lesions are most prominent in idiopathic and 
familial pulmonary hypertension (group 1), unrepaired congeni-
tal heart disease with left-to-right shunts (group 2), and pulmo-
nary hypertension associated with human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) infection and drugs (also group 1).
701
Diseases of vascular origin
Diffuse Pulmonary Hemorrhage Syndromes
Pulmonary hemorrhage is a dramatic complication of some 
interstitial lung disorders. Among these so-called pulmo-
nary hemorrhage syndromes (Fig. 15-31) are (1) Goodpasture 
syndrome, (2) idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis, and 
(3) vasculitis-associated hemorrhage, which is found in 
conditions such as hypersensitivity angiitis, Wegener 
granulomatosis, 
and 
systemic 
lupus 
erythematosus 
(Chapter 11).
Goodpasture Syndrome
Goodpasture syndrome is an uncommon autoimmune 
disease in which kidney and lung injury are caused by 
circulating autoantibodies against the noncollagenous 
domain of the α3 chain of collagen IV. When only renal 
disease is caused by this antibody, it is called anti-
glomerular basement membrane disease. The term 
Goodpasture syndrome designates the 40% to 60% of patients 
who develop pulmonary hemorrhage in addition to renal 
disease. The antibodies initiate inflammatory destruction 
of the basement membrane in renal glomeruli and 
pulmonary alveoli, giving rise to rapidly progressive glo-
merulonephritis and a necrotizing hemorrhagic interstitial 
pneumonitis. Although any age can be affected, most cases 
occur in the teens or 20s, and in contrast to many other 
autoimmune diseases, there is a male preponderance. The 
majority of patients are active smokers.
Pathogenesis.  The immunopathogenesis of the syndrome 
and the nature of the Goodpasture antigens are described 
in Chapter 20. The trigger that initiates the production 
of anti-basement membrane antibodies is still unknown. 
Because the epitopes that evoke anticollagen antibodies are 
normally hidden within the molecule, it is presumed that 
Figure 15-31  Diffuse pulmonary hemorrhage syndrome. There is acute intra-
alveolar hemorrhage and hemosiderin-laden macrophages, reflecting previ-
ous hemorrhage (Prussian blue iron stain). 
some environmental insult such as viral infection, expo-
sure to hydrocarbon solvents (used in the dry cleaning 
industry), or smoking is required to unmask the cryptic 
epitopes. As in other autoimmune disorders, a genetic pre-
disposition is indicated by association with certain HLA 
subtypes (e.g., HLA-DRB1*1501 and *1502).
  MORPHOLOGY
In the classic case, the lungs are heavy, with areas of red-brown 
consolidation. Histologically, there is focal necrosis of alveolar 
walls associated with intra-alveolar hemorrhages. Often the 
alveoli contain hemosiderin-laden macrophages (Fig. 15-31). In 
later stages there may be fibrous thickening of the septae, 
hypertrophy of type II pneumocytes, and organization of blood 
in alveolar spaces. In many cases immunofluorescence studies 
reveal linear deposits of immunoglobulins along the basement 
membranes of the septal walls. The kidneys have the charac-
teristic findings of focal proliferative glomerulonephritis in early 
cases or crescentic glomerulonephritis in patients with rapidly 
progressive glomerulonephritis. Diagnostic linear deposits of 
immunoglobulins and complement are seen by immunofluores-
cence studies along the glomerular basement membranes even 
in the few patients without renal disease.
Clinical Features.  Most cases begin clinically with respi­
ratory symptoms, principally hemoptysis, and radio-
graphic evidence of focal pulmonary consolidations. Soon, 
manifestations of glomerulonephritis appear, leading to 
rapidly progressive renal failure. The most common cause 
of death is uremia. The once dismal prognosis for this 
disease has been markedly improved by intensive plasma-
pheresis. This procedure is thought to be beneficial by 
removing circulating antibasement membrane antibodies 
as well as chemical mediators of immunologic injury. 
Simultaneous immunosuppressive therapy inhibits further 
antibody production, ameliorating both lung hemorrhage 
and glomerulonephritis.
Idiopathic Pulmonary Hemosiderosis
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis is a rare disorder 
characterized by intermittent, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. 
Most cases occur in young children, although the disease 
has been reported in adults as well. It usually presents with 
an insidious onset of productive cough, hemoptysis, and 
anemia associated with diffuse pulmonary infiltrations 
similar to Goodpasture syndrome.
The cause and pathogenesis are unknown, and no anti-
basement membrane antibodies are detectable in serum 
or tissues. However, favorable response to long-term 
immunosuppression with prednisone and/or azathioprine 
indicates that an immunologic mechanism could be 
involved in the pulmonary capillary damage underlying 
alveolar bleeding. In addition, long-term follow-up of 
patients shows that some of them develop other immune 
disorders.
Polyangiitis With Granulomatosis
Previously called Wegener granulomatosis, this autoim-
mune disease most often involves the upper respiratory 
tract and/or the lungs, with hemoptysis being the common 
presenting symptom. Its features are discussed in Chapter 
702
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
11. Here, it is enough to emphasize that a transbronchial 
lung biopsy might provide the only tissue available for 
diagnosis. Since the amount of tissue is small, necrosis and 
granulomatous vasculitis might not be present. Rather, the 
diagnostically important features are capillaritis and scat-
tered, poorly formed granulomas (unlike those of sarcoid-
osis, which are rounded and well-defined).
Pulmonary Infections
Respiratory tract infections are more frequent than 
infections of any other organ and account for the largest 
number of workdays lost in the general population. 
The vast majority are upper respiratory tract infections 
caused by viruses (common cold, pharyngitis), but bacte-
rial, viral, mycoplasmal, and fungal infections of the lung 
(pneumonia) still account for an enormous amount of mor-
bidity and are the eighth leading cause of death (respon-
sible for 2.3% of all deaths) in the United States. Pneumonia 
can be very broadly defined as any infection of the lung 
parenchyma.
Pulmonary anti-microbial defense mechanisms are 
described in Chapter 8. Pneumonia can result whenever 
these local defense mechanisms are impaired or the sys-
temic resistance of the host is lowered. Factors that affect 
resistance in general include chronic diseases, immuno-
logic deficiency, treatment with immunosuppressive 
agents, and leukopenia. The local defense mechanisms of 
the lung can be compromised by many factors, including:
•	 Loss or suppression of the cough reflex as a result of coma, 
anesthesia, neuromuscular disorders, drugs, or chest 
pain (may lead to aspiration of gastric contents)
•	 Injury to the mucociliary apparatus by either impairment 
of ciliary function or destruction of ciliated epithelium, 
due to cigarette smoke, inhalation of hot or corrosive 
gases, viral diseases, or genetic defects of ciliary func-
tion (e.g., the immotile cilia syndrome)
•	 Accumulation of secretions in conditions such as cystic 
fibrosis and bronchial obstruction
•	 Interference with the phagocytic or bactericidal action of 
alveolar macrophages by alcohol, tobacco smoke, 
anoxia, or oxygen intoxication
•	 Pulmonary congestion and edema
Defects in innate immunity (including neutrophil and com-
plement defects) and humoral immunodeficiency typically 
lead to an increased incidence of infections with pyogenic 
bacteria. Germline mutations in MyD88 (an adaptor for 
several TLRs that is important for activation of the tran-
scription factor NFκB) are also associated with destructive 
bacterial (pneumococcal) pneumonias. On the other hand, 
cell-mediated immune defects (congenital and acquired) 
lead to increased infections with intracellular microbes 
such as mycobacteria and herpesviruses as well as with 
microorganisms of very low virulence, such as Pneumocystis 
jiroveci.
Several other points should be emphasized. First, to 
paraphrase the French physician Louis Cruveilhier in 1919 
(during the Spanish flu epidemic), “flu condemns, and 
additional infection executes”.  This is particularly true 
in debilitated patients. For example, the most common 
cause of death in viral influenza epidemics is superim-
posed bacterial pneumonia. Second, although the portal of 
entry for most bacterial pneumonias is the respiratory 
tract, hematogenous seeding of the lungs from another 
organ may occur and may be difficult to distinguish from 
primary pneumonia. Finally, many patients with chronic 
diseases acquire terminal pneumonia while hospitalized 
(nosocomial infection). Bacteria common to the hospital envi-
ronment may have acquired resistance to antibiotics; 
opportunities for spread are increased; invasive proce-
dures, such as intubations and injections, are common; and 
bacteria may contaminate equipment used in respiratory 
care units.
Pneumonia is classified by the specific etiologic agent, 
which determines the treatment, or, if no pathogen can be 
isolated (which occurs in about 50% of cases), by the clini-
cal setting in which the infection occurs. The latter consid-
erably narrows the list of suspected pathogens, providing 
a guide for empirical antimicrobial therapy. As Table 15-7 
indicates, pneumonia can arise in seven distinct clinical 
settings (“pneumonia syndromes”), and the implicated 
pathogens are reasonably specific to each category.
Community-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonias
Community-acquired acute pneumonia refers to lung 
infection in otherwise healthy individuals that is acquired 
from the normal environment (in contrast to hospital 
acquired pneumonia). It may be bacterial or viral. Clinical 
and radiologic features are usually insensitive in differen-
tiating between them. Several newer biomarkers have been 
developed to identify patients with bacterial infection and 
to define their prognosis. Of these, C-reactive protein and 
procalcitonin, both acute-phase reactants produced pri-
marily in the liver, are significantly elevated in bacterial 
more than in viral infections.
Often, the bacterial infection follows an upper respira-
tory tract viral infection. Bacterial invasion of the lung 
parenchyma causes the alveoli to be filled with an 
inflammatory exudate, thus causing consolidation (“solidi-
fication”) of the pulmonary tissue. Many variables, such as 
the specific etiologic agent, the host reaction, and the extent 
of involvement, determine the precise form of pneumonia. 
Predisposing conditions include extremes of age, chronic 
diseases (congestive heart failure, COPD, and diabetes), 
congenital or acquired immune deficiencies, and decreased 
or absent splenic function (sickle cell disease or postsple-
nectomy, which puts the patient at risk for infection with 
encapsulated bacteria such as pneumococcus).
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Streptococcus pneumoniae, or pneumococcus, is the most 
common cause of community-acquired acute pneumonia. 
Examination of Gram-stained sputum is an important 
step in the diagnosis of acute pneumonia. The presence of 
numerous neutrophils containing the typical gram-positive, 
lancet-shaped diplococci supports the diagnosis of pneu-
mococcal pneumonia, but it must be remembered that 
S. pneumoniae is a part of the endogenous flora in 20% of 
adults, and therefore false-positive results may be obtained. 
Isolation of pneumococci from blood cultures is more spe-
cific but less sensitive (in the early phase of illness, only 
20% to 30% of patients have positive blood cultures). 
703
Pulmonary infections
increasing. They are less virulent, spread along the surface 
of the upper respiratory tract, and produce otitis media 
(infection of the middle ear), sinusitis, and bronchopneu-
monia. Neonates and children with comorbidities such as 
prematurity, malignancy, and immunodeficiency are at 
high risk for development of invasive infection.
H. influenzae pneumonia, which may follow a viral 
respiratory infection, is a pediatric emergency and has a 
high mortality rate. Descending laryngotracheobronchitis 
results in airway obstruction as the smaller bronchi are 
plugged by dense, fibrin-rich exudates containing neutro-
phils, similar to that seen in pneumococcal pneumonias. 
Pulmonary consolidation is usually lobular and patchy but 
may be confluent and involve the entire lung lobe. Before 
a vaccine became widely available, H. influenzae was a 
common cause of suppurative meningitis in children up to 
5 years of age. H. influenzae also causes an acute, purulent 
conjunctivitis (pink eye) in children and, in predisposed 
older patients, may cause septicemia, endocarditis, pyelo-
nephritis, cholecystitis, and suppurative arthritis. H. influ-
enzae is the most common bacterial cause of acute 
exacerbation of COPD.
Moraxella catarrhalis
Moraxella catarrhalis is being increasingly recognized as a 
cause of bacterial pneumonia, especially in the elderly. It 
is the second most common bacterial cause of acute exac-
erbation of COPD. Along with S. pneumoniae and H. influ-
enzae, M. catarrhalis constitutes one of the three most 
common causes of otitis media in children.
Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus aureus is an important cause of secondary 
bacterial pneumonia in children and healthy adults follow-
ing viral respiratory illnesses (e.g., measles in children and 
influenza in both children and adults). Staphylococcal 
pneumonia is associated with a high incidence of complica-
tions, such as lung abscess and empyema. Intravenous drug 
users are at high risk for development of staphylococcal 
pneumonia in association with endocarditis. It is also an 
important cause of hospital-acquired pneumonia.
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Klebsiella pneumoniae is the most frequent cause of gram-
negative bacterial pneumonia. It commonly afflicts debi­
litated and malnourished people, particularly chronic 
alcoholics. Thick, mucoid, (often blood-tinged) sputum is 
characteristic, because the organism produces an abundant 
viscid capsular polysaccharide, which the patient may 
have difficulty expectorating.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Although Pseudomonas aeruginosa most commonly causes 
hospital-acquired infections, it is mentioned here because 
of its occurrence in cystic fibrosis and immunocompro-
mised patients. It is common in patients who are neutro-
penic and it has a propensity to invade blood vessels with 
consequent extrapulmonary spread. Pseudomonas septice-
mia is a very fulminant disease.
Legionella pneumophila
Legionella pneumophila is the agent of Legionnaires’ dis­
ease, an eponym for the epidemic and sporadic forms 
Pneumococcal vaccines containing capsular polysaccha-
rides from the common serotypes are used in individuals 
at high risk for pneumococcal sepsis.
Haemophilus influenzae
Haemophilus influenzae is a pleomorphic, gram-negative 
organism that occurs in encapsulated and nonencapsu-
lated forms. There are six serotypes of the encapsulated 
form (types a to f), of which type b is the most virulent. 
Antibodies against the capsule protect the host from 
H. influenzae infection; hence the capsular polysaccharide 
b is incorporated in the widely used vaccine against 
H. influenzae. With routine use of H. influenzae conjugate 
vaccines, the incidence of disease caused by the b serotype 
has declined significantly. By contrast, infections with 
nonencapsulated forms, also called nontypeable forms, are 
Table 15-7  Pneumonia Syndromes
Community-Acquired Acute Pneumonia
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae
Moraxella catarrhalis
Staphylococcus aureus
Legionella pneumophila
Enterobacteriaceae (Klebsiella pneumoniae) and Pseudomonas spp.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Chlamydia spp. (C. pneumoniae, C. psittaci, C. trachomatis)
Coxiella burnetii (Q fever)
Viruses: respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus and human 
metapneumovirus (children); influenza A and B (adults); adenovirus 
(military recruits);
Health Care-Associated Pneumonia
Staphylococcus aureus, methicillin-sensitive
Staphylococcus aureus, methicillin-resistant
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia
Gram-negative rods, Enterobacteriaceae (Klebsiella spp., Serratia 
marcescens, Escherichia coli) and Pseudomonas spp.
Staphylococcus aureus (usually methicillin-resistant)
Aspiration Pneumonia
Anaerobic oral flora (Bacteroides, Prevotella, Fusobacterium, 
Peptostreptococcus), admixed with aerobic bacteria (Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa)
Chronic Pneumonia
Nocardia
Actinomyces
Granulomatous: Mycobacterium tuberculosis and atypical mycobacteria, 
Histoplasma capsulatum, Coccidioides immitis, Blastomyces dermatitidis
Necrotizing Pneumonia and Lung Abscess
Anaerobic bacteria (extremely common), with or without mixed aerobic 
infection
Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes, and 
type 3 pneumococcus (uncommon)
Pneumonia in the Immunocompromised Host
Cytomegalovirus
Pneumocystis jiroveci
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
Invasive aspergillosis
Invasive candidiasis
“Usual” bacterial, viral, and fungal organisms (listed herein)
704
C H A P T E R  15	 The Lung
of pneumonia caused by this organism. It also causes 
Pontiac fever, a related self-limited upper respiratory tract 
infection. This organism flourishes in artificial aquatic 
environments, such as water-cooling towers and the tubing 
systems of domestic (potable) water supplies. The mode of 
transmission is either inhalation of aerosolized organisms 
or aspiration of contaminated drinking water. Legionella 
pneumonia is common in individuals with predisposing 
conditions such as cardiac, renal, immunologic, or hema-
tologic disease. Organ transplant recipients are particularly 
susceptible. It can be quite severe, frequently requiring 
hospitalization, and immunosuppressed patients may 
have fatality rates of up to 50%. Rapid diagnosis is facili-
tated by demonstration of Legionella antigens in the urine 
or by a positive fluorescent antibody test on sputum 
samples; culture remains the diagnostic gold standard.
  MORPHOLOGY
Bacterial pneumonia has two patterns of anatomic distribution: 
lobular bronchopneumonia and lobar pneumonia (Fig. 15-32). 
Patchy consolidation of the lung is the dominant characteristic 
of bronchopneumonia (Fig. 15-33), while consolidation of a 
large portion of a lobe or of an entire lobe defines lobar pneu-
monia (Fig. 15-34). These anatomic categorizations may be 
difficult to apply in individual cases because patterns overlap. 
The patchy involvement may become confluent, producing vir-
tually total lobar consolidation; however, effective antibiotic 
therapy may limit involvement to a subtotal consolidation. 
Moreover, the same organisms may produce either pattern 
depending on patient susceptibility. Most important from the 
clinical standpoint are identification of the causative 
agent and determination of the extent of disease.
In lobar pneumonia, four stages of the inflammatory 
response have classically been described: congestion, red 
hepatization, gray hepatization, and resolution. In the first stage 
of congestion the lung is heavy, boggy, and red. It is charac-
terized by vascular engorgement, intra-alveolar fluid with few 
neutrophils, and often the presence of numerous bacteria. The 
stage of red hepatization that follows is characterized by 
massive confluent exudation, as neutrophils, red cells, and fibrin 
fill the alveolar spaces (Fig. 15-35A). On gross examination, the 
lobe is red, firm, and airless, with a liver-like consistency, hence 
the term hepatization. The stage of gray hepatization that 
follows is marked by progressive disintegration of red cells and 
the persistence of a fibrinosuppurative exudate (Fig. 15-35B), 
Figure 15-32  Comparison of bronchopneumonia and lobar pneumonia. 
Bronchopneumonia
Lobar pneumonia
Figure 15-33  Bronchopneumonia. Section of lung showing patches of con-
solidation (arrows). 
Figure 15-34  Lobar pneumonia—gray hepatization. The lower lobe is uni-
formly consolidated. 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Mycoplasma infections are particularly common among 
children and young adults. They occur sporadically or as 
local epidemics in closed communities (schools, military 
camps, and prisons).
705
Pulmonary infections
Clinical Course.  The major symptoms of community-
acquired acute bacterial pneumonia are abrupt onset of 
high fever, shaking chills, and cough producting mucopu-
rulent sputum; occasional patients may have hemoptysis. 
When pleuritis is present it is accompanied by pleuritic 
pain and pleural friction rub. The whole lobe is radiopaque 
in lobar pneumonia, whereas there are focal opacities in 
bronchopneumonia.
The clinical picture is markedly modified by the admin-
istration of antibiotics. Treated patients may be relatively 
afebrile with few clinical signs 48 to 72 hours after the 
initiation of antibiotics. The identification of the organism 
and the determination of its antibiotic sensitivity are 
the keystones to appropriate therapy. Fewer than 10% of 
patients with pneumonia severe enough to merit hospital-
ization now succumb, and in most such instances death 
results from a complication, such as empyema, meningitis, 
endocarditis, or pericarditis, or to some predisposing influ-
ence, such as debility or chronic alcoholism.
Community-Acquired Viral Pneumonia
Common viral infections include influenza virus types A 
and B, the respiratory syncytial viruses, human metapneu-
movirus, adenovirus, rhinoviruses, rubeola, and varicella 
viruses. Any of these agents can cause merely an upper 
respiratory tract infection, recognized as the common cold, 
or a more severe lower respiratory tract infection. Factors 
that favor such extension of the infection include extremes 
of age, malnutrition, alcoholism, and underlying debilitat-
ing illnesses.
Although the molecular details vary, all of the viruses 
that cause pneuomia produce disease through similar 
general mechanisms. These viruses have tropisms that 
allow them to attach to and enter respiratory lining cells. 
Viral replication and gene expression leads to cytopathic 
changes, inducing cell death and secondary inflammation. 
The resulting damage and impairment of local pulmonary 
defenses, such as mucociliary clearance, may predisopose 
to bacterial superinfections, which are often more serious 
than the viral infection itself.
resulting in a color change to grayish-brown. In the final stage 
of resolution the exudate within the alveolar spaces is broken 
down by enzymatic digestion to produce granular, semifluid 
debris that is resorbed, ingested by macrophages, expecto-
rated, or organized by fibroblasts growing into it (Fig. 15-35C). 
Pleural fibrinous reaction to the underlying inflammation, often 
present in the early stages if the consolidation extends to  
the surface (pleuritis), may similarly resolve. More often it 
Figure 15-35  Stages of bacterial pneumonia. A, Acute pneumonia. The 
congested septal capillaries and numerous intra-alveolar neutrophils are 
characteristic of early red hepatization. Fibrin nets have not yet formed.  
B, Early organization of intra-alveolar exudate, seen focally to be streaming 
through the pores of Kohn (arrow). C, Advanced organizing pneumonia. The 
exudates have been converted to fibromyxoid masses rich in macrophages 
and fibroblasts. 
A
B
C
undergoes organization, leaving fibrous thickening or perma-
nent adhesions.
Foci of bronchopneumonia are consolidated areas of acute 
suppurative inflammation. The consolidation may be confined 
to one lobe but is more often multilobar and frequently bilateral 
and basal because of the tendency of secretions to gravitate to 
the lower lobes. Well-developed lesions are slightly elevated, 
dry, granular, gray-red to yellow, and poorly delimited at their 
margins (Fig. 15-33). Histologically, the reaction usually elicits a 
neutrophil-rich exudate that fills the bronchi, bronchioles, and 
adjacent alveolar spaces (Fig. 15-35A).
Complications of pneumonia include (1) tissue destruction 
and necrosis, causing abscess formation (particularly 
common with type 3 pneumococci or Klebsiella infections); 
(2) spread of infection to the pleural cavity, causing the intra-
pleural fibrinosuppurative reaction known as empyema; and 
(3) bacteremic dissemination to the heart valves, pericar-
dium, brain, kidneys, spleen, or joints, causing metastatic 
abscesses, endocarditis, meningitis, or suppurative arthritis.
