A.  Nondepolarizing (competitive) blockers
The first known NMB was curare [kyoo-RAH-ree], which Amazon hunters used to paralyze prey. The development
of tubocurarine [too-boe-kyoo-AR-een] followed, but it has been replaced by agents with fewer adverse effects,
such as cisatracurium [cis-a-trah-CURE-ih-um], mivacurium [mi-vah-KYOO-ree-um], pancuronium [pan-kure-OH-
nee-um], rocuronium [roe-kyoor-OH-nee-um], and vecuronium [ve-KYOO-roe-nee-um].
1.  Mechanism of action
a.  At low doses
NMBs competitively block ACh at the nicotinic receptors (Figure 5.9). They compete with ACh at the receptor
without stimulating it, thus preventing depolarization of the muscle cell membrane and inhibiting muscular
contraction. Their competitive action can be overcome by administration of cholinesterase inhibitors, such as
neostigmine and edrophonium, which increase the concentration of ACh in the NMJ. Clinicians employ this strategy
to shorten the duration of neuromuscular blockade. In addition, at low doses the muscle responds to direct electrical
stimulation from a peripheral nerve stimulator to varying degrees, allowing for monitoring of the extent of
neuromuscular blockade.
Figure 5.9 Mechanism of action of competitive neuromuscular blocking drugs.
b.  At high doses
Nondepolarizing agents can block the ion channels of the motor end plate. This leads to further weakening of
neuromuscular transmission, reducing the ability of cholinesterase inhibitors to reverse the actions of the
nondepolarizing blockers. With complete blockade, the muscle does not respond to direct electrical stimulation.
2.  Actions
Muscles have differing sensitivity to blockade by competitive agents. Small, rapidly contracting muscles of the face
and eye are most susceptible and are paralyzed first, followed by the fingers, limbs, neck, and trunk muscles. Next,
the intercostal muscles are affected and, lastly, the diaphragm. The muscles recover in the reverse manner. [Note:
Sugammadex is a selective relaxant-binding agent that terminates the action of both rocuronium and vecuronium and
can be used to speed recovery (see Chapter 13).]
3.  Pharmacokinetics
All NMBs are injected intravenously or occasionally intramuscularly. These agents possess two or more quaternary
amines in their bulky ring structure that prevent absorption from the gut. They penetrate membranes very poorly and
do not enter cells or cross the blood–brain barrier. Drug action is terminated in a variety of ways (Figure 5.10).
Pancuronium is excreted unchanged in urine. Cisatracurium undergoes organ-independent metabolism (via
Hofmann elimination) to laudanosine, which is further metabolized and renally excreted. The amino steroid drugs
vecuronium and rocuronium are deacetylated in the liver and excreted unchanged in bile. Mivacurium is eliminated
by plasma cholinesterase. The choice of agent depends on the desired onset and duration of muscle relaxation and
the route of elimination. Characteristics of the neuromuscular-blocking drugs are shown in Figure 5.11.
201
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 5.10 Pharmacokinetics of the neuromuscular blocking drugs. Cisatracurium
undergoes organ-independent elimination. Mivacurium and succinylcholine are
metabolized by plasma cholinesterase. IV = intravenous.
202
www.webofpharma.com
203
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 5.11 Characteristics of neuromuscular blocking drugs.
4.  Adverse effects
In general, these agents are safe with minimal side effects. The adverse effects of the specific NMBs are shown in
Figure 5.11.
5.  Drug interactions
a.  Cholinesterase inhibitors
Drugs such as neostigmine, physostigmine, pyridostigmine, and edrophonium can overcome the action of
nondepolarizing NMBs. However, with increased dosage, cholinesterase inhibitors can cause a depolarizing block
due to elevated ACh concentrations at the end plate membrane. If the NMB has entered the ion channel (is bound to
the receptor), cholinesterase inhibitors are not as effective in overcoming blockade.
b.  Halogenated hydrocarbon anesthetics
Drugs such as desflurane act to enhance neuromuscular blockade by exerting a stabilizing action at the NMJ. These
agents sensitize the NMJ to the effects of NMBs.
c.  Aminoglycoside antibiotics
Drugs such as gentamicin and tobramycin inhibit ACh release from cholinergic nerves by competing with calcium
ions. They synergize with competitive blockers, enhancing neuromuscular blockade.
d.  Calcium channel blockers
These agents may increase the neuromuscular blockade of competitive blockers.
204
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Depolarizing agents
Depolarizing blocking agents work by depolarizing the plasma membrane of the muscle fiber, similar to the action
of ACh. However, these agents are more resistant to degradation by acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and can more
persistently depolarize the muscle fibers. Succinylcholine [suk-sin-il-KOE-leen] is the only depolarizing muscle
relaxant in use today.
1.  Mechanism of action
Succinylcholine attaches to the nicotinic receptor and acts like ACh to depolarize the junction (Figure 5.12). Unlike
ACh, which is instantly destroyed by AChE, the depolarizing agent persists at high concentrations in the synaptic
cleft, remaining attached to the receptor for a longer time and providing sustained depolarization of the muscle cell.
[Note: The duration of action is dependent on diffusion from the motor end plate and hydrolysis by plasma
cholinesterase (also called butyrylcholinesterase or pseudocholinesterase). Genetic variants in which plasma
cholinesterase levels are low or absent lead to prolonged neuromuscular paralysis.] The depolarizing agent first
causes opening of the sodium channel associated with nicotinic receptors, which results in depolarization of the
receptor (phase I). This leads to a transient twitching of the muscle (fasciculations). Continued binding of the
depolarizing agent renders the receptor incapable of transmitting further impulses. With time, continuous
depolarization gives way to gradual repolarization as the sodium channel closes or is blocked. This causes a
resistance to depolarization (phase II) and flaccid paralysis.
205
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 5.12 Mechanism of action of depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs.
206
www.webofpharma.com
2.  Actions
As with the competitive blockers, the respiratory muscles are paralyzed last. Succinylcholine initially produces brief
muscle fasciculations that cause muscle soreness. This may be prevented by administering a small dose of
nondepolarizing NMB prior to succinylcholine. Normally, the duration of action of succinylcholine is extremely
short, due to rapid hydrolysis by plasma cholinesterase. However, succinylcholine that reaches the NMJ is not
metabolized, allowing the agent to bind to nicotinic receptors, and redistribution to plasma is necessary for
metabolism.
3.  Therapeutic uses
Because of its rapid onset of action, succinylcholine is useful when rapid endotracheal intubation is required. It is
also used during electroconvulsive shock treatment.
4.  Pharmacokinetics
Succinylcholine is injected intravenously. Its brief duration of action results from redistribution and rapid hydrolysis
by plasma cholinesterase. Drug effects rapidly disappear upon discontinuation.
5.  Adverse effects
a.  Hyperthermia
Succinylcholine can potentially induce malignant hyperthermia in susceptible patients (see Chapter 13).
b.  Apnea
Administration of succinylcholine to a patient who is deficient in plasma cholinesterase or has an atypical form of
the enzyme can lead to prolonged apnea due to paralysis of the diaphragm. The rapid release of potassium may also
contribute to prolonged apnea in patients with electrolyte imbalances. In patients with electrolyte imbalances
receiving digoxin or diuretics (such as heart failure patients) succinylcholine should be used cautiously or not at all.
c.  Hyperkalemia
Succinylcholine increases potassium release from intracellular stores. This may be particularly dangerous in burn
patients and patients with massive tissue damage in which potassium has been rapidly lost or in patients with renal
failure.
207
www.webofpharma.com
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
During an ophthalmic surgical procedure, the surgeon wanted to constrict the pupil using a miotic drug.
However, he accidentally used another drug that caused dilation of the pupil (mydriasis). Which drug was
most likely used?
A.  Acetylcholine
B.  Pilocarpine
C.  Tropicamide
D.  Bethanechol
Correct answer = C. Muscarinic agonists such as ACh, pilocarpine, and bethanechol contract the circular muscles
of iris sphincter and cause constriction of the pupil (miosis), whereas muscarinic antagonists such as tropicamide
prevent contraction of the circular muscles of the iris and cause dilation of the pupil (mydriasis).
Sarin is a nerve gas that is an organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitor. Which agent could be used as an
antidote to sarin poisoning?
A.  Pilocarpine
B.  Carbachol
C.  Atropine
D.  Physostigmine
Correct answer = C. Sarin is an organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitor. It causes an increase in ACh levels in
tissues that leads to cholinergic crisis through activation of muscarinic and nicotinic receptors. Most symptoms of
cholinergic crisis are mediated by muscarinic receptors and, therefore, the muscarinic antagonist atropine is used
as an antidote for sarin poisoning. Cholinergic agonists such as pilocarpine, carbachol, and physostigmine
(indirect agonists) worsen symptoms of sarin poisoning.
A patient with Alzheimer disease needs treatment for overactive bladder (OAB). Which drug is the best
choice for this patient?
A.  Darifenacin
B.  Solifenacin
C.  Tolterodine
D.  Trospium
Correct answer = D. All of agents for OAB except trospium cross the blood–brain barrier to various degrees and
could worsen dementia symptoms in Alzheimer disease. Trospium is a quaternary ammonium compound that
minimally crosses the blood–brain barrier.
A patient with asthma was prescribed a β2 agonist for acute relief of bronchospasm, but did not respond to
treatment. Which drug is the most likely next option for this patient?
A.  Benztropine
B.  Ipratropium
C.  Oxybutynin
D.  Physostigmine
Correct answer = B. Major receptors present in the bronchial tissues are muscarinic and adrenergic β2 receptors.
Muscarinic activation causes bronchoconstriction, and β2 receptor activation causes bronchodilation. Therefore,
direct or indirect (physostigmine) muscarinic agonists worsen bronchospasm. Ipratropium is a muscarinic
antagonist that can relax bronchial smooth muscles and relieve bronchospasm in patients who are not responsive
to β2 agonists. Benztropine is used in the treatment of Parkinson disease or relief of extrapyramidal symptoms
from antipsychotics. Oxybutynin is used for overactive bladder.
A 50-year-old male who is noncompliant with medications was recently diagnosed with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). His physician would like to prescribe an inhaled anticholinergic that is dosed
once or twice daily. Which drug is most appropriate for this patient?
A.  Atropine
B.  Ipratropium
C.  Tiotropium
D.  Trospium
Correct answer = C. The physician should prescribe a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) so that the
patient has to inhale the medication only 1 or 2 times daily. Tiotropium is a LAMA, whereas ipratropium is a
short-acting muscarinic antagonist (SAMA). Atropine and trospium are muscarinic antagonists, but are not
indicated for pulmonary conditions such as asthma or COPD and are not available as inhaled formulations.
208
www.webofpharma.com
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5.10
Which is the most effective drug for motion sickness for a person planning to go on a cruise?
A.  Atropine
B.  Fesoterodine
C.  Scopolamine
D.  Tropicamide
Correct answer = C. All muscarinic antagonists (anticholinergic drugs) listed are theoretically useful as
antimotion sickness drugs; however, scopolamine is the most effective in preventing motion sickness.
Tropicamide mostly has ophthalmic uses, and fesoterodine is used for overactive bladder.
Which is correct regarding ganglion-blocking drugs?
A.  Blockade of sympathetic ganglia could result in reduced blood pressure.
B.  Blockade of parasympathetic ganglia could result in reduced heart rate.
C.  Nicotine is a nondepolarizing ganglion blocker.
D.  Atropine is a nondepolarizing ganglion blocker.
Correct answer = A. Selective blockade (in theory) of the sympathetic ganglion causes reduction in
norepinephrine release and, therefore, reduction in heart rate and blood pressure. Selective blockade (in theory) of
the parasympathetic ganglion causes reduction in ACh release and an increase in heart rate. Receptors at both
sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia are of the nicotinic type. Nicotine is an agonist at nicotinic receptors
and produces a depolarizing block in the ganglia. Atropine is a muscarinic antagonist and has no effect on the
nicotinic receptors found in the ganglia.
Which drug is useful in treating sinus bradycardia?
A.  Atropine
B.  Cisatracurium
C.  Neostigmine
D.  Succinylcholine
Correct answer = A. Sinus bradycardia is a condition where the heart rate is below normal and most often caused
by increased vagal tone (increased release of ACh in the sinoatrial [SA] node that acts on muscarinic receptors to
reduce heart rate). A muscarinic antagonist such as atropine is useful in this situation to bring the heart rate back
to normal. Succinylcholine and cisatracurium are nicotinic antagonists and have no effect on muscarinic receptors
in the SA node. Neostigmine is a cholinesterase inhibitor and can worsen bradycardia by increasing the level of
ACh in the SA node.
An ICU patient with severe lung injury requires a neuromuscular blocking agent to assist in his ventilator
management. He has liver disease and is currently in renal failure. Which neuromuscular blocker is the best
choice for this patient?
A.  Cisatracurium
B.  Pancuronium
C.  Vecuronium
D.  Rocuronium
Correct answer = A. Pancuronium is renally eliminated and the patient has renal failure. Vecuronium and
rocuronium are hepatically metabolized and the patient has liver disease. Cisatracurium is cleared by organ-
independent metabolism (Hofmann elimination).
Where would you expect to see the first return of function in skeletal muscles following discontinuation of a
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent?
A.  Arms
B.  Diaphragm
C.  Fingers
D.  Pupils
Correct answer = B. Following administration of a neuromuscular blocker, the facial muscles are impacted first,
but the pupils are not controlled by skeletal muscle and are not affected. The fingers and arms would be next, with
the diaphragm function lost last. Function returns in the opposite order, so function of the diaphragm returns first.
209
www.webofpharma.com
6
Adrenergic Agonists
Rajan Radhakrishnan
210
www.webofpharma.com
I.  Overview
The adrenergic drugs affect receptors that are stimulated by norepinephrine (noradrenaline) or epinephrine
(adrenaline). These receptors are known as adrenergic receptors or adrenoceptors. Drugs that activate adrenergic
receptors are termed sympathomimetics, and drugs that block activation of adrenergic receptors are termed
sympatholytics. Some sympathomimetics directly activate adrenergic receptors (direct-acting agonists), while others
act indirectly by enhancing release or blocking reuptake of norepinephrine (indirect-acting agonists). This chapter
describes agents that either directly or indirectly stimulate adrenoceptors (Figure 6.1). Sympatholytic drugs are
discussed in Chapter 7.
Figure 6.1 Summary of adrenergic agonists. Agents marked with an asterisk (*) are
211
www.webofpharma.com
catecholamines.
212
www.webofpharma.com
II.  The Adrenergic Neuron
Adrenergic neurons release norepinephrine as the primary neurotransmitter. These neurons are found in the central
nervous system (CNS) and in the sympathetic nervous system, where they serve as links between ganglia and the
effector organs. Adrenergic drugs act on adrenergic receptors, located either presynaptically on the neuron or
postsynaptically on the effector organ (Figure 6.2).
Figure 6.2 Sites of actions of adrenergic agonists.
213
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Neurotransmission at adrenergic neurons
Neurotransmission in adrenergic neurons closely resembles that described for the cholinergic neurons (see Chapter
4), except that norepinephrine is the neurotransmitter instead of acetylcholine. Neurotransmission involves the
following steps: synthesis, storage, release, and receptor binding of norepinephrine, followed by removal of the
neurotransmitter from the synaptic gap (Figure 6.3).
Figure 6.3 Synthesis and release of norepinephrine from the adrenergic neuron. DOPA =
dihydroxyphenylalanine; MAO = monoamine oxidase; NE = norepinephrine; SNRI =
serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor.
1.  Synthesis of norepinephrine
Tyrosine is transported by a carrier into the adrenergic neuron, where it is hydroxylated to dihydroxyphenylalanine
(DOPA) by tyrosine hydroxylase. This is the rate-limiting step in the formation of norepinephrine. DOPA is then
decarboxylated by the enzyme aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase to form dopamine in the presynaptic neuron.
2.  Storage of norepinephrine in vesicles
Dopamine is then transported into synaptic vesicles by an amine transporter system. This carrier system is blocked
by reserpine (see Chapter 7). Next, dopamine is hydroxylated to form norepinephrine by the enzyme dopamine β-
hydroxylase.
3.  Release of norepinephrine
An action potential arriving at the nerve junction triggers an influx of calcium ions from the extracellular fluid into
the cytoplasm of the neuron. The increase in calcium causes synaptic vesicles to fuse with the cell membrane and to
undergo exocytosis and expel their contents into the synapse. Drugs such as guanethidine block this release.
4.  Binding to receptors
Norepinephrine released from the synaptic vesicles diffuses into the synaptic space and binds to postsynaptic
214
www.webofpharma.com
receptors on the effector organ or to presynaptic receptors on the nerve ending. Binding of norepinephrine to
receptors triggers a cascade of events within the cell, resulting in the formation of intracellular second messengers
that act as links (transducers) in the communication between the neurotransmitter and the action generated within the
effector cell. Adrenergic receptors use both the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) second messenger system
and the phosphatidylinositol cycle to transduce the signal into an effect. Norepinephrine also binds to presynaptic
receptors (mainly α2 subtype) that modulate the release of the neurotransmitter.
5.  Removal of norepinephrine
Norepinephrine may 1) diffuse out of the synaptic space and enter the systemic circulation, 2) be metabolized to
inactive metabolites by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) in the synaptic space, or 3) undergo reuptake back
into the neuron. The reuptake by the neuronal membrane involves a sodium–chloride (Na+/Cl−)–dependent
norepinephrine transporter that can be inhibited by tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), such as imipramine; by
serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as duloxetine; or by cocaine. Reuptake of norepinephrine into the
presynaptic neuron is the primary mechanism for termination of its effects.
6.  Potential fates of recaptured norepinephrine
Once norepinephrine reenters the adrenergic neuron, it may be taken up into synaptic vesicles via the amine
transporter system and be sequestered for release by another action potential, or it may persist in a protected pool in
the cytoplasm. Alternatively, norepinephrine can be oxidized by monoamine oxidase (MAO) present in neuronal
mitochondria.
215
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Adrenergic receptors (adrenoceptors)
In the sympathetic nervous system, several classes of adrenoceptors can be distinguished pharmacologically. Two
main families of receptors, designated α and β, are classified based on response to the adrenergic agonists
epinephrine, norepinephrine, and isoproterenol. Both the α and β receptor types have a number of specific receptor
subtypes. Alterations in the primary structure of the receptors influence their affinity for various agents.
1.  α-Adrenoceptors
The α-adrenoceptors show a weak response to the synthetic agonist isoproterenol, but they are responsive to the
naturally occurring catecholamines epinephrine and norepinephrine (Figure 6.4). For α receptors, the rank order of
potency and affinity is epinephrine ≥ norepinephrine >> isoproterenol. The α-adrenoceptors are divided into two
subtypes, α1 and α2, based on their affinities for α agonists and antagonists. For example, α1 receptors have a higher
affinity for phenylephrine than α2 receptors. Conversely, the drug clonidine selectively binds to α2 receptors and has
less effect on α1 receptors.
216
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 6.4 Types of adrenergic receptors.
a.  α1 Receptors
These receptors are present on the postsynaptic membrane of the effector organs and mediate many of the classic
effects, originally designated as α-adrenergic, involving constriction of smooth muscle. Activation of α1 receptors
initiates a series of reactions through the G-protein activation of phospholipase C, ultimately resulting in the
generation of second messengers inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 initiates the
release of Ca2+ from the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol, and DAG turns on other proteins within the cell
(Figure 6.5).
217
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 6.5 Second messengers mediate the effects of α receptors. DAG = diacylglycerol;
IP3 = inositol trisphosphate; ATP = adenosine triphosphate; cAMP = cyclic adenosine
monophosphate.
b.  α2 Receptors
These receptors are located primarily on sympathetic presynaptic nerve endings and control the release of
norepinephrine. When a sympathetic adrenergic nerve is stimulated, a portion of the released norepinephrine “circles
back” and reacts with α2 receptors on the presynaptic membrane (Figure 6.5). Stimulation of α2 receptors causes
feedback inhibition and inhibits further release of norepinephrine from the stimulated adrenergic neuron. This
inhibitory action serves as a local mechanism for modulating norepinephrine output when there is high sympathetic
218
www.webofpharma.com
activity. [Note: In this instance, by inhibiting further output of norepinephrine from the adrenergic neuron, these
receptors are acting as inhibitory autoreceptors.] α2 Receptors are also found on presynaptic parasympathetic
neurons. Norepinephrine released from a presynaptic sympathetic neuron can diffuse to and interact with these
receptors, inhibiting acetylcholine release. [Note: In these instances, these receptors are behaving as inhibitory
heteroreceptors.] This is another mechanism to modulate autonomic activity in a given area. In contrast to α1
receptors, the effects of binding at α2 receptors are mediated by inhibition of adenylyl cyclase and by a fall in the
levels of intracellular cAMP.
c.  Further subdivisions
The α1 and α2 receptors are further divided into α1A, α1B, α1C, and α1D and into α2A, α2B, and α2C. This extended
classification is necessary for understanding the selectivity of some drugs. For example, tamsulosin is a selective α1A
antagonist that is used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia. The drug has fewer cardiovascular side effects because it
targets α1A subtype receptors found primarily in the urinary tract and prostate gland and does not affect the α1B
subtype found in the blood vessels.
2.  β-Adrenoceptors
Responses of β receptors differ from those of α receptors and are characterized by a strong response to
isoproterenol, with less sensitivity to epinephrine and norepinephrine (Figure 6.4). For β receptors, the rank order of
potency is isoproterenol > epinephrine > norepinephrine. The β-adrenoceptors can be subdivided into three major
subgroups, β1, β2, and β3, based on their affinities for adrenergic agonists and antagonists. β1 receptors have
approximately equal affinities for epinephrine and norepinephrine, whereas β2 receptors have a higher affinity for
epinephrine than for norepinephrine. Thus, tissues with a predominance of β2 receptors (such as the vasculature of
skeletal muscle) are particularly responsive to the effects of circulating epinephrine released by the adrenal medulla.
Binding of a neurotransmitter at any of the three types of β receptors results in activation of adenylyl cyclase and
increased concentrations of cAMP within the cell.
3.  Distribution of receptors
Adrenergically innervated organs and tissues usually have a predominant type of receptor. For example, tissues such
as the vasculature of skeletal muscle have both α1 and β2 receptors, but the β2 receptors predominate. Other tissues
may have one type of receptor almost exclusively. For example, the heart contains predominantly β1 receptors.
4.  Characteristic responses mediated by adrenoceptors
It is useful to organize the physiologic responses to adrenergic stimulation according to receptor type, because many
drugs preferentially stimulate or block one type of receptor. Figure 6.6 summarizes the most prominent effects
mediated by the adrenoceptors. As a generalization, stimulation of α1 receptors characteristically produces
vasoconstriction (particularly in skin and abdominal viscera) and an increase in total peripheral resistance and blood
pressure. Stimulation of β1 receptors characteristically causes cardiac stimulation (increase in heart rate and
contractility), whereas stimulation of β2 receptors produces vasodilation (in skeletal muscle vascular beds) and
smooth muscle relaxation. β3 Receptors are involved in lipolysis (along with β1), and also have effects on the
detrusor muscle of the bladder.
Figure 6.6 Major effects mediated by α- and β-adrenoceptors.
5.  Desensitization of receptors
Prolonged exposure to the catecholamines reduces the responsiveness of these receptors, a phenomenon known as
desensitization. Three mechanisms have been suggested to explain this phenomenon: 1) sequestration of the
receptors so that they are unavailable for interaction with the ligand; 2) down-regulation, that is, a disappearance of
the receptors either by destruction or by decreased synthesis; and 3) an inability to couple to G-protein, because the
receptor has been phosphorylated on the cytoplasmic side.
219
www.webofpharma.com
220
www.webofpharma.com
III.  Characteristics of Adrenergic Agonists
Most adrenergic drugs are derivatives of β-phenylethylamine (Figure 6.7). Substitutions on the benzene ring or on
the ethylamine side chains produce a variety of compounds with varying abilities to differentiate between α and β
receptors and to penetrate the CNS. Two important structural features of these drugs are 1) the number and location
of OH substitutions on the benzene ring and 2) the nature of the substituent on the amino nitrogen.
221
www.webofpharma.com
222
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 6.7 Structures of several important adrenergic agonists. Drugs containing the
catechol ring are shown in yellow.
223
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Catecholamines
Sympathomimetic amines that contain the 3,4-dihydroxybenzene group (such as epinephrine, norepinephrine,
isoproterenol, and dopamine) are called catecholamines. These compounds share the following properties:
1.  High potency
Catecholamines show the highest potency in directly activating α or β receptors.
2.  Rapid inactivation
Catecholamines are metabolized by COMT postsynaptically and by MAO intraneuronally, by COMT and MAO in
the gut wall, and by MAO in the liver. Thus, catecholamines have only a brief period of action when given
parenterally, and they are inactivated (ineffective) when administered orally.
3.  Poor penetration into the CNS
Catecholamines are polar and, therefore, do not readily penetrate into the CNS. Nevertheless, most catecholamines
have some clinical effects (anxiety, tremor, and headaches) that are attributable to action on the CNS.
224
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Noncatecholamines
Compounds lacking the catechol hydroxyl groups have longer half-lives, because they are not inactivated by COMT.
These include phenylephrine, ephedrine, and amphetamine (Figure 6.7). These agents are poor substrates for MAO
(an important route of metabolism) and, thus, show a prolonged duration of action. Increased lipid solubility of
many of the noncatecholamines (due to lack of polar hydroxyl groups) permits greater access to the CNS.
225
www.webofpharma.com
C.  Substitutions on the amine nitrogen
The nature of the substituent on the amine nitrogen is important in determining β selectivity of the adrenergic
agonist. For example, epinephrine, with a –CH3 substituent on the amine nitrogen, is more potent at β receptors than
norepinephrine, which has an unsubstituted amine. Similarly, isoproterenol, which has an isopropyl substituent –
CH(CH3)2 on the amine nitrogen (Figure 6.7), is a strong β agonist with little α activity (Figure 6.4).
226
www.webofpharma.com
D.  Mechanism of action of adrenergic agonists
1.  Direct-acting agonists
These drugs act directly on α or β receptors, producing effects similar to those that occur following stimulation of
sympathetic nerves or release of epinephrine from the adrenal medulla (Figure 6.8). Examples of direct-acting
agonists include epinephrine, norepinephrine, isoproterenol, dopamine, and phenylephrine.
Figure 6.8 Sites of action of direct-, indirect-, and mixed-acting adrenergic agonists.
2.  Indirect-acting agonists
These agents may block the reuptake of norepinephrine or cause the release of norepinephrine from the cytoplasmic
pools or vesicles of the adrenergic neuron (Figure 6.8). The norepinephrine then traverses the synapse and binds to α
or β receptors. Examples of reuptake inhibitors and agents that cause norepinephrine release include cocaine and
227
www.webofpharma.com
amphetamine, respectively.
3.  Mixed-action agonists
Ephedrine and its stereoisomer, pseudoephedrine, both stimulate adrenoceptors directly and enhance release of
norepinephrine from the adrenergic neuron (Figure 6.8).
228
www.webofpharma.com
IV.  Direct-Acting Adrenergic Agonists
Direct-acting agonists bind to adrenergic receptors on effector organs without interacting with the presynaptic
neuron. As a group, these agents are widely used in clinical practice.
229
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Epinephrine
Epinephrine [ep-i-NEF-rin] is one of the four catecholamines (epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, and
dobutamine) commonly used in therapy. The first three are naturally occurring neurotransmitters, and the latter is a
synthetic compound. In the adrenal medulla, norepinephrine is methylated to yield epinephrine, which is stored in
chromaffin cells along with norepinephrine. On stimulation, the adrenal medulla releases about 80% epinephrine
and 20% norepinephrine directly into the circulation. Epinephrine interacts with both α and β receptors. At low
doses, β effects (vasodilation) on the vascular system predominate, whereas at high doses, α effects
(vasoconstriction) are the strongest.
1.  Actions
a.  Cardiovascular
The major actions of epinephrine are on the cardiovascular system. Epinephrine strengthens the contractility of the
myocardium (positive inotrope: β1 action) and increases its rate of contraction (positive chronotrope: β1 action).
Therefore, cardiac output increases. These effects increase oxygen demands on the myocardium. Epinephrine
activates β1 receptors on the kidney to cause renin release. Renin is an enzyme involved in the production of
angiotensin II, a potent vasoconstrictor. Epinephrine constricts arterioles in the skin, mucous membranes, and
viscera (α effects), and it dilates vessels going to the liver and skeletal muscle (β2 effects). These combined effects
result in a decrease in renal blood flow. Therefore, the cumulative effect is an increase in systolic blood pressure,
coupled with a slight decrease in diastolic pressure due to β2 receptor–mediated vasodilation in the skeletal muscle
vascular bed (Figure 6.9).
230
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 6.9 Cardiovascular effects of intravenous infusion of low doses of epinephrine.
b.  Respiratory
Epinephrine causes powerful bronchodilation by acting directly on bronchial smooth muscle (β2 action). It also
inhibits the release of allergy mediators such as histamine from mast cells.
231
www.webofpharma.com
c.  Hyperglycemia
Epinephrine has a significant hyperglycemic effect because of increased glycogenolysis in the liver (β2 effect),
increased release of glucagon (β2 effect), and a decreased release of insulin (α2 effect).
d.  Lipolysis
Epinephrine initiates lipolysis through agonist activity on the β receptors of adipose tissue. Increased levels of
cAMP stimulate a hormone-sensitive lipase, which hydrolyzes triglycerides to free fatty acids and glycerol.
2.  Therapeutic uses
a.  Bronchospasm
Epinephrine is the primary drug used in the emergency treatment of respiratory conditions when
bronchoconstriction has resulted in diminished respiratory function. Thus, in treatment of anaphylactic shock,
epinephrine is the drug of choice and can be lifesaving in this setting. Within a few minutes after subcutaneous
administration, respiratory function greatly improves.
a.  Anaphylactic shock
Epinephrine is the drug of choice for the treatment of type I hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylaxis) in
response to allergens.
a.  Cardiac arrest
Epinephrine may be used to restore cardiac rhythm in patients with cardiac arrest.
d.  Local anesthesia
Local anesthetic solutions may contain low concentrations (for example, 1:100,000 parts) of epinephrine.
Epinephrine greatly increases the duration of local anesthesia by producing vasoconstriction at the site of injection.
Epinephrine also reduces systemic absorption of the local anesthetic and promotes local hemostasis.
e.  Intraocular surgery
Epinephrine is used in the induction and maintenance of mydriasis during intraocular surgery.
3.  Pharmacokinetics
Epinephrine has a rapid onset but a brief duration of action (due to rapid degradation). The preferred route for
anaphylaxis in the outpatient setting is intramuscular (anterior thigh) due to rapid absorption. In emergencies,
epinephrine is given intravenously (IV) for the most rapid onset of action. It may also be given subcutaneously, by
endotracheal tube, or by inhalation (Figure 6.10). It is rapidly metabolized by MAO and COMT, and the metabolites
metanephrine and vanillylmandelic acid are excreted in urine.
Figure 6.10 Pharmacokinetics of epinephrine. CNS = central nervous system.
232
www.webofpharma.com
4.  Adverse effects
Epinephrine can produce adverse CNS effects that include anxiety, fear, tension, headache, and tremor. It can trigger
cardiac arrhythmias, particularly if the patient is receiving digoxin. Epinephrine can also induce pulmonary edema
due to increased afterload caused by vasoconstrictive properties of the drug. Patients with hyperthyroidism may
have an increased production of adrenergic receptors in the vasculature, leading to an enhanced response to
epinephrine, and the dose must be reduced in these individuals. Inhalation anesthetics also sensitize the heart to the
effects of epinephrine, which may lead to tachycardia. Epinephrine increases the release of endogenous stores of
glucose. In diabetic patients, dosages of insulin may have to be increased. Nonselective β-blockers prevent
vasodilatory effects of epinephrine on β2 receptors, leaving α receptor stimulation unopposed. This may lead to
increased peripheral resistance and increased blood pressure.
233
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Norepinephrine
Because norepinephrine [nor-ep-ih-NEF-rin] is the neurotransmitter in the adrenergic neurons, it should,
theoretically, stimulate all types of adrenergic receptors. However, when administered in therapeutic doses, the α-
adrenergic receptor is most affected.
1.  Cardiovascular actions
a.  Vasoconstriction
Norepinephrine causes a rise in peripheral resistance due to intense vasoconstriction of most vascular beds,
including the kidney (α1 effect). Both systolic and diastolic blood pressures increase (Figure 6.11). [Note:
Norepinephrine causes greater vasoconstriction than epinephrine, because it does not induce compensatory
vasodilation via β2 receptors on blood vessels supplying skeletal muscles. The weak β2 activity of norepinephrine
also explains why it is not useful in the treatment of bronchospasm or anaphylaxis.]
234
www.webofpharma.com
235
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 6.11 Cardiovascular effects of intravenous infusion of norepinephrine.
b.  Baroreceptor reflex
Norepinephrine increases blood pressure, and this stimulates the baroreceptors, inducing a rise in vagal activity. The
increased vagal activity produces a reflex bradycardia, which is sufficient to counteract the local actions of
norepinephrine on the heart, although the reflex compensation does not affect the positive inotropic effects of the
drug (Figure 6.11). When atropine, which blocks the transmission of vagal effects, is given before norepinephrine,
stimulation of the heart by norepinephrine is evident as tachycardia.
2.  Therapeutic uses
Norepinephrine is used to treat shock (for example, septic shock), because it increases vascular resistance and,
therefore, increases blood pressure. It has no other clinically significant uses.
3.  Pharmacokinetics
Norepinephrine is given IV for rapid onset of action. The duration of action is 1 to 2 minutes, following the end of
the infusion. It is rapidly metabolized by MAO and COMT, and inactive metabolites are excreted in the urine.
4.  Adverse effects
These are similar to epinephrine. In addition, norepinephrine is a potent vasoconstrictor and may cause blanching
and sloughing of skin along an injected vein. If extravasation (leakage of drug from the vessel into tissues
surrounding the injection site) occurs, it can cause tissue necrosis. It should not be administered in peripheral veins,
if possible. Impaired circulation from norepinephrine may be treated with the α receptor antagonist phentolamine.
Alternatives to phentolamine include intradermal terbutaline and topical nitroglycerin.
236
www.webofpharma.com
C.  Isoproterenol
Isoproterenol [eye-soe-proe-TER-e-nole] is a direct-acting synthetic catecholamine that stimulates both β1- and β2-
adrenergic receptors. Its nonselectivity is a disadvantage and the reason why it is rarely used therapeutically. Its
action on α receptors is insignificant. Isoproterenol produces intense stimulation of the heart (β1 effect), increasing
heart rate, contractility, and cardiac output (Figure 6.12). It is as active as epinephrine in this action. Isoproterenol
also dilates the arterioles of skeletal muscle (β2 effect), resulting in decreased peripheral resistance. Because of its
cardiac stimulatory action, it may increase systolic blood pressure slightly, but it greatly reduces mean arterial and
diastolic blood pressures (Figure 6.12). Isoproterenol is also a potent bronchodilator (β2 effect). The adverse effects
of isoproterenol are similar to the β receptor–related side effects of epinephrine.
237
www.webofpharma.com
238
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 6.12 Cardiovascular effects of intravenous infusion of isoproterenol.
239
www.webofpharma.com
D.  Dopamine
Dopamine [DOE-pa-meen], the immediate metabolic precursor of norepinephrine, occurs naturally in the CNS in
the basal ganglia, where it functions as a neurotransmitter, as well as in the adrenal medulla. Dopamine can activate
α- and β-adrenergic receptors. For example, at higher doses, it causes vasoconstriction by activating α1 receptors,
whereas at lower doses, it stimulates β1 cardiac receptors. In addition, D1 and D2 dopaminergic receptors, distinct
from the α- and β-adrenergic receptors, occur in the peripheral mesenteric and renal vascular beds, where binding of
dopamine produces vasodilation. D2 receptors are also found on presynaptic adrenergic neurons, where their
activation interferes with norepinephrine release.
1.  Actions
a.  Cardiovascular
Dopamine exerts a stimulatory effect on the β1 receptors of the heart, having both positive inotropic and
chronotropic effects (Figure 6.13). At very high doses, dopamine activates α1 receptors on the vasculature, resulting
in vasoconstriction.
240
www.webofpharma.com
241
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 6.13 Clinically important actions of isoproterenol and dopamine.
b.  Renal and visceral
Dopamine dilates renal and splanchnic arterioles by activating dopaminergic receptors, thereby increasing blood
flow to the kidneys and other viscera (Figure 6.13). These receptors are not affected by α- or β-blocking drugs, and
in the past, low-dose (“renal-dose”) dopamine was often used in the prevention or treatment of acute renal failure.
However, more recent data suggest there is limited clinical utility in the renal protective effects of dopamine.
2.  Therapeutic uses
Dopamine can be used for cardiogenic and septic shock and is given by continuous infusion. It raises blood pressure
by stimulating the β1 receptors on the heart to increase cardiac output, and α1 receptors on blood vessels to increase
total peripheral resistance. It enhances perfusion to the kidney and splanchnic areas, as described above. Increased
blood flow to the kidney enhances the glomerular filtration rate and causes diuresis. By contrast, norepinephrine can
diminish blood supply to the kidney and may reduce renal function. Dopamine is also used to treat hypotension,
severe heart failure, and bradycardia unresponsive to other treatments.
3.  Adverse effects
An overdose of dopamine produces the same effects as sympathetic stimulation. Dopamine is rapidly metabolized
by MAO or COMT, and its adverse effects (nausea, hypertension, and arrhythmias) are, therefore, short lived.
242
www.webofpharma.com
E.  Fenoldopam
Fenoldopam [fen-OL-de-pam] is an agonist of peripheral dopamine D1 receptors. It is used as a rapid-acting
vasodilator to treat severe hypertension in hospitalized patients, acting on coronary arteries, kidney arterioles, and
mesenteric arteries. Fenoldopam is a racemic mixture, and the R-isomer is the active component. It undergoes
extensive first-pass metabolism and has a 10-minute elimination half-life after IV infusion. Headache, flushing,
dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and tachycardia (due to vasodilation) may occur with this agent.
243
www.webofpharma.com
F.  Dobutamine
Dobutamine [doe-BYOO-ta-meen] is a synthetic, direct-acting catecholamine that is primarily a β1 receptor agonist
with minor β2 and α1 effects. It increases heart rate and cardiac output with few vascular effects. Dobutamine is used
to increase cardiac output in acute heart failure (see Chapter 18), as well as for inotropic support after cardiac
surgery. The drug increases cardiac output and does not elevate oxygen demands of the myocardium as much as
other sympathomimetic drugs. Dobutamine should be used with caution in atrial fibrillation, because it increases
atrioventricular (AV) conduction. Other adverse effects are similar to epinephrine. Tolerance may develop with
prolonged use.
244
www.webofpharma.com
G.  Oxymetazoline
Oxymetazoline [OX-ee-mee-TAZ-ih-leen] is a direct-acting synthetic adrenergic agonist that stimulates both α1- and
α2-adrenergic receptors. Oxymetazoline is found in many over-the-counter nasal spray decongestants, as well as in
ophthalmic drops for the relief of redness of the eyes associated with swimming, colds, and contact lenses.
Oxymetazoline directly stimulates α receptors on blood vessels supplying the nasal mucosa and conjunctiva, thereby
producing vasoconstriction and decreasing congestion. It is absorbed in the systemic circulation regardless of the
route of administration and may produce nervousness, headaches, and trouble sleeping. Local irritation and sneezing
may occur with intranasal administration. Use for greater than 3 days is not recommended, as rebound congestion
and dependence may occur.
245
www.webofpharma.com
H.  Phenylephrine
Phenylephrine [fen-ill-EF-reen] is a direct-acting, synthetic adrenergic drug that binds primarily to α1 receptors.
Phenylephrine is a vasoconstrictor that raises both systolic and diastolic blood pressures. It has no effect on the heart
itself but, rather, induces reflex bradycardia when given parenterally, making it useful in the treatment of
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. The drug is used to treat hypotension in hospitalized or surgical patients
(especially those with a rapid heart rate). Large doses can cause hypertensive headache and cardiac irregularities.
Phenylephrine acts as a nasal decongestant when applied topically or taken orally. Although data suggest it may not
be as effective, phenylephrine has replaced pseudoephedrine in many oral decongestants, since pseudoephedrine has
been misused to make methamphetamine. Phenylephrine is also used in ophthalmic solutions for mydriasis.
246
www.webofpharma.com
I.  Midodrine
Midodrine, a prodrug, is metabolized to the pharmacologically active desglymidodrine. It is a selective α1 agonist,
which acts in the periphery to increase arterial and venous tone. Midodrine is indicated for the treatment of
orthostatic hypotension. The drug should be given three times daily, with doses at 3- or 4-hour intervals. To avoid
supine hypertension, doses within 4 hours of bedtime are not recommended.
247
www.webofpharma.com
J.  Clonidine
Clonidine [KLOE-ni-deen] is an α2 agonist used for the treatment of hypertension. It can also be used to minimize
symptoms of withdrawal from opiates, tobacco smoking, and benzodiazepines. Both clonidine and the α2 agonist
guanfacine [GWAHN-fa-seen] may be used in the management of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Clonidine
acts centrally on presynaptic α2 receptors to produce inhibition of sympathetic vasomotor centers, decreasing
sympathetic outflow to the periphery. The most common side effects of clonidine are lethargy, sedation,
constipation, and xerostomia. Abrupt discontinuation must be avoided to prevent rebound hypertension. Clonidine
and another α2 agonist methyldopa are discussed with antihypertensives in Chapter 16.
248
www.webofpharma.com
K.  Albuterol, metaproterenol, and terbutaline
Albuterol [al-BYOO-ter-ole], metaproterenol [MET-a-proe-TER-e-nol], and terbutaline [ter-BYOO-te-leen] are
short-acting β2 agonists (SABAs) used primarily as bronchodilators and administered by a metered-dose inhaler
(Figure 6.14). Albuterol is the SABA of choice for the management of acute asthma symptoms, because it is more
selective for β2 receptors than metaproterenol. Inhaled terbutaline is no longer available in the United States, but is
still used in other countries. Injectable terbutaline is used off-label as a uterine relaxant to suppress premature labor,
and use for this indication should not exceed 72 hours. One of the most common side effects of these agents is
tremor, but patients tend to develop tolerance to this effect. Other side effects include restlessness, apprehension,
and anxiety. When these drugs are administered orally, they may cause tachycardia or arrhythmia (due to β1 receptor
activation), especially in patients with underlying cardiac disease. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) also
increase the risk of adverse cardiovascular effects, and concomitant use should be avoided.
249
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 6.14 Onset and duration of bronchodilation effects of inhaled adrenergic agonists.
250
www.webofpharma.com
251
www.webofpharma.com
L.  Salmeterol, formoterol, and indacaterol
Salmeterol [sal-ME-ter-ole], formoterol [for-MOH-ter-ole], arformoterol (the [R,R]-enantiomer of formoterol), and
indacaterol [IN-da-KA-ter-ol] are long-acting β2 selective agonists (LABAs) used for the management of
respiratory disorders such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (see Chapter 39). A single dose by a
metered-dose inhalation device, such as a dry powder inhaler, provides sustained bronchodilation over 12 hours,
compared with less than 3 hours for albuterol. Unlike formoterol, however, salmeterol has a somewhat delayed
onset of action (Figure 6.14). LABAs are not recommended as monotherapy for the treatment of asthma, because
they have been shown to increase the risk of asthma-related deaths; however, these agents are highly efficacious
when combined with an asthma controller medication such as an inhaled corticosteroid.
252
www.webofpharma.com
M.  Mirabegron
Mirabegron [mir-a-BEG-ron] is a β3 agonist that relaxes the detrusor smooth muscle and increases bladder capacity.
It is used for patients with overactive bladder. Mirabegron may increase blood pressure and should not be used in
patients with uncontrolled hypertension. It increases levels of digoxin and inhibits the CYP2D6 isozyme, which may
enhance the effects of other medications metabolized by this pathway (for example, metoprolol).
253
www.webofpharma.com
V.  Indirect-Acting Adrenergic Agonists
Indirect-acting adrenergic agonists cause the release, inhibit the reuptake, or inhibit the degradation of epinephrine
or norepinephrine (Figure 6.8). They potentiate the effects of epinephrine or norepinephrine produced endogenously,
but do not directly affect postsynaptic receptors.
254
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Amphetamine
The marked central stimulatory action of amphetamine [am-FET-a-meen] is often mistaken by drug abusers as its
only action. However, the drug can also increase blood pressure significantly by α1 agonist action on the
vasculature, as well as β1 stimulatory effects on the heart. Its actions are mediated primarily through an increase in
nonvesicular release of catecholamines such as dopamine and norepinephrine from nerve terminals. Thus,
amphetamine is an indirect-acting adrenergic drug. The actions and therapeutic uses of amphetamine and its
derivatives are discussed with CNS stimulants (see Chapter 15).
255
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Tyramine
Tyramine [TIE-ra-meen] is not a clinically useful drug, but it is important because it is found in fermented foods,
such as aged cheese and Chianti wine. It is a normal by-product of tyrosine metabolism. Normally, it is oxidized by
MAO in the gastrointestinal tract, but if the patient is taking MAOIs, it can precipitate serious vasopressor episodes.
Like amphetamines, tyramine can enter the nerve terminal and displace stored norepinephrine. The released
catecholamine then acts on adrenoceptors.
256
www.webofpharma.com
C.  Cocaine
Cocaine [koe-KANE] is unique among local anesthetics in having the ability to block the sodium–chloride (Na+/Cl
−)–dependent norepinephrine transporter required for cellular uptake of norepinephrine into the adrenergic neuron.
Consequently, norepinephrine accumulates in the synaptic space, resulting in enhanced sympathetic activity and
potentiation of the actions of epinephrine and norepinephrine. Therefore, small doses of the catecholamines produce
greatly magnified effects in an individual taking cocaine. In addition, the duration of action of epinephrine and
norepinephrine is increased. Like amphetamines, it can increase blood pressure by α1 agonist actions and β
stimulatory effects. Cocaine as a drug of abuse is discussed in Chapter 45.
257
www.webofpharma.com
VI.  Mixed-Action Adrenergic Agonists
Ephedrine [eh-FED-rin] and pseudoephedrine [soo-doe-eh-FED-rin] are mixed-action adrenergic agents. They not
only enhance release of stored norepinephrine from nerve endings (Figure 6.8) but also directly stimulate both α and
β receptors. Thus, a wide variety of adrenergic actions ensue that are similar to those of epinephrine, although less
potent. Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are not catecholamines and are poor substrates for COMT and MAO.
Therefore, these drugs have a long duration of action. Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine have excellent absorption
after oral administration and penetrate the CNS, but pseudoephedrine has fewer CNS effects. Ephedrine is
eliminated largely unchanged in urine, and pseudoephedrine undergoes incomplete hepatic metabolism before
elimination in urine. Ephedrine raises systolic and diastolic blood pressures by vasoconstriction and cardiac
stimulation and it is indicated in anesthesia-induced hypotension. Ephedrine produces bronchodilation, but it is less
potent and slower acting than epinephrine or isoproterenol. It was previously used to prevent asthma attacks but has
been replaced by more effective medications. Ephedrine produces a mild stimulation of the CNS. This increases
alertness, decreases fatigue, and prevents sleep. It also improves athletic performance. [Note: The clinical use of
ephedrine is declining because of the availability of better, more potent agents that cause fewer adverse effects.
Ephedrine-containing herbal supplements (mainly ephedra-containing products) have been banned by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration because of life-threatening cardiovascular reactions.] Oral pseudoephedrine is primarily
used to treat nasal and sinus congestion. Pseudoephedrine has been illegally used to produce methamphetamine.
Therefore, products containing pseudoephedrine have certain restrictions and must be kept behind the sales counter
in the United States. Important characteristics of the adrenergic agonists are summarized in Figures 6.15 to 6.17.
258
www.webofpharma.com
259
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 6.15 Some adverse effects observed with adrenergic agonists.
Figure 6.16 Summary of β-adrenergic receptors. AV = atrioventricular; GI =
gastrointestinal.
260
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 6.17 Summary of the therapeutic uses of adrenergic agonists. ADHD = attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder; CNS = central nervous system.
261
www.webofpharma.com
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
Which of the following is correct regarding adrenergic neurotransmission?
A.  Norepinephrine is the major neurotransmitter released from sympathetic nerve terminals.
B.  Norepinephrine is mainly released from the adrenal glands.
C.  Tricyclic antidepressants and cocaine prevent the release of norepinephrine from the nerve terminals.
D.  Monoamine oxidase (MAO) converts dopamine to norepinephrine in the nerve terminal.
Correct answer = A. Norepinephrine (NE) is the major neurotransmitter released from sympathetic nerve
terminals. Epinephrine, not norepinephrine, is mainly released from the adrenal glands. Tricyclic antidepressants
(TCAs) and cocaine inhibit the reuptake of norepinephrine into the sympathetic nerve terminals, but they do not
prevent the release of NE. Dopamine is converted to norepinephrine by dopamine β-hydroxylase, not by MAO.
Which of the following adrenergic drugs is used in the treatment of overactive bladder?
A.  Epinephrine
B.  Dobutamine
C.  Phenylephrine
D.  Mirabegron
Correct answer = D. Detrusor muscles in the urinary bladder wall have β3 receptors. Stimulation of these
receptors relaxes the urinary bladder wall and relieves overactive bladder. Mirabegron is a β3 agonist and
therefore used in treating overactive bladder. None of the other drugs listed have β3 agonist activity.
Which of the following classes of adrenergic agents has utility in the management of hypertension?
A.  α1 Agonist
B.  α2 Agonist
C.  β1 Agonist
D.  β3 Agonist
Correct answer = B. α2 Agonists activate α2 receptors located in the presynaptic terminal of sympathetic neurons
and cause a reduction in the release of norepinephrine from sympathetic nerve terminals. This leads to a reduction
in blood pressure. α2 Agonists such as clonidine and methyldopa are therefore used as antihypertensive agents. α1
Agonists cause vasoconstriction, and β1 agonists cause increased cardiac output and renin release, so these agents
may increase blood pressure. β3 Agonists are not used in the management of hypertension.
Which of the following is correct regarding responses mediated by adrenergic receptors?
A.  Stimulation of α1 receptors increases blood pressure.
B.  Stimulation of sympathetic presynaptic α2 receptors increases norepinephrine release.
C.  Stimulation of β2 receptors increases heart rate (tachycardia).
D.  Stimulation of β2 receptors causes bronchoconstriction.
Correct answer = A. Stimulation of α1 receptors, mostly found in the blood vessels, causes vasoconstriction and
an increase in blood pressure. Stimulation of α2 receptors on the sympathetic presynaptic terminal reduces the
release of norepinephrine. β2 receptors are not found in the heart, so activation of β2 receptors does not affect
heart rate. Stimulation of β2 receptors found in the bronchial tissues causes bronchodilation, not
bronchoconstriction.
An asthma patient was given a nonselective β agonist to relieve bronchoconstriction. Which adverse effect
would you expect in this patient?
A.  Bradycardia
B.  Tachycardia
C.  Hypotension (reduction in blood pressure)
D.  Worsening bronchoconstriction
Correct answer = B. A nonselective β agonist activates both β1 and β2 receptors. β1 Activation causes an increase
in heart rate (tachycardia), contractility, and subsequent increase in blood pressure. It relieves bronchoconstriction
because of the β2 receptor activation.
A 22-year-old male is brought to the emergency room with suspected cocaine overdose. Which of the
following symptoms is most likely in this patient?
A.  Hypertension
B.  Bronchoconstriction
262
www.webofpharma.com
6.7
6.8
6.9
6.10
C.  Bradycardia
D.  Miosis (constriction of pupil)
Correct answer = A. Cocaine is an indirect adrenergic agonist that prevents the reuptake of norepinephrine into
the nerve terminals, thus increasing the levels of NE in the synaptic cleft. The increase in NE leads to an increase
in blood pressure (hypertension), tachycardia (not bradycardia), mydriasis (not miosis), and other symptoms of
sympathetic overactivity.
A 12-year-old boy with a peanut allergy is brought to the emergency room after accidental consumption of
peanuts. He is in anaphylactic shock. Which of the following drugs is most appropriate to treat this patient?
A.  Norepinephrine
B.  Phenylephrine
C.  Dobutamine
D.  Epinephrine
Correct answer = D. Norepinephrine has more α agonistic effects and activates mainly α1, α2, and β1 receptors.
Epinephrine has more β agonistic effects and activates mainly α1, α2, β1, and β2 receptors. Phenylephrine has
predominantly α effects and activates mainly α1 receptors. Dobutamine mainly activates β1 receptors and has no
significant effects on β2 receptors. Thus, epinephrine is the drug of choice in anaphylactic shock that can both
stimulate the heart (β1 activation) and dilate bronchioles (β2 activation).
An elderly patient is brought to the emergency room with a blood pressure of 76/60 mm Hg, tachycardia, and
low cardiac output. He is diagnosed with acute heart failure. Which of the following drugs is most
appropriate to improve his cardiac function?
A.  Epinephrine
B.  Fenoldopam
C.  Dobutamine
D.  Isoproterenol
Correct answer = C. Among the choices, the ideal drug to increase contractility in acute heart failure is
dobutamine, since it is a selective β1-adrenergic agonist. Fenoldopam is a dopamine agonist used to treat severe
hypertension. The other drugs are nonselective adrenergic agonists that could cause unwanted side effects.
Which of the following adrenergic agonists is commonly present in nasal sprays available over-the-counter
(OTC) to treat nasal congestion?
A.  Clonidine
B.  Albuterol
C.  Oxymetazoline
D.  Formoterol
Correct answer = C. Drugs with selective α1 agonistic activity are commonly used as nasal decongestants because
of their ability to cause vasoconstriction in the nasal vessels. Oxymetazoline is an α1 agonist and therefore the
preferred drug among the choices as a nasal decongestant. Clonidine is an α2 agonist, albuterol is a β2 agonist, and
formoterol is a long-acting β2 agonist.
A patient who has hypertension and mild asthma attacks bought a herbal remedy for asthma online. He does
not take any prescription medications for asthma, but takes a β1-selective blocker for hypertension. The
herbal remedy relieves the asthma attacks, but his blood pressure seems to increase despite the β-blocker
therapy. Which of the following drugs is most likely present in the herbal remedy?
A.  Phenylephrine
B.  Norepinephrine
C.  Ephedrine
D.  Salmeterol
Correct answer = C. Both ephedrine and salmeterol can relieve asthma symptoms, as they activate β2 receptors in
the bronchioles and cause bronchodilation. However, salmeterol is a selective β2 agonist and should not increase
blood pressure. By contrast, ephedrine stimulates the release of norepinephrine and acts as a direct agonist at α-
and β-adrenergic receptors, thus causing an increase in blood pressure. Phenylephrine (a nonselective α agonist)
does not cause bronchodilation, so it would not relieve asthma symptoms. Norepinephrine is a nonselective
adrenergic agonist that does not have any stimulatory effects on β2 receptors. In addition, norepinephrine is not
active when given orally.
263
www.webofpharma.com
264
www.webofpharma.com
7
Adrenergic Antagonists
Rajan Radhakrishnan and Sandhya Jinesh
265
www.webofpharma.com
I.  Overview
The adrenergic antagonists (also called adrenergic blockers or sympatholytics) bind to adrenoceptors but do not
trigger the usual receptor-mediated intracellular effects. These drugs act by either reversibly or irreversibly attaching
to the adrenoceptors, thus preventing activation by endogenous or exogenous agonists. Like the agonists, the
adrenergic antagonists are classified according to their relative affinities for α or β receptors in the sympathetic
nervous system. Numerous adrenergic antagonists have important roles in clinical medicine, primarily to treat
diseases associated with the cardiovascular system. [Note: Antagonists that block dopamine receptors are most
important in the central nervous system (CNS) and are, therefore, considered in that section.] The adrenergic
antagonists discussed in this chapter are summarized in Figure 7.1.
266
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 7.1 Summary of blocking agents and drugs affecting neurotransmitter uptake or
release.
267
www.webofpharma.com
268
www.webofpharma.com
II.  α-Adrenergic Blocking Agents
α-Adrenergic blocking agents antagonize the subtype(s) of α-adrenergic receptors (α1 or α2), depending on the
specificity of the agent for the receptor subtype(s). Drugs that block α1-adrenoceptors profoundly affect blood
pressure. Because normal sympathetic control of the vasculature occurs in large part through agonist actions on α1-
adrenergic receptors, blockade of these receptors reduces the sympathetic tone of the blood vessels, resulting in
decreased peripheral vascular resistance. This lowered blood pressure induces reflex tachycardia. The magnitude of
the response depends on the sympathetic tone of the individual when the agent is given. Selective α2-adrenergic
blockers have limited clinical utility.
269
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Phenoxybenzamine
Phenoxybenzamine [fen-ox-ee-BEN-za-meen] is a nonselective, noncompetitive blocker of α1- and α2-adrenergic
receptors.
1.  Actions
a.  Cardiovascular effects
The drug prevents α1 receptor vasoconstriction of peripheral blood vessels caused by endogenous catecholamines,
which leads to decreased peripheral resistance and resultant reflex tachycardia. However, by blocking presynaptic α2
receptors on the sympathetic nerve terminals in the heart, phenoxybenzamine causes an increase in the release of
norepinephrine, which in turn increases heart rate and cardiac output (mediated by β1 receptors). This may also lead
to cardiac arrhythmias and anginal pain. Thus, the drug has been unsuccessful in maintaining lowered blood
pressure in hypertension, and it is no longer used for this purpose.
b.  Epinephrine reversal
All α-adrenergic blockers reverse the α agonist actions of epinephrine. For example, the vasoconstrictive action of
epinephrine is interrupted, but vasodilation of other vascular beds caused by stimulation of β2 receptors is not
blocked. Therefore, in the presence of phenoxybenzamine, the systemic blood pressure decreases in response to
epinephrine (Figure 7.2). [Note: The actions of norepinephrine are not reversed but are diminished because
norepinephrine lacks significant β agonist action on the vasculature.] Phenoxybenzamine has no effect on the actions
of isoproterenol, which is a pure β agonist (Figure 7.2).
Figure 7.2 Summary of effects of adrenergic blockers on the changes in blood pressure
induced by isoproterenol, epinephrine, and norepinephrine.
270
www.webofpharma.com
2.  Therapeutic uses
Phenoxybenzamine is used in the treatment of sweating and hypertension associated with pheochromocytoma, a
catecholamine-secreting tumor of cells derived from the adrenal medulla. Phenoxybenzamine is sometimes effective
in treating Raynaud disease and frostbite.
3.  Adverse effects
Phenoxybenzamine can cause postural hypotension, nasal stuffiness, nausea, and vomiting. It may inhibit
ejaculation. It may also induce reflex tachycardia, which is mediated by the baroreceptor reflex. Phenoxybenzamine
should be used with caution in patients with cerebrovascular or cardiovascular disease.
271
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Phentolamine
In contrast to phenoxybenzamine, phentolamine [fen-TOLE-a-meen] produces a competitive block of α1 and α2
receptors. Effects last for approximately 4 hours after a single injection. Pharmacological effects of phentolamine
are very similar to those of phenoxybenzamine. It is used for the diagnosis and short-term management of
pheochromocytoma. It is also used locally to prevent dermal necrosis following extravasation of norepinephrine.
Phentolamine is useful to treat hypertensive crisis due to abrupt withdrawal of clonidine or ingestion of tyramine-
containing foods in patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
272
www.webofpharma.com
C.  Prazosin, terazosin, and doxazosin
Prazosin [PRAY-zoe-sin], terazosin [ter-AY-zoe-sin], and doxazosin [dox-AY-zoe-sin] are selective competitive
blockers of the α1 receptor. In contrast to phenoxybenzamine and phentolamine, they are useful in the treatment of
hypertension. [Note: Tamsulosin [tam-SUE-loh-sin], alfuzosin [al-FYOO-zoe-sin], and silodosin [sye-LOE-doe-sin]
are examples of other selective α1 antagonists indicated for the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia (see
Chapter 41).] Metabolism leads to inactive products that are excreted in urine except for those of doxazosin, which
appear in feces. Doxazosin is the longest acting of these drugs.
1.  Mechanism of action
These agents decrease peripheral vascular resistance and lower blood pressure by causing relaxation of both arterial
and venous smooth muscle. Unlike phenoxybenzamine and phentolamine, these drugs cause minimal changes in
cardiac output, renal blood flow, and glomerular filtration rate. Tamsulosin, alfuzosin, and silodosin have less
pronounced effects on blood pressure because they are less selective for α1B receptors found in the blood vessels and
more selective for α1A receptors in the prostate and bladder. Blockade of the α1A receptors decreases tone in the
smooth muscle of the bladder neck and prostate and improves urine flow.
2.  Therapeutic uses
Individuals with elevated blood pressure treated with one of these drugs do not become tolerant to its action.
However, the first dose of these drugs may produce an exaggerated orthostatic hypotensive response (Figure 7.3)
that can result in syncope (fainting). This action, termed a “first-dose” effect, may be minimized by adjusting the
first dose to one-third or one-fourth of the normal dose and by giving the drug at bedtime. These drugs may cause
modest improvement in lipid profiles and glucose metabolism in hypertensive patients. Because of inferior
cardiovascular outcomes as compared to other antihypertensives, α1 antagonists are not used as monotherapy for the
treatment of hypertension (see Chapter 16).
Figure 7.3 First dose of α1 receptor blocker may produce an orthostatic hypotensive
response that can result in syncope (fainting).
3.  Adverse effects
α1-Blockers such as prazosin and doxazosin may cause dizziness, a lack of energy, nasal congestion, headache,
drowsiness, and orthostatic hypotension (although to a lesser degree than that observed with phenoxybenzamine and
phentolamine). An additive antihypertensive effect occurs when α1 antagonists are given with vasodilators such as
nitrates or PDE-5 inhibitors (for example, sildenafil), thereby necessitating cautious dose titration and use at the
lowest possible doses. These agents may cause “floppy iris syndrome,” a condition in which the iris billows in
response to intraoperative eye surgery. Figure 7.4 summarizes some adverse effects observed with α-blockers.
273
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 7.4 Some adverse effects commonly observed with α-adrenergic blocking agents.
274
www.webofpharma.com
D.  Yohimbine
Yohimbine [yo-HIM-bean] is a selective competitive α2-blocker that works at the level of the CNS to increase
sympathetic outflow to the periphery. It is found as a component of the bark of the yohimbe tree (Pausinystalia
yohimbe) and has been used as a sexual stimulant and in the treatment of erectile dysfunction. Its use in the
treatment of these disorders is not recommended due to lack of demonstrated efficacy.
275
www.webofpharma.com
III.  β-Adrenergic Blocking Agents
All of the clinically available β-blockers are competitive antagonists. Nonselective β-blockers act at both β1 and β2
receptors, whereas cardioselective β antagonists primarily block β1 receptors. [Note: There are no clinically useful
β2 selective antagonists.] These drugs also differ in intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA), CNS effects, blockade
of sympathetic receptors, vasodilation, and pharmacokinetics (Figure 7.5). Although all β-blockers lower blood
pressure, they do not induce postural hypotension, because the α-adrenoceptors remain functional. Therefore, normal
sympathetic control of the vasculature is maintained. β-Blockers are effective in treating systemic as well as portal
hypertension, angina, cardiac arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, heart failure, hyperthyroidism, and glaucoma.
They are also used for the prophylaxis of migraine headaches. [Note: The names of all β-blockers end in “-olol”
except for labetalol and carvedilol.]
Figure 7.5 Elimination half-lives for some β-blockers.
276
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Propranolol: a nonselective β antagonist
Propranolol [proe-PRAN-oh-lole] is the prototype β-adrenergic antagonist and blocks both β1 and β2 receptors with
equal affinity. Sustained-release preparations for once-a-day dosing are available. Nonselective β-blockers,
including propranolol, have the ability to block the actions of isoproterenol (β1, β2 agonist) on the cardiovascular
system. Thus, in the presence of a β-blocker, isoproterenol does not produce cardiac stimulation (β1 mediated) or
reductions in mean arterial pressure and diastolic pressure (β2 mediated; Figure 7.2). [Note: In the presence of a
nonselective β-blocker, epinephrine no longer lowers diastolic blood pressure or stimulates the heart, but its
vasoconstrictive action (mediated by α receptors) remains unimpaired. The actions of norepinephrine on the
cardiovascular system are mediated primarily by α receptors and are, therefore, mostly unaffected.]
1.  Actions
a.  Cardiovascular
Propranolol diminishes cardiac output, having both negative inotropic and chronotropic effects (Figure 7.6). It
directly depresses sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodal activity. The resulting bradycardia usually limits the dose of
the drug. During exercise or stress, when the sympathetic nervous system is activated, β-blockers attenuate the
expected increase in heart rate. Cardiac output, workload, and oxygen consumption are decreased by blockade of β1
receptors, and these effects are useful in the treatment of angina (see Chapter 20). The β-blockers are effective in
attenuating supraventricular cardiac arrhythmias, but generally are not effective against ventricular arrhythmias
(except those induced by exercise).
277
www.webofpharma.com
278
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 7.6 Actions of propranolol and other β-blockers.
b.  Peripheral vasoconstriction
Nonselective blockade of β receptors prevents β2-mediated vasodilation in skeletal muscles, increasing peripheral
vascular resistance (Figure 7.6). The reduction in cardiac output produced by all β-blockers leads to decreased blood
pressure, which triggers a reflex peripheral vasoconstriction that is reflected in reduced blood flow to the periphery.
In patients with hypertension, total peripheral resistance returns to normal or decreases with long-term use of
propranolol as a result of down regulation of the β receptors. There is a gradual reduction of both systolic and
diastolic blood pressures in hypertensive patients.
c.  Bronchoconstriction
Blocking β2 receptors in the lungs of susceptible patients causes contraction of the bronchiolar smooth muscle
(Figure 7.6). This can precipitate an exacerbation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or
asthma. Therefore, β-blockers, particularly nonselective ones, are contraindicated in patients with asthma and should
be avoided in COPD.
d.  Disturbances in glucose metabolism
β-Blockade leads to decreased glycogenolysis and decreased glucagon secretion. Therefore, if propranolol is given
to a diabetic patient receiving insulin, careful monitoring of blood glucose is essential, because pronounced
hypoglycemia may occur after insulin injection. β-Blockers also attenuate the normal physiologic response to
hypoglycemia. [Note: Diaphoresis with hypoglycemia still occurs, as this is mediated through the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine.]
2.  Therapeutic uses
a.  Hypertension
Propranolol does not reduce blood pressure in people with normal blood pressure. Propranolol lowers blood
pressure in hypertension by several different mechanisms of action. Decreased cardiac output is the primary
mechanism, but inhibition of renin release from the kidney, decrease in total peripheral resistance with long-term
use, and decreased sympathetic outflow from the CNS also contribute to the antihypertensive effects (see Chapter
16).
b.  Angina pectoris
Propranolol decreases the oxygen requirement of heart muscle and, therefore, is effective in reducing chest pain on
exertion that is common in angina. Propranolol is therefore useful in the management of chronic stable angina.
c.  Myocardial infarction
Propranolol and other β-blockers have a protective effect on the myocardium. Thus, patients who have had one
myocardial infarction seem to be protected against a second heart attack by prophylactic use of β-blockers. In
addition, administration of a β-blocker immediately following a myocardial infarction reduces infarct size and early
mortality. The mechanism for these effects may be a reduction in the actions of circulating catecholamines that
increase the oxygen demand in an already ischemic heart muscle. Propranolol also reduces the incidence of sudden
arrhythmic death after myocardial infarction.
d.  Migraine
Propranolol is effective in reducing migraine episodes when used prophylactically (see Chapter 37). It is one of the
more useful β-blockers for this indication, due to its lipophilic nature that allows it to penetrate the CNS. [Note: For
the acute management of migraine, serotonin agonists such as sumatriptan are used, as well as other drugs.]
e.  Hyperthyroidism
Propranolol and other β-blockers are effective in blunting the widespread sympathetic stimulation that occurs in
hyperthyroidism. In acute hyperthyroidism (thyroid storm), β-blockers may be lifesaving in protecting against
serious cardiac arrhythmias.
3.  Pharmacokinetics
After oral administration, propranolol is almost completely absorbed. It is subject to first-pass effect, and only about
25% of an administered dose reaches the circulation. The volume of distribution of propranolol is quite large (4
L/kg), and the drug readily crosses the blood–brain barrier due to its high lipophilicity. Propranolol is extensively
metabolized, and most metabolites are excreted in the urine.
4.  Adverse effects
a.  Bronchoconstriction
Propranolol has the potential to cause significant bronchoconstriction due to blockade of β2 receptors (Figure 7.7).
Death by asphyxiation has been reported for patients with asthma who inadvertently received the drug. Therefore,
propranolol is contraindicated in patients with COPD or asthma.
279
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 7.7 Adverse effects commonly observed in individuals treated with propranolol.
b.  Arrhythmias
Treatment with β-blockers must never be stopped abruptly because of the risk of precipitating cardiac arrhythmias,
which may be severe. The β-blockers must be tapered off gradually over a period of at least a few weeks. Long-term
treatment with a β antagonist leads to up-regulation of the β receptor. On suspension of therapy, the increased
receptors can precipitate worsened angina or hypertension through action of endogenous catecholamines on the up-
regulated β receptors.
c.  Sexual impairment
Impaired sexual activity has been reported in male patients taking propranolol. The reasons for this are not clear and
may be independent of β receptor blockade. However, β-blockers do not affect ejaculation (mediated by α
receptors).
d.  Metabolic disturbances
280
www.webofpharma.com
β-Blockade leads to decreased glycogenolysis and decreased glucagon secretion. Fasting hypoglycemia may occur.
In addition, β-blockers can prevent the counterregulatory effects of catecholamines during hypoglycemia. Thus, the
perception of symptoms of hypoglycemia such as tremor, tachycardia, and nervousness are blunted by β-blockers. A
major role of β receptors is to mobilize energy molecules such as free fatty acids. [Note: Lipases in fat cells are
activated mainly by β receptor stimulation, leading to the metabolism of triglycerides into free fatty acids.] Patients
administered nonselective β-blockers may have increased triglycerides and reduced high-density lipoprotein (“good”
cholesterol) through β-blockade. These effects on the serum lipid profile may be less pronounced with the use of β1-
selective antagonists such as metoprolol.
e.  CNS effects
Propranolol has numerous CNS-mediated effects, including depression, dizziness, lethargy, fatigue, weakness,
visual disturbances, hallucinations, short-term memory loss, emotional lability, vivid dreams (including nightmares),
and depression. Fewer CNS effects may be seen with more hydrophilic β-blockers (for example, atenolol) because
they do not cross the blood–brain barrier as readily.
f.  Drug interactions
Drugs that interfere with, or inhibit, the metabolism of propranolol, such as cimetidine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and
ritonavir, may potentiate its antihypertensive effects. Conversely, those that stimulate or induce its metabolism, such
as barbiturates, phenytoin, and rifampin, can decrease its effects. Nonselective β-blockers such as propranolol may
prevent the rescue effects of epinephrine in anaphylaxis.
281
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Nadolol and timolol: nonselective β antagonists
Nadolol [NAH-doh-lole] and timolol [TIM-o-lole] also block β1- and β2-adrenoceptors and are more potent than
propranolol. Nadolol has a very long duration of action (Figure 7.5). Timolol reduces the production of aqueous
humor in the eye. It is used topically in the treatment of chronic open-angle glaucoma.
1.  Treatment of glaucoma
β-Blockers, such as topically applied timolol, are effective in diminishing intraocular pressure in glaucoma (Figure
7.8). This occurs by decreasing the secretion of aqueous humor by the ciliary body. Carteolol [kar-TEE-oh-lol],
levobunolol [lee-voe-BYOO-noe-lole], and metipranolol [met-i-PRAN-oh-lol] are nonselective β antagonists,
whereas betaxolol [be-TAKS-oh-lol] is a β1-selective agent. Unlike the cholinergic drugs, these agents neither affect
the ability of the eye to focus for near vision nor change pupil size. When administered intraocularly, the onset is
about 30 minutes, and the effects last for 12 to 24 hours. The β-blockers are only used for chronic management of
glaucoma. In an acute attack of glaucoma, pilocarpine is still the drug of choice for emergency lowering of
intraocular pressure. Other agents used in the treatment of glaucoma are summarized in Figure 7.8.
Figure 7.8 Classes of drugs used to treat glaucoma.
282
www.webofpharma.com
C.  Acebutolol, atenolol, betaxolol, bisoprolol, esmolol, metoprolol,
and nebivolol: selective β1 antagonists
Drugs that preferentially block the β1 receptors minimize the unwanted bronchoconstriction (β2 effect) seen with use
of nonselective agents in asthma patients. Cardioselective β-blockers, such as acebutolol [a-se-BYOO-toe-lole],
atenolol [a-TEN-oh-lole], and metoprolol [me-TOE-proe-lole], antagonize β1 receptors at doses 50- to 100-fold less
than those required to block β2 receptors. This cardioselectivity is most pronounced at low doses and is lost at high
doses. [Note: Because β1 selectivity of these agents is lost at high doses, they may antagonize β2 receptors.]
1.  Actions
These drugs lower blood pressure in hypertension and increase exercise tolerance in angina (Figure 7.6). Esmolol
[EZ-moe-lole] has a very short half-life (Figure 7.5) due to metabolism of an ester linkage. It is only available
intravenously and is used to control blood pressure or heart rhythm in critically ill patients and those undergoing
surgery or diagnostic procedures. In addition to its cardioselective β-blockade, nebivolol [ne-BIV-oh-lole] releases
nitric oxide from endothelial cells and causes vasodilation. In contrast to propranolol, the cardioselective β-blockers
have fewer effects on pulmonary function, peripheral resistance, and carbohydrate metabolism. Nevertheless, asthma
patients treated with these agents must be carefully monitored to make certain that respiratory activity is not
compromised. Because these drugs have less effect on peripheral vascular β2 receptors, coldness of extremities
(Raynaud phenomenon), a common side effect of β-blockers, is less frequent.
2.  Therapeutic uses
The cardioselective β-blockers are useful in hypertensive patients with impaired pulmonary function. These agents
are also first-line therapy for chronic stable angina. Bisoprolol and the extended-release formulation of metoprolol
are indicated for the management of chronic heart failure.
283
www.webofpharma.com
D.  Acebutolol and pindolol: antagonists with partial agonist
activity
1.  Actions
a.  Cardiovascular
Acebutolol (β1-selective antagonist) and pindolol (nonselective β-blocker) [PIN-doe-lole] are not pure antagonists.
These drugs can also weakly stimulate both β1 and β2 receptors (Figure 7.9) and are said to have ISA. These partial
agonists stimulate the β receptor to which they are bound, yet they inhibit stimulation by the more potent
endogenous catecholamines, epinephrine and norepinephrine. The result of these opposing actions is a diminished
effect on reduction of cardiac rate and cardiac output compared to that of β-blockers without ISA.
284
www.webofpharma.com
285
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 7.9 Comparison of agonists, antagonists, and partial agonists of β-adrenoceptors.
b.  Decreased metabolic effects
β-Blockers with ISA minimize the disturbances of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism that are seen with other β-
blockers. For example, these agents do not decrease plasma HDL levels.
2.  Therapeutic use
β-Blockers with ISA are effective in hypertensive patients with moderate bradycardia, because a further decrease in
heart rate is less pronounced with these drugs. [Note: β-blockers with ISA are not used for stable angina or
arrhythmias due to their partial agonist effect.] Overall, β-blockers with ISA are infrequently used in clinical
practice. Figure 7.10 summarizes some of the indications for β-blockers.
286
www.webofpharma.com
287
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 7.10 Some clinical applications of β-blockers. AV = atrioventricular.
288
www.webofpharma.com
E.  Labetalol and carvedilol: antagonists of both α- and β-
adrenoceptors
1.  Actions
Labetalol [lah-BET-a-lole] and carvedilol [CAR-ve-dil-ol] are nonselective β-blockers with concurrent α1-blocking
actions that produce peripheral vasodilation, thereby reducing blood pressure. They contrast with the other β-
blockers that produce initial peripheral vasoconstriction, and these agents are, therefore, useful in treating
hypertensive patients for whom increased peripheral vascular resistance is undesirable. Carvedilol also decreases
lipid peroxidation and vascular wall thickening, effects that have benefit in heart failure.
2.  Therapeutic use in hypertension and heart failure
Labetalol is used as an alternative to methyldopa in the treatment of pregnancy-induced hypertension. Intravenous
labetalol is also used to treat hypertensive emergencies, because it can rapidly lower blood pressure (see Chapter
16). β-Blockers should not be given to patients with an acute exacerbation of heart failure, as they can worsen the
condition. However, carvedilol as well as metoprolol and bisoprolol are beneficial in patients with stable chronic
heart failure. These agents work by blocking the effects of sympathetic stimulation on the heart, which causes
worsening heart failure over time (see Chapter 18).
3.  Adverse effects
Orthostatic hypotension and dizziness are associated with α1-blockade. Figure 7.11 summarizes the receptor
specificities and uses of the β-adrenergic antagonists.
Figure 7.11 Summary of β-adrenergic antagonists. NO = nitric oxide. 1Acebutolol and
pindolol are partial agonists, as well. 2Bisoprolol, metoprolol, and carvedilol are also
used for the treatment of heart failure.
289
www.webofpharma.com
IV.  Drugs Affecting Neurotransmitter Release or Uptake
Some agents act on the adrenergic neuron, either to interfere with neurotransmitter release from storage vesicles or
to alter the uptake of the neurotransmitter into the adrenergic neuron. However, due to the advent of newer and more
effective agents with fewer side effects, these agents are seldom used therapeutically. Reserpine [re-SER-peen] is
one of the remaining agents in this category.
Reserpine, a plant alkaloid, blocks the Mg2+/adenosine triphosphate–dependent transport of biogenic amines
(norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin) from the cytoplasm into storage vesicles in the adrenergic nerve
terminals in all body tissues. This causes the ultimate depletion of biogenic amines. Sympathetic function, in
general, is impaired because of decreased release of norepinephrine. Reserpine has a slow onset, a long duration of
action, and effects that persist for many days after discontinuation. It has been used for the management of
hypertension but has largely been replaced with newer agents with better side effect profiles and fewer drug
interactions. It is also indicated in agitated psychotic states such as schizophrenia to relieve symptoms.
290
www.webofpharma.com
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
A 60-year-old patient started a new antihypertensive medication. His blood pressure is well controlled, but
he complains of fatigue, drowsiness, and fainting when he gets up from the bed (orthostatic hypotension).
Which of the following drugs is he most likely taking?
A.  Metoprolol
B.  Propranolol
C.  Prazosin
D.  Alfuzosin
Correct answer = C. Because they block α1-mediated vasoconstriction, α-blockers (prazosin) are more likely to
cause orthostatic hypotension, as compared to β-blockers (metoprolol, propranolol). Alfuzosin is a more selective
antagonist for α1A receptors in the prostate and bladder and is less likely to cause hypotension than prazosin.
A 30-year-old male patient was brought to the ER with amphetamine overdose. He presented with high
blood pressure and arrhythmias. Which drug is the most appropriate to treat the cardiovascular symptoms of
amphetamine overdose in this patient?
A.  Metoprolol
B.  Prazosin
C.  Labetalol
D.  Nebivolol
Correct answer = C. Amphetamine is an indirect adrenergic agonist that mainly enhances the release of
norepinephrine from peripheral sympathetic neurons. Therefore, it activates all types of adrenergic receptors (that
is, α and β receptors) and causes an increase in blood pressure. Since both α and β receptors are activated
indirectly by amphetamine, α-blockers (prazosin) or β-blockers (metoprolol, nebivolol) alone cannot relieve the
cardiovascular effects of amphetamine poisoning. Labetalol blocks both α1 and beta receptors and can minimize
the cardiovascular effects of amphetamine overdose.
A new antihypertensive drug was tested in an animal model of hypertension. The drug when given alone
reduces blood pressure in the animal. Norepinephrine when given in the presence of this drug did not cause
any significant change in blood pressure or heart rate in the animal. The mechanism of action of the new
drug is similar to which of the following agents?
A.  Doxazosin
B.  Clonidine
C.  Atenolol
D.  Carvedilol
Correct answer = D. Norepinephrine activates both α1 and β1 receptors and causes an increase in heart rate and
blood pressure. A drug that prevents the increase in blood pressure caused by norepinephrine should be similar to
carvedilol that antagonizes both α1 and β1 receptors. Doxazosin is an α1 antagonist, clonidine is an α2 agonist, and
atenolol is a β antagonist, and these drugs cannot completely prevent the cardiovascular effects of norepinephrine.
A β-blocker was prescribed for hypertension in a patient with asthma. After a week of treatment, the asthma
attacks got worse, and the patient was asked to stop taking the β-blocker. Which β-blocker would you
suggest as an alternative that is less likely to worsen the asthma?
A.  Propranolol
B.  Metoprolol
C.  Labetalol
D.  Carvedilol
Correct answer = B. The patient was most likely given a nonselective β-blocker (antagonizes both β1 and β2
receptors) that made the asthma worse due to β2 antagonism. An alternative is to prescribe a cardioselective
(antagonizes only β1) β-blocker that does not antagonize β2 receptors in the bronchioles. Metoprolol is a
cardioselective β-blocker. Propranolol, labetalol, and carvedilol are nonselective β-blockers and could worsen the
asthma.
A 70-year-old male is treated with doxazosin for overflow incontinence due to his enlarged prostate. He
complains of dizzy spells while getting up from bed at night. Which drug would you suggest as an alternative
that may not cause dizziness?
A.  Propranolol
B.  Phentolamine
C.  Tamsulosin
D.  Terazosin
291
www.webofpharma.com
7.6
7.7
7.8
7.9
7.10
Correct answer = C. Dizziness in this elderly patient could be due to orthostatic hypotension caused by doxazosin.
Tamsulosin is an α1 antagonist that is more selective to the α1 receptor subtype (α1A) present in the prostate and
less selective to the α1 receptor subtype (α1B) present in the blood vessels. Therefore, tamsulosin should not affect
blood pressure significantly and may not cause dizziness. Terazosin and phentolamine antagonize both these
subtypes and cause significant hypotension as a side effect. Propranolol is a nonselective beta-blocker that is not
indicated in overflow incontinence.
A 50-year-old male was in anaphylactic shock after being stung by a hornet. The medical team tried to
reverse the bronchoconstriction and hypotension using epinephrine; however, the patient did not fully
respond to the treatment. The patient’s wife mentioned that he is taking a prescription medication for blood
pressure. Which medication is he most likely taking that contributed to a reduced response to epinephrine?
A.  Doxazosin
B.  Propranolol
C.  Metoprolol
D.  Acebutolol
Correct answer = B. Epinephrine reverses hypotension by activating β1 receptors and relieves bronchoconstriction
by activating β2 receptors in anaphylaxis. Since epinephrine was not effective in reversing hypotension or
bronchoconstriction in this patient, it could be assumed that the patient was on a nonselective β-blocker
(propranolol). Doxazosin (α1-blocker), metoprolol, or acebutolol (both β1-selective blockers) would not have
completely prevented the effects of epinephrine.
Which of the following is correct regarding α-adrenergic blockers?
A.  α-Adrenergic blockers are used in the treatment of hypotension in anaphylactic shock.
B.  α-Adrenergic blockers are used in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).
C.  α-Adrenergic blockers may cause bradycardia.
D.  α-Adrenergic blockers reduce the frequency of urination.
Correct answer = B. α-Adrenergic blockers are used in the treatment of BPH because of their relaxant effect on
prostate smooth muscles. Being antihypertensive agents, they are not useful in treating hypotension in
anaphylaxis. α-Adrenergic blockers generally cause reflex tachycardia (not bradycardia) due to the significant
drop in blood pressure caused by them. They increase (not reduce) the frequency of urination by relaxing the
internal sphincter of the urinary bladder, which is controlled by α1 receptors.
Which of the following is correct regarding β-blockers?
A.  Treatment with β-blockers should not be stopped abruptly.
B.  Propranolol is a cardioselective β-blocker.
C.  Cardioselective β-blockers worsen asthma.
D.  β-Blockers decrease peripheral resistance by causing vasorelaxation.
Correct answer = A. If β-blocker therapy is stopped abruptly, that could cause angina and rebound hypertension.
This could be due to the up-regulation of β receptors in the body. β-Blockers do not cause direct vasorelaxation.
Therefore, they do not decrease peripheral resistance with short-term use. Propranolol is a nonselective β-blocker
(not cardioselective). Cardioselective β-blockers antagonize only β1 receptors and do not worsen asthma, as they
do not antagonize β2 receptors.
Which of the following drugs is commonly used topically in the treatment of glaucoma?
A.  Esmolol
B.  Timolol
C.  Silodosin
D.  Yohimbine
Correct answer = B. β-Blockers reduce the formation of aqueous humor in the eye and therefore reduce
intraocular pressure, thus relieving glaucoma. Timolol is a nonselective β-blocker that is commonly used topically
to treat glaucoma. Esmolol is a short-acting β-blocker that is used intravenously for hypertension or arrhythmias.
Silodosin is an α1 antagonist used for BPH, and yohimbine is a α2 antagonist used for sexual dysfunction.
Which of the following drugs has the highest potential to worsen orthostatic hypotension when given
together with prazosin?
A.  Propranolol
B.  Atenolol
C.  Nebivolol
D.  Labetalol
Correct answer = D. Labetalol is a nonselective β-blocker with α1-blocking activity. Prazosin causes orthostatic
hypotension due to its α1-blockade, which could be enhanced by adding labetalol. Propranolol, atenolol and
292
www.webofpharma.com
nebivolol do not have α1-blocking effects.
293
www.webofpharma.com
UNIT III
Drugs Affecting the Central Nervous System
294
www.webofpharma.com
8
Drugs for Neurodegenerative Diseases
Jose A. Rey
295
www.webofpharma.com
I.  Overview
Most drugs that affect the central nervous system (CNS) act by altering some step in the neurotransmission process.
Drugs affecting the CNS may act presynaptically by influencing the production, storage, release, or termination of
action of neurotransmitters. Other agents may activate or block postsynaptic receptors. This chapter provides an
overview of the CNS, with a focus on those neurotransmitters that are involved in the actions of the clinically useful
CNS drugs. These concepts are useful in understanding the etiology and treatment strategies for the
neurodegenerative disorders that respond to drug therapy: Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, multiple sclerosis
(MS), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Figure 8.1).
296
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 8.1 Summary of agents used in the treatment of Parkinson disease, Alzheimer
disease, multiple sclerosis, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
297
www.webofpharma.com
II.  Neurotransmission in the CNS
The basic functioning of neurons in the CNS is similar to that of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) described in
Chapter 3. For example, transmission of information in both the CNS and in the periphery involves the release of
neurotransmitters that diffuse across the synaptic cleft to bind to specific receptors on the postsynaptic neuron. In
both systems, the recognition of the neurotransmitter by the membrane receptor of the postsynaptic neuron triggers
intracellular changes. However, several major differences exist between neurons in the peripheral ANS and those in
the CNS. The circuitry of the CNS is more complex than that of the ANS, and the number of synapses in the CNS is
far greater. The CNS, unlike the peripheral ANS, contains networks of inhibitory neurons that are constantly active
in modulating the rate of neuronal transmission. In addition, the CNS communicates through the use of multiple
neurotransmitters, whereas the ANS uses only two primary neurotransmitters, acetylcholine, and norepinephrine.
298
www.webofpharma.com
III.  Synaptic Potentials
In the CNS, receptors in most synapses are coupled to ion channels. Binding of the neurotransmitter to the
postsynaptic membrane receptors results in a rapid but transient opening of ion channels. Open channels allow
specific ions inside and outside the cell membrane to flow down their concentration gradients. The resulting change
in the ionic composition across the membrane of the neuron alters the postsynaptic potential, producing either
depolarization or hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic membrane, depending on the specific ions and the direction
of their movement.
299
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Excitatory pathways
Neurotransmitters can be classified as either excitatory or inhibitory, depending on the nature of the action they
elicit. Stimulation of excitatory neurons causes a movement of ions that results in a depolarization of the
postsynaptic membrane. These excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSP) are generated by the following: 1)
Stimulation of an excitatory neuron causes the release of neurotransmitters, such as glutamate or acetylcholine,
which bind to receptors on the postsynaptic cell membrane. This causes a transient increase in the permeability of
sodium (Na+) ions. 2) The influx of Na+ causes a weak depolarization, or EPSP, that moves the postsynaptic
potential toward its firing threshold. 3) If the number of stimulated excitatory neurons increases, more excitatory
neurotransmitter is released. This ultimately causes the EPSP depolarization of the postsynaptic cell to pass a
threshold, thereby generating an all-or-none action potential. [Note: The generation of a nerve impulse typically
reflects the activation of synaptic receptors by thousands of excitatory neurotransmitter molecules released from
many nerve fibers.] Figure 8.2 shows an example of an excitatory pathway.
Figure 8.2 Binding of the excitatory neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, causes
300
www.webofpharma.com
depolarization of the neuron.
301
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Inhibitory pathways
Stimulation of inhibitory neurons causes movement of ions that results in a hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic
membrane. These inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSP) are generated by the following: 1) Stimulation of
inhibitory neurons releases neurotransmitters, such as γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) or glycine, which bind to
receptors on the postsynaptic cell membrane. This causes a transient increase in the permeability of specific ions,
such as potassium (K+) and chloride (Cl−). 2) The influx of Cl− and efflux of K+ cause a weak hyperpolarization, or
IPSP, that moves the postsynaptic potential away from its firing threshold. This diminishes the generation of action
potentials. Figure 8.3 shows an example of an inhibitory pathway.
302
www.webofpharma.com
303
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 8.3 Binding of the inhibitory neurotransmitter, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA),
causes hyperpolarization of the neuron.
304
www.webofpharma.com
C.  Combined effects of the EPSP and IPSP
Most neurons in the CNS receive both EPSP and IPSP input. Thus, several different types of neurotransmitters may
act on the same neuron, but each binds to its own specific receptor. The overall action is the summation of the
individual actions of the various neurotransmitters on the neuron. The neurotransmitters are not uniformly
distributed in the CNS but are localized in specific clusters of neurons, the axons of which may synapse with
specific regions of the brain. Many neuronal tracts, thus, seem to be chemically coded, and this may offer greater
opportunity for selective pharmacological modulation of certain neuronal pathways.
305
www.webofpharma.com
IV.  Neurodegenerative Diseases
Neurodegenerative diseases of the CNS include Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, MS, and ALS. These
devastating illnesses are characterized by the progressive loss of selected neurons in discrete brain areas, resulting in
characteristic disorders of movement, cognition, or both.
306
www.webofpharma.com
V.  Overview of Parkinson Disease
Parkinsonism is a progressive neurological disorder of muscle movement, characterized by tremors, muscular
rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural and gait abnormalities. Most cases involve people over the age of 65, among
whom the incidence is about 1 in 100 individuals.
307
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Etiology
The cause of Parkinson disease is unknown for most patients. The disease is correlated with destruction of
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra with a consequent reduction of dopamine actions in the corpus
striatum, parts of the basal ganglia system that are involved in motor control.
1.  Substantia nigra
The substantia nigra, part of the extrapyramidal system, is the source of dopaminergic neurons (shown in red in
Figure 8.4) that terminate in the neostriatum. Each dopaminergic neuron makes thousands of synaptic contacts
within the neostriatum and therefore modulates the activity of a large number of cells. These dopaminergic
projections from the substantia nigra fire tonically rather than in response to specific muscular movements or
sensory input. Thus, the dopaminergic system appears to serve as a tonic, sustaining influence on motor activity,
rather than participating in specific movements.
Figure 8.4 Role of substantia nigra in Parkinson disease. ACh = acetylcholine; DA =
dopamine; GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid.
2.  Neostriatum
Normally, the neostriatum is connected to the substantia nigra by neurons (shown in orange in Figure 8.4) that
secrete the inhibitory transmitter GABA at their termini. In turn, cells of the substantia nigra send neurons back to
the neostriatum, secreting the inhibitory transmitter dopamine at their termini. This mutual inhibitory pathway
normally maintains a degree of inhibition of both areas. In Parkinson disease, destruction of cells in the substantia
nigra results in the degeneration of the nerve terminals that secrete dopamine in the neostriatum. Thus, the normal
inhibitory influence of dopamine on cholinergic neurons in the neostriatum is significantly diminished, resulting in
overproduction, or a relative overactivity, of acetylcholine by the stimulatory neurons (shown in green in Figure
308
www.webofpharma.com
8.4). This triggers a chain of abnormal signaling, resulting in loss of the control of muscle movements.
3.  Secondary parkinsonism
Drugs such as the phenothiazines and haloperidol, whose major pharmacologic action is blockade of dopamine
receptors in the brain, may produce parkinsonian symptoms (also called pseudoparkinsonism). These drugs should
be used with caution in patients with Parkinson disease.
309
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Strategy of treatment
In addition to an abundance of inhibitory dopaminergic neurons, the neostriatum is also rich in excitatory
cholinergic neurons that oppose the action of dopamine (Figure 8.4). Many of the symptoms of parkinsonism reflect
an imbalance between the excitatory cholinergic neurons and the greatly diminished number of inhibitory
dopaminergic neurons. Therapy is aimed at restoring dopamine in the basal ganglia and antagonizing the excitatory
effect of cholinergic neurons, thus reestablishing the correct dopamine/acetylcholine balance.
310
www.webofpharma.com
VI.  Drugs Used in Parkinson Disease
Many currently available drugs aim to maintain CNS dopamine levels, or signaling, as constant as possible. These
agents offer temporary relief from the symptoms of the disorder, but they do not arrest or reverse the neuronal
degeneration caused by the disease.
311
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Levodopa and carbidopa
Levodopa [lee-voe-DOE-pa] is a metabolic precursor of dopamine (Figure 8.5). It restores dopaminergic
neurotransmission in the neostriatum by enhancing the synthesis of dopamine in the surviving neurons of the
substantia nigra. In early disease, the number of residual dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (typically
about 20% of normal) is adequate for conversion of levodopa to dopamine. Thus, in new patients, the therapeutic
response to levodopa is consistent, and the patient rarely complains that the drug effects “wear off.” Unfortunately,
with time, the number of neurons decreases, and fewer cells are capable of converting exogenously administered
levodopa to dopamine. Consequently, motor control fluctuation develops. Relief provided by levodopa is only
symptomatic, and it lasts only while the drug is present in the body.
Figure 8.5 Synthesis of dopamine from levodopa in the absence and presence of
carbidopa, an inhibitor of dopamine decarboxylase in the peripheral tissues. (GI =
gastrointestinal.)
1.  Mechanism of action
a.  Levodopa
Dopamine does not cross the blood–brain barrier, but its immediate precursor, levodopa, is actively transported into
the CNS and converted to dopamine (Figure 8.5). Levodopa must be administered with carbidopa [kar-bi-DOE-pa].
Without carbidopa, much of the drug is decarboxylated to dopamine in the periphery, resulting in diminished effect,
nausea, vomiting, cardiac arrhythmias, and hypotension.
b.  Carbidopa
Carbidopa, a dopamine decarboxylase inhibitor, diminishes the metabolism of levodopa in the periphery, thereby
increasing the availability of levodopa to the CNS. The addition of carbidopa lowers the dose of levodopa needed
by four- to five-fold and, consequently, decreases the severity of adverse effects arising from peripherally formed
dopamine.
2.  Therapeutic uses
Levodopa in combination with carbidopa is an efficacious drug regimen for the treatment of Parkinson disease. It
decreases rigidity, tremors, and other symptoms of parkinsonism. In approximately two-thirds of patients with
Parkinson disease, levodopa–carbidopa substantially reduces the severity of symptoms for the first few years of
treatment. Patients typically experience a decline in response during the 3rd to 5th year of therapy. Withdrawal from
the drug must be gradual.
3.  Absorption and metabolism
The drug is absorbed rapidly from the small intestine (when empty of food). Levodopa has an extremely short half-
life (1 to 2 hours), which causes fluctuations in plasma concentration. This may produce fluctuations in motor
response, which generally correlate with the plasma concentration of levodopa, or perhaps give rise to the more
troublesome “on–off” phenomenon, in which the motor fluctuations are not related to plasma levels in a simple way.
Motor fluctuations may cause the patient to suddenly lose normal mobility and experience tremors, cramps, and
immobility. Ingestion of meals, particularly if high in protein, interferes with the transport of levodopa into the CNS.
Thus, levodopa should be taken on an empty stomach, typically 30 minutes before a meal.
4.  Adverse effects
312
www.webofpharma.com
a.  Peripheral effects
Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting occur because of stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone (Figure 8.6).
Tachycardia and ventricular extrasystole result from dopaminergic action on the heart. Hypotension may also
develop. Adrenergic action on the iris causes mydriasis. In some individuals, blood dyscrasias and a positive
reaction to the Coombs test are seen. Saliva and urine may turn brownish color because of the melanin pigment
produced from catecholamine oxidation.
313
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 8.6 Adverse effects of levodopa.
b.  CNS effects
314
www.webofpharma.com
Visual and auditory hallucinations and abnormal involuntary movements (dyskinesias) may occur. These effects are
the opposite of parkinsonian symptoms and reflect overactivity of dopamine in the basal ganglia. Levodopa can also
cause mood changes, depression, psychosis, and anxiety.
5.  Interactions
The vitamin pyridoxine (B6) increases the peripheral breakdown of levodopa and diminishes its effectiveness
(Figure 8.7). Concomitant administration of levodopa and nonselective monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs),
such as phenelzine, can produce a hypertensive crisis caused by enhanced catecholamine production. Therefore,
concomitant administration of these agents is contraindicated. In many psychotic patients, levodopa exacerbates
symptoms, possibly through the buildup of central catecholamines. Cardiac patients should be carefully monitored
for the possible development of arrhythmias. Antipsychotic drugs are generally contraindicated in Parkinson disease,
because they potently block dopamine receptors and may augment parkinsonian symptoms. However, low doses of
atypical antipsychotics, such as quetiapine or clozapine, are sometimes used to treat levodopa-induced psychotic
symptoms.
Figure 8.7 Some drug interactions observed with levodopa. MAO = monoamine oxidase.
315
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Selegiline, rasagiline, and safinamide
Selegiline [seh-LEDGE-ah-leen], also called deprenyl [DE-pre-nill], selectively inhibits monoamine oxidase (MAO)
type B, the enzyme that metabolizes dopamine. It does not inhibit MAO type A (metabolizes norepinephrine and
serotonin) unless given above recommended doses, where it loses its selectivity. By decreasing the metabolism of
dopamine, selegiline increases dopamine levels in the brain (Figure 8.8). When selegiline is administered with
levodopa, it enhances the actions of levodopa and substantially reduces the required dose. Unlike nonselective
MAOIs, selegiline at recommended doses has little potential for causing hypertensive crises. However, the drug
loses selectivity at high doses, and there is a risk for severe hypertension. Selegiline is metabolized to
methamphetamine and amphetamine, whose stimulating properties may produce insomnia if the drug is
administered later than mid-afternoon. Rasagiline [ra-SA-gi-leen], an irreversible and selective inhibitor of brain
MAO type B, has five times the potency of selegiline. Unlike selegiline, rasagiline is not metabolized to an
amphetamine-like substance. Safinamide [sa-FIN-a-mide] is also a selective inhibitor of MAO type B indicated for
use as an adjunct to levodopa–carbidopa.
Figure 8.8 Action of selegiline (deprenyl) in dopamine metabolism. (MAO B =
monoamine oxidase type B.)
316
www.webofpharma.com
C.  Catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors
Normally, the methylation of levodopa by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) to 3-O-methyldopa is a minor
pathway for levodopa metabolism. However, when peripheral dopamine decarboxylase activity is inhibited by
carbidopa, a significant concentration of 3-O-methyldopa is formed that competes with levodopa for active transport
into the CNS (Figure 8.9). Entacapone [en-TAK-a-pone] and tolcapone [TOLE-ka-pone] selectively and reversibly
inhibit COMT. Inhibition of COMT by these agents leads to decreased plasma concentrations of 3-O-methyldopa,
increased central uptake of levodopa, and greater concentrations of brain dopamine. Both of these agents reduce the
symptoms of “wearing-off” phenomena seen in patients on levodopa–carbidopa. The two drugs differ primarily in
their pharmacokinetic and adverse effect profiles.
Figure 8.9 Effect of entacapone on dopa concentration in the central nervous system
(CNS). COMT = catechol-O- methyltransferase.
1.  Pharmacokinetics
Oral absorption of both drugs occurs readily and is not influenced by food. They are extensively bound to plasma
albumin, with a limited volume of distribution. Tolcapone has a relatively long duration of action (probably due to
its affinity for the enzyme) compared to entacapone, which requires more frequent dosing. Both drugs are
extensively metabolized and eliminated in feces and urine. The dosage may need to be adjusted in patients with
moderate or severe cirrhosis.
2.  Adverse effects
Both drugs exhibit adverse effects that are observed in patients taking levodopa–carbidopa, including diarrhea,
postural hypotension, nausea, anorexia, dyskinesias, hallucinations, and sleep disorders. Most seriously, fulminating
hepatic necrosis is associated with tolcapone use. Therefore, it should be used, along with appropriate hepatic
function monitoring, only in patients in whom other modalities have failed. Entacapone does not exhibit this toxicity
and has largely replaced tolcapone in clinical practice.
317
www.webofpharma.com
D.  Dopamine receptor agonists
This group of antiparkinsonian compounds includes bromocriptine [broe-moe-KRIP-teen], an ergot derivative, and
the nonergot drugs, ropinirole [roe-PIN-i-role], pramipexole [pra-mi-PEX-ole], rotigotine [ro-TIG-oh-teen], and
apomorphine [A-poe-more-feen]. These agents have a longer duration of action than that of levodopa and are
effective in patients exhibiting fluctuations in response to levodopa. Initial therapy with these drugs is associated
with less risk of developing dyskinesias and motor fluctuations as compared to patients started on levodopa.
Bromocriptine, pramipexole, and ropinirole are effective in patients with Parkinson disease complicated by motor
fluctuations and dyskinesias. However, these drugs are ineffective in patients who have not responded to levodopa.
Apomorphine is an injectable dopamine agonist that is used in severe and advanced stages of the disease to
supplement oral medications. Adverse effects severely limit the utility of the dopamine agonists (Figure 8.10).
318
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 8.10 Some adverse effects of dopamine agonists.
1.  Bromocriptine
319
www.webofpharma.com
The actions of the ergot derivative bromocriptine are similar to those of levodopa, except that hallucinations,
confusion, delirium, nausea, and orthostatic hypotension are more common, whereas dyskinesia is less prominent. In
psychiatric illness, bromocriptine may cause the mental condition to worsen. It should be used with caution in
patients with a history of myocardial infarction or peripheral vascular disease due to the risk of vasospasm. Because
bromocriptine is an ergot derivative, it has the potential to cause pulmonary and retroperitoneal fibrosis.
2.  Apomorphine, pramipexole, ropinirole, and rotigotine
These are nonergot dopamine agonists that are approved for the treatment of Parkinson disease. Ropinirole is also
indicated for the treatment of restless legs syndrome. Pramipexole and ropinirole are orally active agents.
Apomorphine and rotigotine are available in injectable and transdermal delivery systems, respectively. Apomorphine
is used for acute management of the hypomobility “off” phenomenon in advanced Parkinson disease. Rotigotine is
administered as a once-daily transdermal patch that provides even drug levels over 24 hours. These agents alleviate
the motor deficits in patients who have never taken levodopa and also in patients with advanced Parkinson disease
who are treated with levodopa. Dopamine agonists may delay the need to use levodopa in early Parkinson disease
and may decrease the dose of levodopa in advanced Parkinson disease. Unlike the ergotamine derivatives, these
agents do not exacerbate peripheral vascular disorders or cause fibrosis. Nausea, hallucinations, insomnia, dizziness,
constipation, and orthostatic hypotension are adverse effects of these drugs, but dyskinesias are less frequent than
with levodopa (Figure 8.11). Pramipexole is mainly excreted unchanged in the urine, and dosage adjustments are
needed in renal dysfunction. The fluoroquinolone antibiotics and other inhibitors of the cytochrome P450 (CYP450)
1A2 isoenzyme (for example, fluvoxamine) may inhibit the metabolism of ropinirole, requiring an adjustment in
ropinirole dosage. Figure 8.12 summarizes some properties of dopamine agonists.
320
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 8.11 Motor complications in patients treated with levodopa or dopamine agonists.
Figure 8.12 Pharmacokinetic properties of dopamine agonists pramipexole, ropinirole,
and rotigotine. Vd = volume of distribution. 1Increases to 12 hours in patients older than
65 years. 2Less than 10% excreted unchanged. 3Administered as a once-daily transdermal
patch.
321
www.webofpharma.com
322
www.webofpharma.com
E.  Amantadine
It was accidentally discovered that the antiviral drug amantadine [a-MAN-ta-deen] has an antiparkinsonian action.
Amantadine has several effects on a number of neurotransmitters implicated in parkinsonism, including increasing
the release of dopamine, blocking cholinergic receptors, and inhibiting the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) type of
glutamate receptors. The drug may cause restlessness, agitation, confusion, and hallucinations, and, at high doses, it
may induce acute toxic psychosis. Orthostatic hypotension, urinary retention, peripheral edema, and dry mouth also
may occur. Amantadine is less efficacious than levodopa, and tolerance develops more readily. However,
amantadine has fewer adverse effects.
323
www.webofpharma.com
F.  Antimuscarinic agents
The antimuscarinic agents are much less efficacious than levodopa and play only an adjuvant role in
antiparkinsonism therapy. The actions of benztropine [BENZ-troe-peen] and trihexyphenidyl [tri-hex-ee-FEN-i-dill]
are similar, although individual patients may respond more favorably to one drug or the other. Blockade of
cholinergic transmission produces effects similar to augmentation of dopaminergic transmission, since it helps to
correct the imbalance in the dopamine/acetylcholine activity (Figure 8.4). These agents can induce mood changes
and confusion, and produce xerostomia, constipation, and visual problems typical of muscarinic blockers (see
Chapter 5). They interfere with gastrointestinal peristalsis and are contraindicated in patients with glaucoma,
prostatic hyperplasia, or pyloric stenosis.
324
www.webofpharma.com
VII.  Drugs Used in Alzheimer Disease
Dementia of the Alzheimer type has three distinguishing features: 1) accumulation of senile plaques (β-amyloid
accumulations), 2) formation of numerous neurofibrillary tangles, and 3) loss of cortical neurons, particularly
cholinergic neurons. Current therapies aim to either improve cholinergic transmission within the CNS or prevent
excitotoxic actions resulting from overstimulation of NMDA-glutamate receptors in selected areas of the brain.
Pharmacologic intervention for Alzheimer disease is only palliative and provides modest short-term benefit. None of
the available therapeutic agents alter the underlying neurodegenerative process.
325
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
Numerous studies have linked the progressive loss of cholinergic neurons and, presumably, cholinergic transmission
within the cortex to the memory loss that is a hallmark symptom of Alzheimer disease. It is postulated that inhibition
of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) within the CNS improves cholinergic transmission, at least at those neurons that are
still functioning. The reversible AChE inhibitors approved for the treatment of Alzheimer disease include donepezil
[doe-NE-peh-zil], galantamine [ga-LAN-ta-meen], and rivastigmine [ri-va-STIG-meen]. These agents have some
selectivity for AChE in the CNS, as compared to the periphery. Galantamine may also augment the action of
acetylcholine at nicotinic receptors in the CNS. At best, these compounds may provide a modest reduction in the
rate of loss of cognitive functioning in Alzheimer patients. Rivastigmine is the only agent approved for the
management of dementia associated with Parkinson disease and also the only AChE inhibitor available as a
transdermal formulation. Rivastigmine is hydrolyzed by AChE to a carbamylated metabolite and has no interactions
with drugs that alter the activity of CYP450 enzymes. The other agents are substrates for CYP450 and have a
potential for such interactions. Common adverse effects include nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, anorexia, tremors,
bradycardia, and muscle cramps (Figure 8.13).
326
www.webofpharma.com
327
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 8.13 Adverse effects of AChE inhibitors.
328
www.webofpharma.com
B.  NMDA receptor antagonist
Stimulation of glutamate receptors in the CNS appears to be critical for the formation of certain memories.
However, overstimulation of glutamate receptors, particularly of the NMDA type, may result in excitotoxic effects
on neurons and is suggested as a mechanism for neurodegenerative or apoptotic (programmed cell death) processes.
Binding of glutamate to the NMDA receptor assists in the opening of an ion channel that allows Ca2+ to enter the
neuron. Excess intracellular Ca2+ can activate a number of processes that ultimately damage neurons and lead to
apoptosis. Memantine [meh-MAN-teen] is an NMDA receptor antagonist indicated for moderate to severe
Alzheimer disease. It acts by blocking the NMDA receptor and limiting Ca2+ influx into the neuron, such that toxic
intracellular levels are not achieved. Memantine is well tolerated, with few dose-dependent adverse events. Expected
adverse effects, such as confusion, agitation, and restlessness, are often indistinguishable from the symptoms of
Alzheimer disease. Given its different mechanism of action and possible neuroprotective effects, memantine is often
given in combination with an AChE inhibitor.
329
www.webofpharma.com
VIII.  Drugs Used in Multiple Sclerosis
MS is an autoimmune inflammatory demyelinating disease of the CNS. The course of MS is variable. For some, MS
may consist of one or two acute neurologic episodes. In others, it is a chronic, relapsing, or progressive disease that
may span 10 to 20 years. Historically, corticosteroids (for example, dexamethasone and prednisone) have been used
to treat acute exacerbations of the disease. Chemotherapeutic agents, such as cyclophosphamide and azathioprine,
have also been used.
330
www.webofpharma.com
A.  Disease-modifying therapies
Drugs currently approved for MS are indicated to decrease relapse rates or, in some cases, to prevent accumulation
of disability. The major target of these medications is to modify the immune response through inhibition of white
blood cell–mediated inflammatory processes that eventually lead to myelin sheath damage and decreased or
inappropriate axonal communication between cells.
1.  Interferon b1a and interferon b1b
The immunomodulatory effects of interferon [in-ter-FEER-on] help to diminish the inflammatory responses that
lead to demyelination of the axon sheaths. Adverse effects of these medications may include depression, local
injection site reactions, increases in hepatic enzymes, and flu-like symptoms.
2.  Glatiramer
Glatiramer [gluh-TEER-a-mur] is a synthetic polypeptide that resembles myelin protein and may act as a decoy to
T-cell attack. Some patients experience a postinjection reaction that includes flushing, chest pain, anxiety, and
itching. It is usually self-limiting.
3.  Fingolimod
Fingolimod [fin-GO-li-mod] is an oral drug that alters lymphocyte migration, resulting in fewer lymphocytes in the
CNS. Fingolimod may cause first-dose bradycardia and is associated with an increased risk of infection and macular
edema.
4.  Teriflunomide
Teriflunomide [te-ree-FLOO-no-mide] is an oral pyrimidine synthesis inhibitor that leads to a lower concentration of
active lymphocytes in the CNS. Teriflunomide may cause elevated liver enzymes. It should be avoided in pregnancy.
5.  Dimethyl fumarate
Dimethyl fumarate [dye-METH-il FOO-ma-rate] is an oral agent that may alter the cellular response to oxidative
stress to reduce disease progression. Flushing and abdominal pain are the most common adverse events.
6.  Monoclonal antibodies
Alemtuzumab [AL-em-TOOZ-ue-mab], daclizumab [dah-KLIH-zyoo-mab], natalizumab [na-ta-LIZ-oo-mab], and
ocrelizumab [OK-re-LIZ-ue-mab] are monoclonal antibodies indicated for the treatment of MS. Ocrelizumab is the
first agent to be approved for primary progressive forms of the disease. These agents can be associated with
significant toxicities, such as progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy with natalizumab, serious infections with
daclizumab and alemtuzumab, and autoimmune disorders with alemtuzumab. As such, these agents may be reserved
for patients who have failed other therapies.
331
www.webofpharma.com
B.  Symptomatic treatment
Many different classes of drugs are used to manage symptoms of MS such as spasticity, constipation, bladder
dysfunction, and depression. Dalfampridine [DAL-fam-pre-deen], an oral potassium channel blocker, improves
walking speeds in patients with MS. It is the first drug approved for this use.
332
www.webofpharma.com
IX.  Drugs Used in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
ALS is characterized by progressive degeneration of motor neurons, resulting in the inability to initiate or control
muscle movement. Riluzole [RIL-ue-zole] and edaravone [e-DAR-a-vone] are indicated for the management of
ALS. Riluzole, an oral NMDA receptor antagonist, is believed to act by inhibiting glutamate release and blocking
sodium channels. Riluzole may improve survival time in patients suffering from ALS. Edaravone is an intravenous
free radical scavenger and antioxidant that may slow the progression of ALS.
333
www.webofpharma.com
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
A 75-year-old man with moderate Parkinson disease is no longer responding to anticholinergic treatment for
his tremors and bradykinesia. Which combination of antiparkinsonian drugs is an appropriate treatment plan?
A.  Amantadine, carbidopa, and entacapone
B.  Levodopa, carbidopa, and entacapone
C.  Pramipexole, carbidopa, and entacapone
D.  Ropinirole, carbidopa, and selegiline
Correct answer = B. To reduce the dose of levodopa and its peripheral side effects, the peripheral decarboxylase
inhibitor, carbidopa, is coadministered. As a result of this combination, more levodopa is available for
metabolism by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) to 3-O-methyldopa, which competes with levodopa for the
active transport processes into the CNS. By administering entacapone (an inhibitor of COMT), the competing
product is not formed, and more levodopa enters the brain. The other choices are not appropriate because neither
peripheral decarboxylase, nor COMT, nor monoamine oxidase metabolizes amantadine or the direct-acting
dopamine agonists ropinirole and pramipexole; thus carbidopa and entacapone should only be given with
levodopa, otherwise they are not contributing to the clinical response of the patient.
Peripheral adverse effects of levodopa, including nausea, hypotension, and cardiac arrhythmias, can be
diminished by including which drug in the therapy?
A.  Amantadine
B.  Ropinirole
C.  Carbidopa
D.  Entacapone
Correct answer = C. Carbidopa inhibits the peripheral decarboxylation of levodopa to dopamine, thereby
diminishing the gastrointestinal and cardiovascular side effects of levodopa. The other agents listed do not
ameliorate adverse effects of levodopa.
Which antiparkinsonian drug may cause vasospasm?
A.  Amantadine
B.  Bromocriptine
C.  Entacapone
D.  Ropinirole
Correct answer = B. Bromocriptine is a dopamine receptor agonist that may cause vasospasm. It is
contraindicated in patients with peripheral vascular disease. Ropinirole directly stimulates dopamine receptors,
but it does not cause vasospasm. The other drugs do not act directly on dopamine receptors.
Modest improvement in the memory of patients with Alzheimer disease may occur with drugs that increase
transmission at which receptor?
A.  Adrenergic
B.  Cholinergic
C.  Dopaminergic
D.  Serotonergic
Correct answer = B. AChE inhibitors, such as galantamine, increase cholinergic transmission in the CNS and may
cause a modest delay in the progression of Alzheimer disease. Increased transmission at the other types of
receptors listed does not result in improved memory.
A 70-year-old woman with moderate to severe dementia of the Alzheimer type has been treated with an
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor for 6 months at maximum dosing with minimal effect. Which medication is a
glutamate receptor antagonist that could provide added benefit for management of her moderate to severe
symptoms of Alzheimer disease?
A.  Rivastigmine
B.  Pramipexole
C.  Memantine
D.  Galantamine
Correct answer = C. When combined with an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, memantine has modest efficacy in
keeping patients with Alzheimer disease at or above baseline for at least 6 months and may delay disease
progression. It is currently not approved for mild cognitive impairment or mild AD.
An 80-year-old male patient with moderate Alzheimer disease had a short trial of an oral medication for
Alzheimer disease and experienced frequent nausea, along with difficulty swallowing the medication. Which
agent is best for management of Alzheimer disease in this patient?
334
www.webofpharma.com
8.7
8.8
8.9
8.10
A.  Rivastigmine
B.  Donepezil
C.  Memantine
D.  Rotigotine
Correct answer = A. Rivastigmine is the only agent available as a transdermal delivery system (patch) for the
treatment of Alzheimer disease. It may also be used for dementia associated with Parkinson disease. Daily use of
the rivastigmine patch provides steady drug levels to treat Alzheimer disease, with a possible reduced incidence
of nausea. Rotigotine is available as a transdermal delivery system; however, it is indicated for Parkinson disease
and not for Alzheimer disease.
Which medication would benefit a 55-year-old female patient recently diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS)?
A.  Pramipexole
B.  Galantamine
C.  Riluzole
D.  Glatiramer
Correct answer = C. Riluzole is approved for the debilitating and lethal illness of ALS. It is used to, ideally, delay
the progression and need for ventilator support in severe patients. It is believed to work by decreasing the release
of glutamate from the presynaptic terminal.
A 48-year-old woman with relapsing multiple sclerosis has had intolerable adverse reactions to interferon
beta (depression) and dimethyl fumarate (angioedema) and now requires an alternative treatment option.
Which medication is most appropriate for this patient?
A.  Riluzole
B.  Rotigotine
C.  Teriflunomide
D.  Galantamine
Correct answer = C. Teriflunomide is believed to exert its disease modifying and anti-inflammatory effects by
inhibiting the enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase to reduce pyrimidine synthesis. Teriflunomide may provide
an alternative treatment option with a different side effect profile compared to the prior two attempted treatments.
The other agents are not indicated for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
Which agent may cause tremors as an adverse effect and, thus, should be used with caution in patients with
Parkinson disease, even though it is also indicated for the treatment of dementia associated with Parkinson
disease?
A.  Benztropine
B.  Rotigotine
C.  Rivastigmine
D.  Dimethyl fumarate
Correct answer = C. Though rivastigmine is an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, which can cause tremors as an
adverse effect, its use is not contraindicated in patients with Parkinson disease, as this agent is also the only
medication approved for dementia associated with Parkinson disease. It should be used with caution, as it may
worsen the parkinsonian-related tremors. A risk–benefit discussion should occur with the patient and the
caregiver before rivastigmine is used.
A 50-year-old male patient with secondary progressive multiple sclerosis reports continued difficulty
walking and the distance that he can walk before being overcome by fatigue. Which agent may be beneficial
to improve walking speed and disability in this patient?
A.  Dalfampridine
B.  Donepezil
C.  Riluzole
D.  Bromocriptine
Correct answer = A. Dalfampridine is a potassium channel blocker that exerts its therapeutic effect in multiple
sclerosis via potassium channel blockade and has been proven to improve walking speed and disability in patients
with multiple sclerosis. It is the only agent that is indicated to improve walking speed in patients with MS. The
other agents are not indicated for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
335
www.webofpharma.com
9
Anxiolytic and Hypnotic Drugs
Jose A. Rey
336
www.webofpharma.com
I.  Overview
Disorders involving anxiety are among the most common mental disorders. Anxiety is an unpleasant state of
tension, apprehension, or uneasiness (a fear that arises from either a known or an unknown source). The physical
symptoms of severe anxiety are similar to those of fear (such as tachycardia, sweating, trembling, and palpitations)
and involve sympathetic activation. Episodes of mild anxiety are common life experiences and do not warrant
treatment. However, severe, chronic, debilitating anxiety may be treated with antianxiety drugs (sometimes called
anxiolytics) and/or some form of psychotherapy. Because many antianxiety drugs also cause some sedation, they
may be used clinically as both anxiolytic and hypnotic (sleep-inducing) agents. Figure 9.1 summarizes the anxiolytic
and hypnotic agents. Some antidepressants are also indicated for certain anxiety disorders; however, they are
discussed with the antidepressants (see Chapter 10).
337
www.webofpharma.com
338
www.webofpharma.com
Figure 9.1 Summary of anxiolytic and hypnotic drugs.
339
www.webofpharma.com
II.  Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines are widely used anxiolytic drugs. They have largely replaced barbiturates and meprobamate in the
treatment of anxiety and insomnia, because benzodiazepines are generally considered to be safer and more effective
(Figure 9.2). Though benzodiazepines are commonly used, they are not necessarily the best choice for anxiety or
insomnia. Certain antidepressants with anxiolytic action, such as the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),
are preferred in many cases, and nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics and antihistamines may be preferable for insomnia.
Figure 9.2 Ratio of lethal dose to effective dose for morphine (an opioid, see Chapter
14), chlorpromazine (an antipsychotic, see Chapter 11), and the anxiolytic, hypnotic
drugs, phenobarbital and diazepam.
340
www.webofpharma.com
