CHAPTER 236 Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging: Echocardiography, Nuclear Cardiology, and Magnetic Resonance/Computed Tomography Imaging
1705
FIGURE 236-33  Cardiac thrombus (arrow) in an apical aneurysmal region 
following acute myocardial infarction.
*
FIGURE 236-34  Late gadolinium enhancement image of a massive anterior 
infarction complicated by a dyskinetic left ventricular LV aneurysm and 
intracavitary thrombus (red asterisk).
additional information of pericardial fibrosis and inflammation by 
LGE imaging and evidence of constrictive physiology (e.g., regional 
relaxation concordance due to myocardial adhesions, abnormal septal 
bounce with Valsalva maneuver).
■
■CARDIAC THROMBUS AND MASS
Echocardiography is usually the modality that first detects a cardiac 
mass with differential diagnoses including thrombus, tumor, or veg-
etation. Given their unrestricted tomographic views and multiplanar 
three-dimensional imaging, CMR and CT can complement echoc-
ardiography by further characterizing the physical features of the 
cardiac mass. Compared to CT, CMR has the advantage of higher 
tissue contrast differentiation, more robust cine imaging, and the use 
of multifaceted techniques within the same imaging session to deter-
mine the physiologic characteristics of the mass. Gadolinium contrast 
enhancement patterns of increased capillary perfusion can detect vas-
cularity within a mass which differentiates a tumor from a thrombus. 
Structures that are known to mimic a cardiac mass include (1) anatomic 
variants, such as the Eustachian valve, Chiari network, crista sagit-
talis or terminalis, and the right ventricular moderator band, and (2) 
“pseudotumors,” such as interatrial septal aneurysm, coronary or aor-
tic aneurysm, lipomatous hypertrophy of interatrial septum, hiatal her-
nia, or a catheter/pacemaker lead. Coexisting abnormalities that raise 
the likelihood of a cardiac thrombus (Fig. 236-33) include regional wall 
motion abnormality from an infarction or ventricular aneurysm, atrial 
fibrillation leading to slow flow in the left atrial appendage, or pres-
ence of venous catheters or recent endovascular injury. CMR has the 
advantage of being able to assess regional wall motion and infarction or 
ventricular aneurysm in matching scan planes, adjacent to the cardiac 
thrombus, using cine and LGE imaging, respectively. For ventricular 
thrombus, gadolinium-enhanced LGE imaging can detect thrombus at 
a higher sensitivity than echocardiography by depicting high-contrast 
difference between the dark thrombus and its adjacent structures and 
by imaging in three dimensions. In addition, mural thrombus does not 
enhance on first-pass perfusion and often has a characteristic “etched” 
appearance (black border surrounding a bright center) on LGE imag-
ing, thus providing higher diagnostic specificity than anatomic infor-
mation alone (Fig. 236-34). Comparing the signal intensities of a mass 
before and after contrast injection may confirm the lack of tissue vascu-
larity (i.e., thrombus) by the lack of signal enhancement after contrast 
administration. Like intracardiac thrombus, regions of microvascular 
obstruction also appear dark, but microvascular obstruction is confined 
within the myocardium and surrounded by infarction and thus can 
be differentiated from intracardiac thrombus. Cardiac CT imaging is 
ideally suited for small thrombus in the left atrial appendage especially 
in cases where transesophageal echocardiography is suboptimal or not 
feasible.
The majority of cardiac malignancy is metastatic which is about 
twentyfold more common than primary cardiac malignancies. 
Metastasis to the heart can be the result of direct invasion (e.g., lung 
and breast), lymphatic spread (e.g., lymphomas and melanomas), or 
hematogenous spread (e.g., renal cell carcinoma). Primary benign car-
diac tumors are seen mostly in children and young adults and include 
atrial myxoma, rhabdomyoma, fibroma, and endocardial fibroelastoma 
(Fig. 236-35). Atrial myxomas are often seen as a round or multilobar 
mass in the left atrium (75%), right atrium (20%), or ventricles or 
mixed chambers (5%). They typically have inhomogeneous bright-
ness in the center on cine steady-state free precession imaging due to 
their gelatinous contents and may have a pedunculated attachment 
to the fossa ovalis. Primary malignant cardiac tumors are rare and 
may include angiosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and 
liposarcoma.
■
■ROLE OF IMAGING IN INFECTIOUS AND 
INFLAMMATORY DISEASE
Patients with suspected endocarditis often undergo echocardiography 
for the purpose of identifying vegetations or intramyocardial abscesses. 
Vegetations are generally highly mobile structures that most typically 
are attached to valves or present in areas of the heart with turbulent 
flow. The absence of a vegetation on echocardiography does not rule 
out endocarditis, because small vegetations below the resolution of the 
imaging techniques can be present. Echocardiography remains the best 
technique for assessment of vegetations because its high temporal res-
olution allows visualization of the typical oscillating motion, although 
large vegetations can be visualized with other techniques (Fig. 236-36). 
The size and location of a vegetation do not necessarily provide any 
specific information about the type of infection. Abscesses, particu-
larly around the aortic and mitral annuli, are particularly concerning 
in patients with endocarditis and should be suspected in patients 
with prolongation of cardiac intervals in the setting of endocarditis. 
Visualization of both vegetations and possible abscesses is best done 
with transesophageal echocardiography, particularly in patients with 
prosthetic valves. Indeed, transesophageal echocardiography is the 
first test of choice in a patient with a mechanical mitral or aortic valve 
and suspected endocarditis (Fig. 236-36). Vegetations should be mea-
sured because their size has prognostic importance and can be used to 
decide whether a patient should be taken to surgery.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1706
LA
LV
LA
LV
FIGURE 236-36  Vegetation on native mitral valve (left panel, arrow). Left atrium (LA) and left ventricle (LV) are indicated. Middle panel shows a vegetation on a 
mechanical prosthesis (St. Jude) indicated by an arrow; right panel shows vegetation on prosthesis after excision.
CT
Before
treatment
After
treatment
FDG PET
PET/CT fusion
L
A
P
R
FIGURE 236-37  Representative cross-sectional computed tomography (CT; left), fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET; middle), and 
fused CT and PET (right) images before and after antibiotic treatment in a patient with fever and suspected infection of the stent placed in the descending portion 
of the aortic arch (arrow) for treatment of aortic coarctation. The FDG images before treatment demonstrate intense glucose uptake within the stent, consistent with 
inflammation/infection. The lower panel demonstrates significant attenuation of the FDG signal after treatment. (Images used with permission from Dr. Sharmila Dorbala, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital.)
*
FIGURE 236-35  A case of a cardiac fibroma. A patient presented with shortness of breath and was found to have a large myocardial mass on echocardiography. 
Cine cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the large myocardial mass involving the anterolateral wall. Shortly after gadolinium contrast was injected, the 
myocardial mass demonstrated intense accumulation of contrast on LGE imaging (right panel, asterisk). This is a case of cardiac fibroma. The patient also has gingival 
hyperplasia and bifid thoracic ribs, a part of the rare Gorlin’s syndrome.
CHAPTER 236 Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging: Echocardiography, Nuclear Cardiology, and Magnetic Resonance/Computed Tomography Imaging
1707
CTA
PET
PET/CT fusion
Ao
Ao
LV
LV
Ao
LV
FIGURE 236-38  Representative coronal computed tomography (CT) angiographic (CTA; left panel), fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET; 
middle panel), and fused CT and PET (right panel) images in a patient with suspected aortitis. The CTA images demonstrate thickening of the ascending aorta (Ao), 
which correlates with intense, focal FDG uptake consistent with active inflammation. LV, left ventricle.
FIGURE 236-39  Large secundum-type atrial septal defect (arrow) noted in the subcostal view with color flow Doppler showing flow through the defect (right).
PET metabolic imaging is emerging as a potentially useful imaging 
technique to identify the source of infection in patients with prosthetic 
valves, vascular grafts, and implantable pacemakers/defibrillators, 
especially in patients in whom echocardiography and/or blood 
cultures are negative. There is an emerging literature documenting 
the potential value of macrophage-targeted metabolic imaging with 
18F-FDG and PET (Fig. 236-37). Likewise, FDG PET is also useful to 
identify vascular inflammation and monitor the response to immuno-
suppressive therapy (Fig. 236-38).
■
■EVALUATION OF COMMON CONGENITAL 
ABNORMALITIES IN THE ADULT
While a discussion of complex congenital heart disease is beyond the 
scope of this chapter, several common congenital abnormalities are 
present in adults, and cardiac imaging is essential to diagnosing and 
managing these conditions. Abnormalities of the interatrial septum 
probably represent the most common adult congenital cardiac abnor-
malities. Patent foramen ovale (PFO) can be identified in almost 25% 
of patients. In patients with PFO, a one-way flap in the region of the 
fossa ovalis is normally kept close by the left atrial pressure, which 
is generally higher than right atrial pressure for much of the cardiac 
cycle. However, right-to-left flow through a PFO can occur any time 
the right atrial pressure exceeds the left atrial pressure, including with 
maneuvers or conditions in which intrathoracic pressure is increased. 
The presence of a PFO can increase the likelihood of the paradoxical 
embolus, and thus the presence of a PFO should be determined in 
patients with stroke or systemic embolus of unknown etiology. Because 
the one-way flap of the PFO will be closed during much of the cardiac 
cycle, color flow Doppler will usually not reveal a PFO. Instead, agi-
tated saline (bubble study) is the best way to assess for PFO or atrial 
septal defect. Saline is agitated and injected peripherally and then 
enters the right atrium. If no shunt is present, only the right side of 
the heart will be pacified because the air bubbles will be too small to 
traverse the lungs. Because PFO is a one-way flap, maneuvers should 
be used to temporarily increase right atrial pressure. Either a Valsalva 
maneuver or sniff maneuver can be effective.
Atrial septal defects occur most commonly in the region of the fossa 
ovalis, referred to as secundum-type defects (Fig. 236-39). Additional 
atrial septal defects include defects of the sinus venosus and atrium 
primum. Color flow Doppler echocardiography is usually sufficient for 
diagnosis of a secundum-type atrial septal defect, but agitated saline 
is generally needed for the diagnosis of other types of atrial septal 
defects.
Ventricular septal defects can generally be visualized by color flow 
Doppler as turbulent high-velocity jets from the left to the right ventri-
cle. In cases where the jet origin is unclear, continuous wave Doppler 
can estimate the velocities. These would be expected to be extremely 
high to reflect the pressure gradient between the left and right ventri-
cles. Defects can occur in both the muscular and membranous portions 
of the ventricular septum.
In patients with either atrial or ventricular septal defects, estima-
tion of the severity of the left-to-right shunt is essential and can be an 
important determinant in management decisions. Shunts are generally 
assessed by echocardiography by assessing the relationship between 
pulmonary flow and aortic flow, the Qp/Qs ratio. Shunts and cardiac 
anatomy of most congenital heart diseases can also be accurately eval-
uated by CMR (Fig. 236-40).
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1708
■
■FURTHER READING
Di Carli MF et al: The future of cardiovascular imaging. Circulation 
133:2640, 2016.
Johnson NP et al: Invasive FFR and noninvasive CFR in the evaluation 
of ischemia: What is the future? J Am Coll Cardiol 67:2772, 2016.
Naoum C et al: Cardiac computed tomography and magnetic reso-
nance imaging in the evaluation of mitral and tricuspid valve disease: 
Implications for transcatheter interventions. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 
10:pii: e005331, 2017.
Solomon SD et al: Essential Echocardiography, a Companion to 
Braunwald’s Heart Disease, Elsevier, 2018.
Steel KE, Kwong RY: Application of cardiac magnetic resonance imag-
ing in cardiomyopathy. Curr Heart Fail Rep 5:128, 2008.
Vandoorne K, Nahrendorf M: Multiparametric imaging of organ 
system interfaces. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 10:pii: e005613, 2017.
VIDEO 236-4  The VIDEO shows cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) myocardial 
perfusion imaging during vasodilating stress, in three parallel-short-axis views. 
A bolus of gadolinium contrast was injected intravenously while rapid imaging 
acquisition occurred. The contrast enhances the right ventricle first, then travels 
through the pulmonary circulation, enters the left ventricle (LV), and then perfuses 
the LV myocardium. Myocardial perfusion defects with this technique show as 
black subendocardial rims, reflecting lack of contrast accumulation due to 
ischemia and/or scar. In this case, the anterior wall has a severe perfusion defect 
(red arrow). Figure 236-14 shows the late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) image 
of a mid short-axis view. There is no evidence of infarction in the anterior wall, 
which would be seen as bright white areas, indicating that the stress perfusion 
defect primarily represents myocardial ischemia. This patient had a significant 
stenosis of the left anterior descending coronary artery.
VIDEO 236-3  Exercise echocardiogram showing rest images on left and 
poststress images on right, with parasternal long-axis, upper panel, and apical 
four-chamber, lower panel, end-systolic frames. Following exercise, the distal 
septal/apical region becomes akinetic. A = upper left (UL); B = upper right (UR); 
C = lower left (LL); D = lower right (LR).
VIDEO 236-1  Cine steady-state free precession (SSFP) imaging (left) in short 
axis in a patient who had a large anterior myocardial infarction. Only one cut of 
a stack of short axis is shown. This method allows quantification of left ventricular 
(LV) and right ventricular (RV) volumes in diastole and systole and calculation 
of the LV ejection fraction, stroke volumes, and cardiac output (a product of 
LV stroke volume and heart rate). Note that in this case there is anterior and 
anteroseptal akinesia (lack of systolic wall thickening, as shown by the left cine 
movie, red arrows) matching by a near-transmural myocardial infarction as seen 
by the matching late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) image (right picture, white 
arrows).
VIDEO 236-2  This is cine cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging of a 
patient in the long-axis four-chamber view. Note that the basal aspect of the 
right ventricular (RV) free wall is thickened, aneurysmal, and akinetic (red arrows). 
The global RV systolic function is mildly reduced, and the RV is dilated. CMR can 
image the RV using tomographic views and can quantify the RV volumes and 
ejection fraction volumetrically. This is a patient who presented with syncopal 
spells and inducible ventricular tachycardia on subsequent workup. He was 
diagnosed to have arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia.
0
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
ms 0
10
20
30
40
50
Flow volume
A
B
C
60
70
80
Main pulmonary artery
Ascending aorta
90
100
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
950
Time |ms|
FIGURE 236-40  A and B are phase contrast images that display blood flow (phase images on A) and anatomy (structural images on B) of the aorta (red) and pulmonary 
artery (green). C demonstrates the flow curves of the aorta (red) and the pulmonary artery (green). Note that the total flow (area under the curve) was substantially 
higher in the pulmonary artery than the aorta, indicative of a marked elevated pulmonary-to-systemic shunt ratio, as a result of the partial anomalous pulmonary venous 
return that drained into the superior vena cava.
CHAPTER 237 Diagnostic Cardiac Catheterization and Coronary Angiography
1709
VIDEO 236-8  This video shows the heart in long and short axis. Note the large 
atria, thickened pericardium, and extensive pericardial adhesions. Given the 
extensive pericardial adhesions, there is little shearing motion of the ventricles 
against the parietal pericardium.
VIDEO 236-7  These are T2* images of the heart (left panel) and the liver (right 
panel) of a patient who has hemochromatosis. Note that iron and the liver are 
markedly darkened in these movies, indicating high load of iron in the heart 
muscle and liver. The rate of signal reduction (decay) in the myocardium and 
liver can be calculated as T2* value expressed in milliseconds. In this case, 
the T2* was at 10 ms. T2* <20 ms in patients with cardiomyopathy has been 
shown to indicate iron toxicity as the etiology of the cardiomyopathy, and it carries 
prognostic valve for such patients at risk of cardiac iron toxicity.
VIDEO 236-6  A patient with severe aortic regurgitation quantified by cardiac 
magnetic resonance (CMR). Notice the dark flow jet during diastolic across the 
aortic valve. For quantitation of the aortic regurgitation severity, a cross-sectional 
cut was made just below the aortic valve, perpendicular to the aortic regurgitation 
jet, using phase contrast flow imaging. Apart from aortic regurgitation fraction and 
volume, CMR also can volumetrically quantify ventricular sizes and dimensions 
of the aorta, which are useful in monitoring patients with aortic valve diseases.
VIDEO 236-5  A 60-year-old female presented with intermittent chest pain of 
3 days in duration but was pain-free at the time of assessment in the emergency 
room. Admission electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated T-wave inversion 
in the anterior precordial lead, but cardiac enzymes were normal. A resting 
cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) study reviewed a large area of anteroseptal 
hypokinesia (left picture, region of hypokinesia shown by the red arrows), matching 
with a large resting perfusion defect (middle picture, perfusion defect shown by the 
blue arrows). Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging (right picture), however, 
did not show any enhancement to indicate any infarction in the anteroseptal wall, 
suggesting that the hypocontractile and hypoperfused anteroseptal wall was 
viable. Urgent coronary angiography demonstrated an acute thrombus in the 
mid left anterior descending coronary artery, which required coronary stenting. 
This case represents an example of acute coronary syndrome with hibernating 
but viable myocardium in the anteroseptal wall. The anteroseptal wall recovered 
contractile function when reassessed 6 months later.
237 Diagnostic Cardiac 
Catheterization and 
Coronary Angiography
Jane A. Leopold, David P. Faxon 
Diagnostic cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography are 
considered the gold standard in the assessment of the anatomy 
and physiology of the heart and its associated vasculature. In 1929, 
Forssmann demonstrated the feasibility of cardiac catheterization in 
humans when he passed a urological catheter from a vein in his arm 
to his right atrium and documented the catheter’s position in the heart 
by x-ray. In the 1940s, Cournand and Richards applied this technique 
to patients with cardiovascular disease to evaluate cardiac function. 
These three physicians were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1956. In 1958, 
Sones inadvertently performed the first selective coronary angiogra-
phy when a catheter in the left ventricle slipped back across the aortic 
valve, engaged the right coronary artery, and power-injected 40 mL of 
contrast down the vessel. The resulting angiogram provided superb 
anatomic detail of the artery, and the patient suffered no adverse 
effects. Sones went on to develop selective coronary catheters, which 
were modified further by Judkins, who developed preformed catheters 
and allowed coronary artery angiography to gain widespread use as 
a diagnostic tool. In the United States, cardiac catheterization is the 
second most common operative procedure, with more than 1.5 million 
procedures performed annually.
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION
■
■INDICATIONS, RISKS, AND PREPROCEDURE 
MANAGEMENT
Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography are indicated to eval-
uate the extent and severity of cardiac disease in symptomatic patients 
and to determine if medical, surgical, or catheter-based interventions 
are warranted (Table 237-1). They are also used to exclude severe dis-
ease in symptomatic patients with equivocal findings on noninvasive 
studies and in patients with chest-pain syndromes of unclear etiology 
for whom a definitive diagnosis is necessary for management. Cardiac 
catheterization is not mandatory prior to cardiac surgery in some 
younger patients who have congenital or valvular heart disease that is 
well defined by noninvasive imaging, and who do not have symptoms 
or risk factors that suggest concomitant coronary artery disease.
The risks associated with elective cardiac catheterization are rel-
atively low, with a reported risk of <0.1% for myocardial infarction, 
TABLE 237-1  Indications for Cardiac Catheterization and Coronary 
Angiography
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
Asymptomatic or Symptomatic
High risk for adverse outcome based on noninvasive testing
Sudden cardiac death
Sustained (>30 s) monomorphic ventricular tachycardia
Nonsustained (<30 s) polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
Symptomatic
Canadian Cardiology Society Class II, III, or IV stable angina on medical 
therapy
Acute coronary syndrome (unstable angina and non-ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction)
Chest-pain syndrome of unclear etiology and equivocal findings on noninvasive 
tests
ST-Segment Elevation Acute Myocardial Infarction
Reperfusion with primary percutaneous coronary intervention
Persistent or recurrent ischemia
Pulmonary edema and/or reduced ejection fraction
Cardiogenic shock or hemodynamic instability
Risk stratification or positive stress test after acute myocardial infarction
Mechanical complications—mitral regurgitation, ventricular septal defect
Valvular Heart Disease
Suspected severe valve disease in symptomatic patients—dyspnea, angina, 
heart failure, syncope
Infective endocarditis with need for cardiac surgery
Asymptomatic patients with aortic regurgitation and cardiac enlargement or  
↓ ejection fraction
Prior to cardiac surgery in patients with suspected coronary artery disease
Congestive Heart Failure
New onset with angina or suspected undiagnosed coronary artery disease
New-onset cardiomyopathy of uncertain cause or suspected to be due to 
coronary artery disease
Congenital Heart Disease
Prior to surgical correction, when symptoms or noninvasive testing suggests 
coronary disease
Suspicion for congenital coronary anomalies
Pericardial Disease
Symptomatic patients with suspected cardiac tamponade or constrictive 
pericarditis
Cardiac Transplantation
Preoperative and postsurgical evaluation
Other Conditions
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with angina
Diseases of the aorta when knowledge of coronary artery involvement is 
necessary for management
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1710 0.01% for stroke, and 0.1% for death. These risks increase substantially 
if the catheterization is performed emergently, during acute myocardial 
infarction or in hemodynamically unstable patients. Additional risks of 
the procedure include tachy- or bradyarrhythmias that require counter-
shock or pharmacologic therapy, acute renal failure leading to transient 
or permanent dialysis, vascular complications that necessitate surgical 
repair or percutaneous intervention, and significant access-site bleed-
ing. Of these risks, vascular access-site bleeding is the most common 
complication, occurring in 1.5–2.0% of patients, with major bleeding 
events associated with a worse short- and long-term outcome.
In patients who understand and accept the risks associated with 
cardiac catheterization, there are no absolute contraindications when 
the procedure is performed in anticipation of a life-saving interven-
tion. Relative contraindications do, however, exist; these include 
decompensated congestive heart failure; acute renal failure; severe 
chronic renal insufficiency, unless dialysis is planned; bacteremia; 
acute stroke; active gastrointestinal bleeding; excessive anticoagu-
lation or recent lytic administration, severe, uncorrected electrolyte 
abnormalities; a history of an anaphylactic/anaphylactoid reaction 
to iodinated contrast agents; and a history of allergy/anaphylaxis/
bronchospasm to aspirin in patients for whom progression to a percu-
taneous coronary intervention is likely and aspirin desensitization has 
not been performed.
Contrast allergy and contrast-induced acute kidney injury merit 
further consideration, because these adverse events may occur in oth-
erwise healthy individuals and prophylactic measures exist to reduce 
risk. Allergic reactions to contrast agents occur in <5% of cases, with 
severe anaphylactoid (clinically indistinguishable from anaphylaxis, 
but not mediated by an IgE mechanism) reactions occurring in 0.1–0.2% 
of patients. Mild reactions manifest as nausea, vomiting, and urticaria, 
while severe anaphylactoid reactions lead to hypotensive shock, pul-
monary edema, and cardiorespiratory arrest. Patients with a history 
of significant contrast allergy should be premedicated for at least 
24 hours prior to planned coronary angiography with corticosteroids 
and antihistamines (H1- and H2-blockers) and studies performed with 
nonionic, low-osmolar contrast agents that have a lower reported rate 
of allergic reactions.
Contrast-induced acute kidney injury, defined as an increase in 
creatinine >0.5 mg/dL or 25% above baseline that occurs 48–72 h after 
contrast administration, occurs in ~2–7% of patients with rates of 
20–30% reported in high-risk patients, including those with diabetes 
mellitus, congestive heart failure, chronic kidney disease, anemia, and 
older age. Dialysis is required in 0.3–0.7% of patients and is associated 
with a fivefold increase in in-hospital mortality. For all patients, ade-
quate intravascular volume expansion with intravenous 0.9% saline 
(1.0–1.5 mL/kg per hour) for 3–12 h before and continued 6–24 h after 
the procedure limits the risk of contrast-induced acute kidney injury. 
Pretreatment with N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) has not reduced the 
risk of contrast-induced acute kidney injury consistently and, there-
fore, is no longer recommended routinely. Diabetic patients treated 
with metformin should stop the drug 24 hours prior to the procedure 
and not restart until 48 hours after contrast administration to limit 
the associated risk of lactic acidosis. Other strategies to decrease risk 
include the administration of sodium bicarbonate (3 mL/kg per hour) 
1 hour before and 6 hours after the procedure; use of low- or iso-osmolar 
contrast agents; and limiting the volume of contrast to <50 mL per 
procedure.
Cardiac catheterization is performed after the patient has fasted for 
6 h and has received intravenous conscious sedation to remain awake 
but sedated during the procedure. All patients with suspected coronary 
artery disease are pretreated with 325 mg aspirin. In patients in whom 
the procedure is likely to progress to a percutaneous coronary inter-
vention, an additional antiplatelet agent should be started: clopidogrel 
(600-mg loading dose and 75 mg daily) or prasugrel (60-mg loading 
dose and 10 mg daily), or ticagrelor (180-mg loading and 90 mg twice 
daily). Prasugrel should not be selected for individuals with prior 
stroke or transient ischemic attack. Warfarin is held starting 2–3 days 
prior to the catheterization to allow the international normalized ratio 
(INR) to fall to <1.7 and limit access-site bleeding complications. The 
novel oral anticoagulants should be stopped 24–48 h prior to the test. 
Cardiac catheterization is a sterile procedure, so antibiotic prophylaxis 
is not required.
■
■TECHNIQUE
Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography provide a detailed 
hemodynamic and anatomic assessment of the heart and coronary 
arteries. The selection of procedures is dependent on the patient’s 
symptoms and clinical condition, with some direction provided by 
noninvasive studies.
Vascular Access 
Cardiac catheterization procedures are per-
formed using a percutaneous technique to enter the femoral or radial 
artery and femoral, brachial, or internal jugular vein as the access sites 
for left and right heart catheterization, respectively. A flexible sheath is 
inserted into the vessel over a guidewire, allowing diagnostic catheters 
to be introduced into the vessel and advanced toward the heart using 
fluoroscopic guidance. The radial artery (or rarely the brachial artery) 
access site is advantageous in patients with peripheral arterial disease 
that involves the abdominal aorta, iliac, or femoral vessels; severe iliac 
artery tortuosity; morbid obesity; or preference for early postproce-
dure ambulation. Use of radial-artery access is also gaining popularity 
due to a lower rate of access-site bleeding complications. A normal 
modified Allen’s test or Barbeau test confirming dual blood supply 
to the hand from the radial and ulnar arteries is recommended prior 
to access at this site. The internal jugular or antecubital veins serve 
as the preferred access sites to the right heart when the patient has an 
inferior vena cava filter in place or requires prolonged hemodynamic 
monitoring.
Right Heart Catheterization  This procedure measures pres-
sures in the right heart and pulmonary artery. Right heart catheteri-
zation is no longer a routine part of diagnostic cardiac catheterization, 
but it is reasonable in patients with unexplained dyspnea, pulmonary 
hypertension, valvular heart disease, pericardial disease, right and/or 
left ventricular dysfunction, congenital heart disease, and suspected 
intracardiac shunts. Right heart catheterization most commonly uses 
a balloon-tipped flotation catheter that is advanced sequentially to the 
right atrium, right ventricle, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary wedge 
position (as a surrogate for left atrial pressure) using fluoroscopic guid-
ance; in each cardiac chamber, pressure is measured and blood samples 
are obtained for oxygen saturation analysis to screen for intracardiac 
shunts and calculate a cardiac output.
Left Heart Catheterization  This procedure measures pressures 
in the left heart as a determinant of left ventricular performance. With 
the aid of fluoroscopy, a catheter is guided to the ascending aorta and 
across the aortic valve into the left ventricle to provide a direct measure 
of left ventricular pressure. In patients with a tilting-disc prosthetic 
aortic valve, crossing the valve with a catheter is contraindicated, and 
the left heart may be accessed via a transseptal technique from the right 
atrium using a needle-tipped catheter to puncture the atrial septum 
at the fossa ovalis. Once the catheter crosses from the right to the left 
atrium, it can be advanced across the mitral valve to the left ventricle. 
This technique is also used for mitral valvuloplasty. Heparin is given 
for prolonged procedures to limit the risk of stroke from embolism 
of clots that may form on the catheter. For patients with heparin- 
induced thrombocytopenia, the direct thrombin inhibitors bivalirudin 
(0.75 mg/kg bolus, 1.75 mg/kg per hour for the duration of the proce-
dure) or argatroban (350 μg/kg bolus, 15 μg/kg per min for the dura-
tion of the procedure) may be used.
■
■HEMODYNAMICS
A comprehensive hemodynamic assessment involves obtaining pres-
sure measurements in the right and left heart and peripheral arte-
rial system and determining the cardiac output (Table 237-2). The 
shape and magnitude of the pressure waveforms provide important 
CHAPTER 237 Diagnostic Cardiac Catheterization and Coronary Angiography
1711
TABLE 237-2  Normal Values for Hemodynamic Measurements
Pressures (mmHg)
Right atrium
 
  Mean
0–5
  a wave
1–7
  v wave
1–7
Right ventricle
 
  Peak systolic/end diastolic
17–32/1–7
Pulmonary artery
 
  Peak systolic/end diastolic
17–32/1–7
  Mean
9–19
Pulmonary capillary wedge (mean)
4–12
Left atrium
 
  Mean
4–12
  a wave
4–15
  v wave
4–15
Left ventricle
 
  Peak systolic/end diastolic
90–130/5–12
Aorta
 
  Peak systolic/end diastolic
90–130/60–85
  Mean
70–100
(Resistances [dyn-s]/cm5)
  Systemic vascular resistance
900–1400
  Pulmonary vascular resistance
40–120
Oxygen Consumption Index ([L-min]/m2)
115–140
  Arteriovenous oxygen difference (vol %)
3.5–4.8
  Cardiac index ([L-min]/m2)
2.8–4.2
mmHg
0
25
50
ECG
RA
RV
PA
PCWP
FIGURE 237-1  Normal hemodynamic waveforms recorded during right heart catheterization. Atrial pressure 
tracings have a characteristic “a” wave that reflects atrial contraction and a “v” wave that reflects pressure 
changes in the atrium during ventricular systole. Ventricular pressure tracings have a low-pressure diastolic filling 
period and a sharp rise in pressure that occurs during ventricular systole. d, diastole; PA, pulmonary artery; 
PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; s, systole.
diagnostic information; an example of normal pressure tracings is 
shown in Fig. 237-1. In the absence of valvular heart disease, the atria 
and ventricles are “one chamber” during diastole when the tricuspid 
and mitral valves are open while in systole, when the pulmonary and 
aortic valves are open, the ventricles and their respective outflow 
tracts are considered “one chamber.” These concepts form the basis by 
which hemodynamic measurements are used to assess valvular steno-
sis. When aortic stenosis is present, there is a systolic pressure gradient 
between the left ventricle and the aorta; when mitral stenosis is present, 
there is a diastolic pressure gradient between the pulmonary capillary 
wedge (left atrial) pressure and the left ventricle (Fig. 237-2). Hemo-
dynamic measurements also discriminate between aortic stenosis and 
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy where the asymmetrically 
hypertrophied septum creates a dynamic intraventricular pressure gra-
dient during ventricular systole. The magnitude of this obstruction is 
measured using an end-hole catheter positioned at the left ventricular 
apex that is pulled back while recording pressure; once the catheter has 
passed the septal obstruction and is positioned in the apex of the left 
ventricle, a gradient can be measured between the left ventricular apex 
and the aorta. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy is confirmed 
by the Brockenbrough-Braunwald sign: following a premature ventric-
ular contraction, there is an increase in the left ventricular–aorta pres-
sure gradient with a simultaneous decrease in the aortic pulse pressure. 
The finding of a decrease in pulse pressure is absent in aortic stenosis.
Regurgitant valvular lesions increase volume (and pressure) in the 
“receiving” cardiac chamber. In severe mitral and tricuspid regurgita-
tion, the increase in blood flow to the atria takes place during ventricu-
lar systole, leading to an increase in the v wave (often two times greater 
than the mean pressure). Severe aortic regurgitation leads to a decrease 
in aortic diastolic pressure with a concomitant rise in left ventricular end- 
diastolic pressure, resulting in equalization of pressures between the 
two chambers at end-diastole.
Hemodynamic measurements are also used to differentiate between 
cardiac tamponade, constrictive pericarditis, and restrictive cardio-
myopathy (Table 237-3). In cardiac tamponade, right atrial pressure 
is increased with a decreased or absent “y” descent, indicative of 
impaired right atrial emptying in diastole, and there is diastolic equal-
ization of pressures in all cardiac chambers. In constrictive pericarditis, 
right atrial pressure is elevated with a prominent “y” descent, indicat-
ing rapid filling of the right ventricle during early diastole. A diastolic 
dip and plateau or “square root sign,” in the ventricular waveforms 
due to an abrupt halt in ventricular filling during diastole; right ven-
tricular and pulmonary artery pressures are elevated; and discordant 
pressure changes in the right and left ventricles with inspiration (right 
ventricular systolic pressure increases while left ventricular systolic 
pressure decreases) are observed. The latter 
hemodynamic phenomenon is the most 
specific for constriction. Restrictive cardio-
myopathy may be distinguished from con-
strictive pericarditis by a marked increase 
in right ventricular and pulmonary artery 
systolic pressures (usually >60 mmHg), a 
separation of the left and right ventricular 
diastolic pressures by >5 mmHg (at baseline 
or with acute volume loading), and concor-
dant changes in left and right ventricular 
diastolic filling pressures with inspiration 
(both increase).
Cardiac Output 
Cardiac output is 
measured by the Fick method or the ther-
modilution technique. Typically, the Fick 
method and thermodilution technique are 
both performed during cardiac catheteri-
zation, although the Fick method is con-
sidered more reliable in the presence of 
tricuspid regurgitation and in low-output 
states. The Fick method uses oxygen as 
the indicator substance and is based on the 
principle that the amount of a substance 
taken up or released by an organ (oxygen 
consumption) is equal to the product of its 
blood flow (cardiac output) and the differ-
ence in the concentration of the substance in 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1712
TABLE 237-3  Hemodynamic Findings in Tamponade, Constrictive Pericarditis, and Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
 
CARDIAC TAMPONADE
CONSTRICTIVE PERICARDITIS
EFFUSIVE-CONSTRICTIVE 
PERICARDITIS
RESTRICTIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY
Pericardial pressure
↑
↑
↑
Normal
Right atrium pressure
↑
↑
↑ (Fails to decrease by 
50% or to <10 mmHg after 
pericardiocentesis)
↑
Right atrium pressure 
waveform
 
Prominent “x” descent
Diminished or absent “y” 
descent
Prominent “x” descent
Prominent “y” descent
Prominent “x” descent
“y” descent less prominent 
than expected
Prominent “y” descent
 
Right ventricle systolic 
pressure
<50 mmHg
<50 mmHg
<50 mmHg
>60 mmHg
Right ventricle end-
diastolic pressure
 
>1/3 right ventricular systolic 
pressure
>1/3 right ventricular systolic 
pressure
<1/3 right ventricular systolic 
pressure
 
Equals left ventricular end-
diastolic pressure within  
5 mmHg
Equals left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure within 5 mmHg
Equals left ventricular end-
diastolic pressure within  
5 mmHg
Less than left ventricular end-
diastolic pressure by ≥5 mmHg
Right ventricle 
pressure waveform
 
Dip and plateau or “square root” sign
Dip and plateau or “square 
root” sign
Dip and plateau or “square root” 
sign
Right ventricle–left 
ventricle systolic 
pressure relationship 
with inspiration
Discordant
Discordant
Discordant
Concordant
mmHg
0
100
mmHg
0
200
50
 25
ECG
ECG
LV
Ao
Aortic
gradient
LV
PCW
Mitral
gradient
FIGURE 237-2  Severe aortic and mitral stenosis. Simultaneous recording of left ventricular (LV) 
and aortic (Ao) pressure tracings demonstrates a 62-mmHg mean systolic gradient (shaded area) 
that corresponds to an aortic valve area of 0.6 cm2 (left). Simultaneous recording of LV and 
pulmonary capillary wedge (PCW) pressure tracings reveals a 14-mmHg mean diastolic gradient 
(shaded area) that is consistent with critical mitral stenosis (mitral valve area = 0.5 cm2). 
d, diastole; e, end diastole; s, systole.
the arterial and venous circulation (arterial-venous oxygen difference). 
Thus, the formula for calculating the Fick cardiac output is: 
Cardiac output (L/min) = (oxygen consumption  
[mL/min])/(arterial-venous oxygen difference [mL/L])
Oxygen consumption is estimated as 125 mL oxygen/minute × body 
surface area, and the arterial-venous oxygen difference is determined 
by first calculating the oxygen carrying capacity of blood (hemoglobin 
[g/100 mL] × 1.36 [mL oxygen/g hemoglobin] × 10) and multiplying 
this product by the fractional oxygen saturation. The thermodilution 
method measures a substance that is injected into and adequately 
mixes with blood. In contemporary practice, thermodilution cardiac 
outputs are measured using temperature as the indicator. Measure-
ments are made with a thermistor-tipped catheter that detects temper-
ature deviations in the pulmonary artery after the injection of 10 mL of 
room-temperature normal saline into the right atrium.
Vascular Resistance  Resistance across the sys-
temic and pulmonary circulations is calculated by 
extrapolating from Ohm’s law of electrical resistance 
and is equal to the mean pressure gradient divided by 
the mean flow (cardiac output). Therefore, systemic 
vascular resistance is ([mean aortic pressure − mean 
right atrial pressure]/cardiac output) multiplied by 80 
to convert the resistance from Wood units to dyn-s-cm−5. 
Similarly, the pulmonary vascular resistance is ([mean 
pulmonary artery − mean pulmonary capillary wedge 
pressure]/cardiac output) × 80. Pulmonary vascular 
resistance is lowered by oxygen, nitroprusside, calcium 
channel blockers, prostacyclin infusions, and inhaled 
nitric oxide; these therapies may be administered during 
catheterization to determine if increased pulmonary 
vascular resistance is fixed or reversible.
Valve Area  Hemodynamic data may also be used 
to calculate the valve area using the Gorlin formula 
that equates the area to the flow across the valve 
divided by the pressure gradient between the cardiac 
chambers surrounding the valve. The formula for the 
assessment of valve area is: Area = (cardiac output 
[cm3/min]/[systolic ejection period or diastolic fill-
ing period][heart rate])/44.3 C × square root of the 
pressure gradient, where C = 1 for aortic valve and 
0.85 for the mitral valve. A valve area of <1.0 cm2 
and a mean gradient of >40 mmHg indicate severe 
aortic stenosis, while a valve area of <1.5 cm2 and 
a mean gradient >5–10 mmHg are consistent with moderate-to- 
severe mitral stenosis; in symptomatic patients with a mitral valve 
area >1.5 cm2, a mean gradient >15 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure 
>60 mmHg, or a pulmonary artery wedge pressure >25 mmHg after 
exercise is also considered significant and may warrant intervention. 
The modified Hakki formula has also been used to estimate aortic 
valve area. This formula calculates the valve area as the cardiac output 
(L/min) divided by the square root of the pressure gradient. Aor-
tic valve area calculations based on the Gorlin formula are flow- 
dependent and, therefore, for patients with low cardiac outputs, it is 
imperative to determine if a decreased valve area actually reflects a 
fixed stenosis or is overestimated by a low cardiac output and stroke 
volume that is insufficient to open the valve leaflets fully. In these 
instances, cautious hemodynamic manipulation using dobutamine to 
increase the cardiac output and recalculation of the aortic valve area 
may be necessary.
CHAPTER 237 Diagnostic Cardiac Catheterization and Coronary Angiography
1713
DIASTOLE
SYSTOLE
FIGURE 237-3  Left ventriculogram at end diastole (left) and end systole (right). In patients with normal left 
ventricular function, the ventriculogram reveals symmetric contraction of all walls (top). Patients with coronary artery 
disease may have wall motion abnormalities on ventriculography as seen in this 60-year-old male following a large 
anterior myocardial infarction. In systole, the anterior, apical, and inferior walls are akinetic (white arrows) (bottom).
*
DIASTOLE
SYSTOLE
FIGURE 237-4  Cinefluoroscopic detection of mechanical valve leaflet 
dysfunction. Images of a bileaflet mechanical valve in the aortic position taken 
during diastole (left) and systole (right) show that one leaflet opens normally 
during systole while the other leaflet (below asterisk) remains immobile and fixed 
consistent with valve leaflet thrombosis.
Intracardiac Shunts  In patients with congenital heart disease, 
detection, localization, and quantification of the intracardiac shunt 
should be evaluated. A shunt should be suspected when there is 
unexplained arterial desaturation or increased oxygen saturation of 
venous blood. A “step up” or increase in oxygen content indicates the 
presence of a left-to-right shunt while a “step down” indicates a right-
to-left shunt. The shunt is localized by detecting a difference in oxygen 
saturation levels of 5–7% between adjacent cardiac chambers. The 
severity of the shunt is determined by the ratio of pulmonary blood 
flow (Qp) to the systemic blood flow (Qs), or Qp/Qs = ([systemic arterial 
oxygen content − mixed venous oxygen content]/pulmonary vein oxy-
gen content − pulmonary artery oxygen content). For an atrial septal 
defect, a shunt ratio of 1.5 is considered significant and factored with 
other clinical variables to determine the need for intervention. When a 
congenital ventricular septal defect is present, a shunt ratio of ≥2.0 with 
evidence of left ventricular volume overload is a strong indication for 
surgical correction.
■
■VENTRICULOGRAPHY AND AORTOGRAPHY
Ventriculography to assess left ventricular function may be performed 
during cardiac catheterization. A pigtail catheter is advanced retro-
grade across the aortic valve into the left ventricle and 30–45 mL of 
contrast is power-injected to visualize the left ventricular chamber 
during the cardiac cycle. The ventriculogram is usually performed in 
the right anterior oblique projection to examine wall motion and mitral 
valve function. Normal wall motion is observed as symmetric contrac-
tion of all segments; hypokinetic segments have decreased contraction, 
akinetic segments do not contract, and dyskinetic segments appear to 
bulge paradoxically during systole (Fig. 237-3). Ventriculography may 
also reveal a left ventricular aneurysm, pseudoaneurysm, or divertic-
ulum and can be used to assess mitral valve prolapse and the severity 
of mitral regurgitation. The degree of mitral regurgitation is estimated 
by comparing the density of contrast opacification of the left atrium 
with that of the left ventricle. Minimal 
contrast reflux into the left atrium is con-
sidered 1+ mitral regurgitation, while 
contrast density in the left atrium that 
is greater than that in the left ventricle 
with reflux of contrast into the pulmo-
nary veins within three beats defines 4+ 
mitral regurgitation. Ventriculography 
performed in the left anterior oblique 
projection can be used to identify a ven-
tricular septal defect. Calculation of the 
ventricular volumes in systole and dias-
tole allows calculation of stroke volume 
and cardiac output.
Aortography in the cardiac catheter-
ization laboratory visualizes abnormal-
ities of the ascending aorta, including 
aneurysmal dilation and involvement 
of the great vessels, as well as dissection 
with compression of the true lumen by 
an intimal flap that separates the true 
and false lumina. Aortography can also 
be used to identify patent saphenous 
vein grafts that elude selective cannu-
lation, identify shunts that involve the 
aorta such as a patent ductus arteriosus, 
and provide a qualitative assessment 
of aortic regurgitation using a 1+−4+ 
scale similar to that used for mitral 
regurgitation.
■
■CINEFLUOROSCOPY OF 
PROSTHETIC  
MECHANICAL VALVES
Prosthetic valve leaflet dysfunction may 
occur as a result of thrombus or obstruc-
tion of leaflet excursion by pannus (Fig. 237-4). The incidence of pros-
thetic valve thrombosis in left-sided valves is 0.1–6.0% per patient-year 
with differences in rates attributable to valve type, position, anticoagu-
lation status, and left ventricular function. Prosthetic valve dysfunction 
should be suspected in patients with subtherapeutic anticoagulation 
with a low mean International Normalized Ratio (INR), a prothrom-
botic state, recent onset heart failure, cardiogenic shock, cardiac arrest, 
thromboembolic event or, in asymptomatic patients, an increasing 
gradient across the valve. Cinefluoroscopy visualizes the motion of 
mechanical valve leaflets, and is noninvasive, available in most cen-
ters, and can be performed rapidly with minimal radiation exposure. 
Prosthetic mechanical valves should be imaged en face and at a 90° 
angle over several cardiac cycles to document opening and closing of 
the valve leaflets as well as motion of the base ring. Each type of pros-
thetic valve has leaflet opening and closing angles that are reported by 
the manufacturer and can be used to determine if movement or closure 
of the valve leaflets is restricted suggestive of mechanical obstruction.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1714
LAD
RCA
LCx
LAD
LM
A
B
C
OM
D
PDA
FIGURE 237-5  Normal coronary artery anatomy. A. Coronary angiogram showing the left circumflex (LCx) artery and its obtuse marginal (OM) branches. The left 
anterior descending (LAD) artery is also seen but may be foreshortened in this view. B. The LAD and its diagonal (D) branches are best seen in cranial views. In this 
angiogram, the left main (LM) coronary artery is also seen. C. The right coronary artery (RCA) gives off the posterior descending artery (PDA), so this is a right dominant 
circulation.
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 237-6  Coronary stenoses on cine angiogram and intravascular 
ultrasound. Significant stenoses in the coronary artery are seen as narrowings 
(black arrows) of the vessel. Intravascular ultrasound shows a normal segment 
of artery (A), areas with eccentric plaque (B, C), and near total obliteration of 
the lumen at the site of the significant stenosis (D). Note that the intravascular 
ultrasound catheter is present in the images as a black circle.
CORONARY ANGIOGRAPHY
Selective coronary angiography is almost always performed during 
cardiac catheterization and is used to define the coronary anatomy and 
determine the extent of epicardial coronary artery and coronary artery 
bypass graft disease. Specially shaped coronary catheters are used to 
engage the left and right coronary ostia. Hand injection of radiopaque 
contrast agents creates a coronary “luminogram” that is recorded as 
radiographic images (cine angiography). Because the coronary arter-
ies are three-dimensional objects that are in motion with the cardiac 
cycle, angiograms of the vessels using several different orthogonal 
projections are taken to best visualize the vessels without overlap or 
foreshortening.
The normal coronary anatomy is highly variable between individ-
uals, but, in general, there are two coronary ostia and three major 
coronary vessels—the left anterior descending, the left circumflex, 
and the right coronary arteries with the left anterior descending and 
left circumflex arteries arising from the left main coronary artery 
(Fig. 237-5). When the right coronary artery is the origin of the atri-
oventricular nodal branch, the posterior descending artery, and the 
posterior lateral vessels, the circulation is defined as right dominant; 
this is found in ~85% of individuals. When these branches arise from 
the left circumflex artery as occurs in ~5% of individuals, the circula-
tion is defined as left dominant. The remaining ~10% of patients have 
a codominant circulation with the posterior descending vessel arising 
from both the right coronary and the posterior lateral vessels from left 
coronary circulation. In some patients, a ramus intermedius branch 
arises directly from the left main coronary artery; this finding is a 
normal variant. Coronary artery anomalies occur in 1–2% of patients, 
with separate ostia for the left anterior descending and left circumflex 
arteries being the most common (0.41%).
Coronary angiography visualizes coronary artery stenoses as lumi-
nal narrowings on the cine angiogram. The degree of narrowing 
is referred to as the percent stenosis and is determined visually by 
comparing the most severely diseased segment with a proximal or 
distal “normal segment”; a stenosis >50% is considered significant 
(Fig. 237-6). Online quantitative coronary angiography can provide 
a more accurate assessment of the percent stenosis and lessen the 
tendency to overestimate lesion severity visually. The presence of a 
myocardial bridge, which most commonly involves the left anterior 
descending artery, may be mistaken for a significant stenosis; this 
occurs when a portion of the vessel dips below the epicardial surface 
into the myocardium and is subject to compressive forces during ven-
tricular systole. The key to differentiating a myocardial bridge from a 
fixed stenosis is that the “stenosed” part of the vessel returns to normal 
during diastole. Coronary calcification is also seen during angiography 
prior to the injection of contrast agents. Collateral blood vessels may be 
seen traversing from one vessel to the distal vasculature of a severely 
stenosed or totally occluded vessel. Thrombolysis in myocardial 
infarction (TIMI) flow grade, a measure of the relative duration of time 
that it takes for contrast to opacify the coronary artery fully, may pro-
vide an additional clue to the degree of lesion severity, and the presence 
of TIMI grade 1 (minimal filling) or 2 (delayed filling) suggests that a 
severe coronary artery stenosis is present.
■
■INTRAVASCULAR ULTRASOUND, OPTICAL 
COHERENCE TOMOGRAPHY, AND FRACTIONAL FLOW 
RESERVE
During coronary angiography, intermediate stenoses (40–70%), inde-
terminate findings, or anatomic findings that are incongruous with the 
patient’s symptoms may require further interrogation. In these cases, 
intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) provides a more accurate anatomic 
assessment of the coronary artery and the degree of coronary athero-
sclerosis (Fig. 237-6). IVUS is performed using a small flexible catheter 
CHAPTER 237 Diagnostic Cardiac Catheterization and Coronary Angiography
1715
Fibrous
A
B
C
D
E
Lipid plaque
Thrombus
Stent
FIGURE 237-7  Optical coherence tomography imaging. A. The optical coherence tomography (OCT) catheter (*) in the lumen of a coronary artery with limited 
neointima formation. The intima is seen with high definition, but unlike intravascular ultrasound imaging, the vessel media and adventitia are not well visualized. B. A 
fibrous plaque (arrow) is characterized by a bright signal. C. A large, eccentric, lipid-rich plaque obscures part of the vessel lumen. Because lipid in the plaque absorbs 
light, the lipid-rich plaque appears as a dark area with irregular borders (arrow). The plaque is covered by a thin fibrous cap (arrowhead) typical of a vulnerable plaque. 
D. A thrombus (arrow) adherent to a ruptured plaque that is protruding into the vessel lumen. E. A coronary stent is that is well opposed to the vessel wall. The stent 
struts appear as short bright lines with dropout behind the struts (arrow).
FIGURE 237-8.  Fractional flow reserve. The fractional flow reserve is measured using a coronary pressure-sensor guidewire that measures the ratio of the pressure in 
the coronary artery distal to the stenosis (Pd, green) divided by the pressure in the artery proximal to the stenosis (Pa, red) at maximal hyperemia following the injection 
of adenosine. A fractional flow reserve of <0.80 indicates that revascularization would be beneficial.
with a 40-mHz transducer at its tip that is advanced into the coronary 
artery over a guidewire. Data from IVUS studies may be used to image 
atherosclerotic plaque precisely, determine luminal cross-sectional 
area, and measure vessel size; it is also used during or following per-
cutaneous coronary intervention to assess the stenosis and determine 
the adequacy of stent placement. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) 
is a catheter-based imaging technique that uses near-infrared light 
to generate images with better spatial resolution than IVUS (12–18 
microns vs 150–200 microns); however, the depth of field is smaller. 
The advantage of OCT imaging over IVUS lies in its ability to image 
characteristics of the atherosclerotic plaque (lipid, fibrous cap) with 
high definition and to assess coronary stent placement, apposition, and 
patency (Fig. 237-7).
Measurement of the fractional flow reserve provides a functional 
assessment of the stenosis and is more accurate in predicting long-term 
clinical outcome than imaging techniques. The fractional flow reserve 
is the ratio of the pressure in the coronary artery distal to the stenosis 
divided by the pressure in the artery proximal to the stenosis at maxi-
mal vasodilation. Fractional flow reserve is measured using a coronary 
pressure–sensor guidewire at rest and at maximal hyperemia follow-
ing the injection of adenosine (Fig. 237-8). A fractional flow reserve 
of <0.80 indicates a hemodynamically significant stenosis that would 
benefit from intervention. Using both pressure and velocity, an index of 
myocardial resistance can also be calculated. Studies have shown this 
to be an important predictor of outcome as well.
■
■POSTPROCEDURE CARE
Once the procedure is completed, vascular access sheaths are removed. 
If the femoral approach is used, direct manual compression or vascu-
lar closure devices that immediately close the arteriotomy site with a 
staple/clip, collagen plug, or sutures are used to achieve hemostasis. 
These devices decrease the length of supine bed rest (from 6 hours to 
2–4 hours) and improve patient satisfaction, but have not been shown 
definitively to be superior to manual compression with respect to 
access-site complications. With radial-artery access, bed rest is needed 
for only 2 h. When cardiac catheterization is performed as an elective 
outpatient procedure, the patient completes postprocedure bed rest in 
a monitored setting and is discharged home with instructions to liberal-
ize fluids because contrast agents promote an osmotic diuresis, to avoid 
strenuous activity, and to observe the vascular access site for signs of 
complications. Overnight hospitalization may be required for high-risk 
patients with significant comorbidities, patients with complications 
occurring during the catheterization, or patients who have undergone 
a percutaneous coronary intervention. Hypotension early after the pro-
cedure may be due to inadequate fluid replacement or retroperitoneal 
bleeding from the access site. Patients who received >2 Gy of radiation 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1716 during the procedure should be examined for signs of erythema. For 
patients who received higher doses (>5 Gy), clinical follow-up within 1 
month to assess for skin injury is recommended.
■
■FURTHER READING
Bashore TM et al: 2012 American College of Cardiology Foundation/
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions expert 
consensus document on cardiac catheterization laboratory standards 
update: A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation 
Task Force on Expert Consensus documents developed in collabora-
tion with the Society of Thoracic Surgeons and Society for Vascular 
Medicine. J Am Coll Cardiol 59:2221, 2012.
Berry C et al: Fractional flow reserve-guided management in stable 
coronary disease and acute myocardial infarction: Recent develop-
ments. Eur Heart J 36:3155, 2015.
Bezerra HG et al: Intracoronary optical coherence tomography: A 
comprehensive review. JACC Cardiovasc Interv 2:1035, 2009.
Lim MJ et al (eds): Hemodynamic Rounds: Interpretation of Cardiac Patho-
physiology from Pressure Waveform Analysis, 3rd ed. Hoboken, John 
Wiley and Sons, 2009.
Maehara A et al: Advances in intravascular imaging: Circulation. Car-
diovasc Interv 2:482, 2009.
Moscucci M (ed): Grossman & Baim’s Cardiac Catheterization, Angiog-
raphy, and Intervention, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2014.
Section 3	
Disorders of Rhythm
■
■HISTORY AND INTRODUCTION
The field of cardiac electrophysiology was ushered in with the devel-
opment of the electrocardiogram (ECG) by Einthoven at the turn of 
the twentieth century. Subsequent recording of cellular membrane cur-
rents demonstrated that the body surface ECG is the timed sum of the 
cellular action potentials in the atria and ventricles. In the late 1960s, 
the development of intracavitary recording, in particular, His bundle 
electrograms, marked the beginning of contemporary clinical elec-
trophysiology. Adoption of radiofrequency (RF) technology to ablate 
cardiac tissue in the early 1990s heralded the birth of interventional 
cardiac electrophysiology.
The clinical problem of sudden death caused by ventricular arrhyth-
mias, most commonly in the setting of coronary artery obstruction, was 
recognized as early as the late nineteenth century. The problem was 
vexing and led to the development of pharmacologic and nonpharma-
cologic therapies, including transthoracic defibrillators, cardiac mas-
sage, and, most recently, implantable intravascular and subcutaneous 
defibrillators. Over time the limitations of antiarrhythmic drug therapy 
have been highlighted repeatedly in clinical trials, and now ablation 
and devices are first-line therapy for a number of cardiac arrhythmias.
In the last two decades, the genetic basis of a number of heritable 
arrhythmias has been elucidated, revealing important insights into 
the mechanisms not only of these rare arrhythmias but also of similar 
rhythm disturbances observed in more common forms of heart disease.
■
■DESCRIPTIVE PHYSIOLOGY
The normal cardiac impulse is generated by pacemaker cells in the 
sinoatrial (SA) node situated at the junction of the right atrium and the 
superior vena cava (see Fig. 235-1). This impulse is transmitted slowly 
through nodal tissue to the anatomically complex atria, where it is 
conducted more rapidly to the atrioventricular node (AVN), inscribing 
238 Principles of  
Electrophysiology
David D. Spragg, Gordon F. Tomaselli 
the P wave of the ECG (see Fig. 235-2). There is a perceptible delay in 
conduction through the anatomically and functionally heterogeneous 
AV. The time needed for activation of the atria and the AVN delay is 
represented as the PR interval of the ECG. The AVN is the only electri-
cal connection between the atria and the ventricles in the normal heart. 
The electrical impulse emerges from the AVN and is transmitted to the 
His-Purkinje system, specifically the common bundle of His, then the 
left and right bundle branches, and then to the Purkinje network, facil-
itating activation of ventricular muscle. In normal circumstances, the 
ventricles are activated rapidly in a well-defined fashion that is deter-
mined by the course of the Purkinje network, and this inscribes the 
QRS complex (see Fig. 235-2). Recovery of electrical excitability occurs 
more slowly and is governed by the time of activation and duration 
of regional action potentials. The relative brevity of epicardial action 
potentials in the ventricle results in repolarization that occurs first on 
the epicardial surface and then proceeds to the endocardium, which 
inscribes a T wave normally of the same polarity as the QRS complex. 
The duration of ventricular activation and recovery is determined by 
the action potential duration and is represented on the body surface 
ECG by the QT interval (see Fig. 235-2).
Cardiac myocytes exhibit a characteristically long action poten-
tial (200–400 ms) compared with neurons and skeletal muscle cells 
(1–5 ms). The action potential profile is sculpted by the orchestrated 
activity of multiple distinctive time- and voltage-dependent ionic 
currents (Fig. 238-1A). The currents are carried by transmembrane pro-
teins that passively conduct ions down their electrochemical gradients 
through selective pores (ion channels), actively transport ions against 
their electrochemical gradient (pumps, transporters), or electrogeni-
cally exchange ionic species (exchangers).
Action potentials in the heart are regionally distinct. The regional 
variability in cardiac action potentials is a result of differences in the 
number and types of ion channel proteins expressed by different cell 
types in the heart. Further, unique sets of ionic currents are active in 
pacemaking and muscle cells, and the relative contributions of these 
currents may vary in the same cell type in different regions of the heart 
(Fig. 238-1A).
Ion channels are complex, multisubunit transmembrane glycopro-
teins that open and close in response to a number of biologic stimuli, 
including a change in membrane voltage, ligand binding (directly 
to the channel or to a G protein–coupled receptor), and mechanical 
deformation (Fig. 238-2). Other ion motive exchangers and transporters 
contribute importantly to cellular excitability in the heart. Ion pumps 
establish and maintain the ionic gradients across the cell membrane 
that serve as the driving force for current flow through ion channels. 
Transporters or exchangers that do not move ions in an electrically 
neutral manner (e.g., the sodium-calcium exchanger transports three 
Na+ for one Ca2+) are termed electrogenic and contribute directly to the 
action potential profile.
The most abundant superfamily of ion channels expressed in the 
heart is voltage gated. Several structural themes are common to all 
voltage-dependent ion channels. First, the architecture is modular, con-
sisting either of four homologous subunits (e.g., K channels) or of four 
internally homologous domains (e.g., Na and Ca channels). Second, the 
proteins fold around a central pore lined by amino acids that exhibit 
exquisite conservation within a given channel family of like selectivity 
(e.g., all Na channels have very similar P segments). Third, the gen-
eral strategy for activation gating (opening and closing in response to 
changes in membrane voltage) is highly conserved: the fourth trans-
membrane segment (S4), studded with positively charged residues, lies 
within the membrane field and moves in response to depolarization, 
opening the channel. Fourth, most ion channel complexes include not 
only the pore-forming proteins (α subunits) but also auxiliary subunits 
(e.g., β subunits) that modify channel function (Fig. 238-2).
Na and Ca channels are the primary carriers of depolarizing current 
in both the atria and the ventricles; inactivation of these currents and 
activation of repolarizing K currents hyperpolarize the heart cells, 
reestablishing the negative resting membrane potential (Fig. 238-1B). 
The plateau phase is a time when little current is flowing, and relatively 
minor changes in depolarizing or repolarizing currents can have 
CHAPTER 238 Principles of Electrophysiology 
1717
profound effects on the shape and duration of the action profile. Muta-
tions in subunits of these channel proteins produce arrhythmogenic 
alterations in the action potentials that cause long and short QT syn-
drome, Brugada syndrome, idiopathic ventricular fibrillation, familial 
atrial fibrillation, and some forms of conduction system disease.
■
■MECHANISMS OF CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIAS
Cardiac arrhythmias result from abnormalities of electrical impulse 
generation, conduction, or both. Bradyarrhythmias typically arise from 
disturbances in impulse formation at the level of the SA node or from 
disturbances in impulse propagation at any level, including exit block 
from the sinus node, conduction block in the AVN, and impaired con-
duction in the His-Purkinje system. Tachyarrhythmias can be classified 
according to mechanism, including enhanced automaticity (sponta-
neous depolarization of atrial, junctional, or ventricular pacemakers), 
triggered arrhythmias (initiated by afterdepolarizations occurring 
during or immediately after cardiac repolarization, during phase 3 or 4 
of the action potential), or reentry (circus propagation of a depolarizing 
wavefront). A variety of mapping and pacing maneuvers typically per-
formed during invasive electrophysiologic testing can often determine 
the underlying mechanism of a tachyarrhythmia (Table 238-1).
Alterations in Impulse Initiation: Automaticity  Sponta-
neous (phase 4) diastolic depolarization underlies the property of 
automaticity characteristic of pacemaking cells in the SA and atrioven-
tricular (AV) nodes, His-Purkinje system, coronary sinus, and pulmo-
nary veins. Phase 4 depolarization results from the concerted action of 
a number of ionic currents, including K+ currents, Ca2+ currents, elec-
trogenic Na, K-ATPase, the Na-Ca exchanger, and the so-called funny, 
or pacemaker, current (If); however, the relative importance of these 
currents remains controversial.
The rate of phase 4 depolarization and, therefore, the firing rates of 
pacemaker cells are dynamically regulated. Prominent among the fac-
tors that modulate phase 4 is autonomic nervous system tone. The neg-
ative chronotropic effect of activation of the parasympathetic nervous 
system is a result of the release of acetylcholine that binds to muscarinic 
Ventricular AP
Current
GENE (Protein)
Depolarizing
Repolarizing
INa
ICa-L
INa
ICa-L
INCX
IK1
Ito
IKr
IKs
IK1
Ito
IKr
IKs
IKur
SCN5A (Nav1.5)
CACNA1C (Cav1.2)
SLC8A1 (NCX1.1)
KCNJ2 (Kir2.1)
voltage
outward
inward
time
voltage
0 1
2
3
4
4
0
1
2
3
time
KCND3/KCNIP2  (Kv4.3/KChIP2)
KCNH2/KCNE2 (HERG/MiRP-1)
KCNQ1/KCNE1 (KVLQT1/minK)
KCNA5 (Kv1.5)
Atrial AP
A
B
Na+
K+
K+
K+
Ca2+
FIGURE 238-1  A. Cellular atrial and ventricular action potentials. Phases 0–4 are the rapid upstroke, early repolarization, plateau, late repolarization, and diastole, 
respectively. The ionic currents and their respective genes are shown above and below the action potentials. The major currents that underlie the action potentials vary 
in atrial and ventricular myocytes. B. A ventricular action potential with a schematic of the ionic currents flowing during the phases of the action potential. Potassium 
current (IK1) is the principal current during phase 4 and determines the resting membrane potential of the myocyte. Sodium current generates the upstroke of the 
action potential (phase 0); activation of Ito with inactivation of the Na current inscribes early repolarization (phase 1). The plateau (phase 2) is generated by a balance 
of repolarizing potassium currents and depolarizing calcium current. Inactivation of the calcium current with persistent activation of potassium currents (predominantly 
IKr and IKs) causes phase 3 repolarization.
receptors, releasing G protein βγ subunits that activate a potassium 
current (IKACh) in nodal and atrial cells. The resulting increase in K+ 
conductance opposes membrane depolarization, slowing the rate of 
rise of phase 4 of the action potential. Conversely, augmentation of 
sympathetic nervous system tone increases myocardial catecholamine 
concentrations, which activate both α- and β-adrenergic receptors. The 
effect of β1-adrenergic stimulation predominates in pacemaking cells, 
augmenting both L-type Ca current (ICa-L) and If, thus increasing the 
slope of phase 4. Enhanced sympathetic nervous system activity can 
dramatically increase the rate of firing of SA nodal cells, producing 
sinus tachycardia with rates >200 beats/min. By contrast, the increased 
rate of firing of Purkinje cells is more limited, rarely producing ventric-
ular tachyarrhythmias >120 beats/min.
Normal automaticity may be affected by a number of other factors 
associated with heart disease. Hypokalemia and ischemia may reduce 
the activity of Na, K-ATPase, thereby reducing the background repo-
larizing current and enhancing phase 4 diastolic depolarization. The 
end result would be an increase in the spontaneous firing rate of pace-
making cells. Modest increases in extracellular potassium may render 
the maximum diastolic potential more positive, thereby also increasing 
the firing rate of pacemaking cells. A more significant increase in [K+]o, 
however, renders the heart inexcitable by depolarizing the membrane 
potential.
Normal or enhanced automaticity of subsidiary latent pacemakers 
produces escape rhythms in the setting of failure of more dominant 
pacemakers. Suppression of a pacemaker cell by a faster rhythm leads 
to an increased intracellular Na+ load ([Na+]i), and extrusion of Na+ 
from the cell by Na, K-ATPase produces an increased background repo-
larizing current that slows phase 4 diastolic depolarization. At slower 
rates, [Na+]i is decreased, as is the activity of the Na, K-ATPase, result-
ing in progressively more rapid diastolic depolarization and warm-up 
of the tachycardia rate. Overdrive suppression and warm-up are char-
acteristic of, but may not be observed in, all automatic tachycardias. 
Abnormal conduction into tissue with enhanced automaticity (entrance 
block) may blunt or eliminate the phenomena of overdrive suppression 
and warm-up of automatic tissue.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1718
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
K channels
N
N
N
N
N
N
C
C
C
P
P
P P
P
S
S
P
K+
X4
C
C
α Subunits
Extracellular
Intracellular
Inactivation
Pore
segments
LA
binding
β Subunits
β1
β
γ
δ
α1
α2
β2
Na channels
Ca channels
FIGURE 238-2  Topology and subunit composition of the voltage-dependent ion 
channels. Potassium channels are formed by the tetramerization of α or pore-
forming subunits and one or more β subunits; only single β subunits are shown 
for clarity. Sodium and calcium channels are composed of α subunits with four 
homologous domains and one or more ancillary subunits. In all channel types, 
the loop of protein between the fifth and sixth membrane-spanning repeat in each 
subunit or domain forms the ion-selective pore. In the case of the sodium channel, 
the channel is a target for phosphorylation, the linker between the third and fourth 
homologous domain is critical to inactivation, and the sixth membrane-spanning 
repeat in the fourth domain is important in local anesthetic antiarrhythmic drug 
binding. The Ca channel is a multisubunit protein complex with the α1 subunit 
containing the pore and major drug binding domain.
Abnormal automaticity may produce atrial tachycardia, accelerated 
idioventricular rhythms, and ventricular tachycardia, particularly asso-
ciated with ischemia and reperfusion. It has also been suggested that 
injury currents at the borders of ischemic myocardium may depolarize 
adjacent nonischemic tissue, predisposing to automatic ventricular 
tachycardia.
Afterdepolarizations 
and 
Triggered 
Automaticity  
Triggered automaticity or activity refers to impulse initiation that is 
dependent on afterdepolarizations (Fig. 238-3). Afterdepolarizations 
are membrane voltage oscillations that occur during (early afterdepo-
larizations, EADs) or after (delayed afterdepolarizations, DADs) an 
action potential.
The cellular feature common to the induction of DADs is the pres-
ence of an increased Ca2+ load in the cytosol and sarcoplasmic reticu-
lum. Digitalis glycoside toxicity, catecholamines, and ischemia all can 
enhance Ca2+ loading sufficiently to produce DADs. Accumulation 
of lysophospholipids in ischemic myocardium with consequent Na+ 
and Ca2+ overload has been suggested as a mechanism for DADs and 
triggered automaticity. Cells from damaged areas or cells that survive 
a myocardial infarction may display spontaneous release of calcium 
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and this may generate “waves” of 
intracellular calcium elevation and arrhythmias.
EADs occur during the action potential and interrupt the orderly 
repolarization of the myocyte. Traditionally, EADs have been thought 
to arise from action potential prolongation and reactivation of depo-
larizing currents, but more recent experimental evidence suggests a 
previously unappreciated interrelationship between intracellular cal-
cium loading and EADs. Cytosolic calcium may increase when action 
potentials are prolonged. This, in turn, appears to enhance L-type Ca 
current, further prolonging action potential duration as well as pro-
viding the inward current driving EADs. Intracellular calcium loading 
by action potential prolongation may also enhance the likelihood of 
DADs. The interrelationship among intracellular [Ca2+], EADs, and 
DADs may be one explanation for the susceptibility of hearts that are 
calcium loaded (e.g., in ischemia or congestive heart failure [CHF]) 
to develop arrhythmias, particularly on exposure to action potential– 
prolonging drugs.
EAD-triggered arrhythmias exhibit rate dependence. In general, 
the amplitude of an EAD is augmented at slow rates when action 
potentials are longer. Indeed, a fundamental condition that underlies 
the development of EADs is action potential and QT prolongation. 
Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, bradycardia, and, most commonly, 
drugs can predispose to the generation of EADs, invariably in the 
context of prolonging the action potential. Antiarrhythmics with class 
IA and III action (see below) produce action potential and QT prolon-
gation intended to be therapeutic but frequently causing arrhythmias. 
Noncardiac drugs such as phenothiazines, nonsedating antihistamines, 
and some antibiotics can also prolong the action potential duration 
and predispose to EAD-mediated triggered arrhythmias. Decreased 
[K+]o paradoxically may decrease membrane potassium currents (par-
ticularly the delayed rectifier current, IKr) in the ventricular myocyte, 
explaining why hypokalemia causes action potential prolongation and 
EADs. In fact, potassium infusions in patients with the congenital long 
QT syndrome (LQTS) and in those with drug-induced acquired QT 
prolongation shorten the QT interval.
EAD-mediated triggered activity probably underlies initiation of 
the characteristic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, torsades des 
pointes, seen in patients with congenital and acquired forms of LQTS. 
Structural heart disease, such as cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure, 
may also delay ventricular repolarization (so-called electrical remodel-
ing) and predispose to arrhythmias related to abnormalities of repolar-
ization. The abnormalities of repolarization in hypertrophy and heart 
failure are often magnified by concomitant drug therapy or electrolyte 
disturbances.
Abnormal Impulse Conduction: Reentry  The most common 
arrhythmia mechanism is reentry resulting from abnormal electrical 
impulse conduction and is defined as the circulation of an activation 
wave around an inexcitable obstacle. The requirements for reentry 
are two electrophysiologically dissimilar pathways for impulse prop-
agation around an inexcitable region (Fig. 238-4). Reentry can occur 
around a fixed anatomic structure (e.g., myocardial scar), with a stable 
pattern of cardiac depolarization moving in series over the anterograde 
CHAPTER 238 Principles of Electrophysiology 
1719
TABLE 238-1  Arrhythmia Mechanisms
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC 
PROPERTY
MOLECULAR COMPONENTS
MECHANISM
PROTOTYPIC ARRHYTHMIAS
Cellular
Impulse Initiation
 
 
 
Automaticity
If, ICa-L, ICa-T, IK, IK1
Suppression/acceleration of phase 4
Sinus bradycardia, sinus tachycardia
Triggered automaticity
Calcium overload, ITI
DADs
Digitalis toxicity, reperfusion VT
 
ICa-L, IK, INa
EADs
Torsades des pointes, congenital and acquired
Excitation
INa
Suppression of phase 0
Ischemic VF
 
IK-ATP
AP shortening, inexcitability
 
 
ICa-L
Suppression
AV block
Repolarization
INa, ICa-L, IK, IK1, Ca2+ homeostasis
AP prolongation, EADs, DADs
Polymorphic VT (HF, LVH)
 
ICa-L, K channels, Ca2+ homeostasis
AP shortening
Atrial fibrillation
Multicellular
Cellular Coupling
Connexins (Cx43), INa, IK-ATP
Decreased coupling
Ischemic VT/VF
Tissue Structure
Extracellular matrix, collagen
Excitable gap and functional reentry
Monomorphic VT, atrial fibrillation
Abbreviations: AP, action potential; AV, atrioventricular; DADs, delayed afterdepolarizations; EADs, early afterdepolarizations; HF, heart failure; LVH, left ventricular 
hypertrophy; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachyarrhythmia.
EAD
DAD
50 mV
0.5 s
0 mV
Reactivation
of L-type Ca
current
 
Intracellular
Ca2+ overload 
FIGURE 238-3  Schematic action potentials with early afterdepolarizations 
(EADs) and delayed afterdepolarizations (DADs). Afterdepolarizations are 
spontaneous depolarizations in cardiac myocytes. EADs occur before the end 
of the action potential (phases 2 and 3), interrupting repolarization. DADs occur 
during phase 4 of the action potential after completion of repolarization. The 
cellular mechanisms of EADs and DADs differ (see text).
A
B
C
D
Slow
Reentrant
circuit
Initiation of
reentry
Sustained
reentry
Gap
Block
Termination of
reentry
FIGURE 238-4  Schematic diagram of reentry. A. The circuit contains two limbs, 
one with slow conduction. B. A premature impulse blocks in the fast pathway 
and conducts over the slow pathway, allowing the fast pathway to recover so 
that the activation wave can reenter the fast pathway from the retrograde 
direction. C. During sustained reentry utilizing such a circuit, a gap (excitable gap) 
exists between the activating head of the wave and the recovering tail. D. One 
mechanism of termination of reentry occurs when the conduction and recovery 
characteristics of the circuit change and the activating head of the wave collides 
with the tail, extinguishing the tachycardia.
and retrograde limbs of the circuit. This form of reentry, referred to as 
anatomic reentry or excitable gap reentry (see below), is initiated when a 
depolarizing wavefront encounters an area of unidirectional conduction 
block in the retrograde limb of the circuit. Conduction across the antero-
grade limb occurs with a delay that, if of sufficient duration, allows for 
recovery of conduction in the retrograde limb with reentry of the depo-
larization wave into the retrograde limb of the circuit. Sustained reentry 
requires that the functional dimension of depolarized tissue or the 
tachycardia wavelength (λ = conduction velocity × refractory period) 
fits within the total anatomic length of the circuit, referred to as the path 
length. When the path length of the circuit exceeds the λ of the tachycar-
dia, the region between the head of the activation wave and the refrac-
tory tail is referred to as the excitable gap. Anatomically determined, 
excitable gap reentry can explain several clinically important tachycar-
dias, such as AV reentry, atrial flutter, bundle branch reentry ventricular 
tachycardia, and ventricular tachycardia in scarred myocardium.
Reentrant arrhythmias may exist in the heart in the absence of an 
excitable gap and with a tachycardia wavelength nearly the same size 
as the path length. In this case, the wavefront propagates through 
partially refractory tissue without a fixed anatomic obstacle and no 
fully excitable gap; this is referred to as leading circle reentry, a form of 
functional reentry (reentry that depends on functional properties of the 
tissue). Unlike excitable gap reentry, there is no fixed anatomic circuit 
in leading circle reentry, and it may, therefore, not be possible to dis-
rupt the tachycardia with pacing or destruction of a part of the circuit. 
Furthermore, the circuit in leading circle reentry tends to be less stable 
than that in excitable gap reentrant arrhythmias, with large variations 
in cycle length and a predilection to termination. There is strong evi-
dence to suggest that less organized arrhythmias, such as atrial and 
ventricular fibrillation, are associated with more complex activation of 
the heart and are due to functional reentry.
Catheter-based and pharmacologic therapies for reentrant arrhyth-
mias are designed to disrupt the anatomic circuit or alter the relation-
ship between the wavelength and path length of the arrhythmia circuit, 
eliminating pathologic conduction. For example, antiarrhythmic drugs 
that prolong the action potential (Class III) are effective if they suffi-
ciently prolong the λ such that it can no longer fit within the anatomic 
circuit. Catheter ablation is often undertaken with the goal of identify-
ing and destroying a critical limb of the reentrant circuit (i.e., ablation 
of the cavotricuspid isthmus in the treatment of typical, right atrial 
flutter). Due to the less defined pathways of myocardial activation seen 
in functional reentry, ablation of these rhythms tends to target initiating 
triggers (e.g., pulmonary vein potentials in catheter ablation of atrial 
fibrillation) rather than the anatomic circuit.
Structural heart disease is associated with changes in conduction 
and refractoriness that increase the risk of reentrant arrhythmias. 
Chronically ischemic myocardium exhibits a downregulation of the 
gap junction channel protein (connexin 43) that carries intercellular 
ionic current. The border zones of infarcted and failing ventricular 
myocardium exhibit not only functional alterations of ionic currents 
but also remodeling of tissue and altered distribution of gap junctions. 
The changes in gap junction channel expression and distribution, in 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1720 combination with macroscopic tissue alterations, support a role for 
slowed conduction in reentrant arrhythmias that complicate chronic 
coronary artery disease (CAD). Aged human atrial myocardium exhib-
its altered conduction, manifest as highly fractionated atrial electro-
grams, producing an ideal substrate for the reentry that may underlie 
the very common development of atrial fibrillation in the elderly.
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Cardiac Arrhythmias
The evaluation of patients with suspected cardiac arrhythmias is 
highly individualized; however, two key features—the history and 
ECG—are pivotal in directing the diagnostic workup and therapy. 
Patients with cardiac arrhythmias exhibit a wide spectrum of clinical 
presentations that range from asymptomatic ECG abnormalities to 
survival from cardiac arrest. In general, the more severe the present-
ing symptoms are, the more aggressive the evaluation and treatment 
are. Loss of consciousness that is believed to be of cardiac origin 
typically mandates an exhaustive search for the etiology and often 
requires invasive, device-based therapy. The presence of structural 
heart disease and prior myocardial infarction dictates a change in 
the approach to the management of syncope or ventricular arrhyth-
mias. The presence of a family history of serious ventricular arrhyth-
mias or premature sudden death will influence the evaluation of 
presumed heritable arrhythmias.
The physical examination is focused on determining whether 
there is cardiopulmonary disease that is associated with specific 
cardiac arrhythmias. The absence of significant cardiopulmonary 
disease often, but not always, suggests benignity of the rhythm 
disturbance. In contrast, palpitations, syncope, or near syncope in 
the setting of significant heart or lung disease have more ominous 
implications. In addition, the physical examination may reveal the 
presence of a persistent arrhythmia such as atrial fibrillation.
The judicious use of noninvasive diagnostic tests is an important 
element in the evaluation of patients with arrhythmias, and there 
is no test more important than the ECG, particularly if recorded at 
the time of symptoms. Uncommon but diagnostically important 
signatures of electrophysiologic disturbances may be unearthed 
on the resting ECG, such as delta waves in Wolff-Parkinson-White 
(WPW) syndrome, prolongation or shortening of the QT interval, 
right precordial ST-segment abnormalities in Brugada syndrome, 
and epsilon waves in arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia. 
Variants of body surface ECG recording can provide important 
information about arrhythmia substrates and triggers. Holter moni-
toring and event recording, either continuous or intermittent, record 
the body surface ECG over longer periods, enhancing the possibility 
of observing the cardiac rhythm during symptoms. Holter monitor-
ing is particularly useful in assessing daily symptoms thought to be 
attributable to arrhythmia or for quantifying a particular arrhyth-
mia phenomenon (e.g., premature ventricular complex burden). 
Ambulatory event monitors are indicated when symptoms thought 
to be due to arrhythmia occur less frequently (i.e., several epi-
sodes per month), and, because the monitors are typically patient- 
activated, they are optimal for correlating symptoms with rhythm 
disturbances. Implantable long-term monitors permit prolonged 
telemetric monitoring both for diagnosis and to assess the efficacy 
of therapy. Implantable monitors are typically used for the eval-
uation of malignant symptoms that occur quite infrequently and 
that cannot be provoked at diagnostic electrophysiology study and 
increasingly assessing the presence or burden of atrial fibrillation in 
patients with complications of this arrhythmia, such as stroke.
Exercise electrocardiography is important in determining the 
presence of myocardial demand ischemia; more recently, analysis 
of the morphology of the QT interval with exercise has been used 
to assess the risk of serious ventricular arrhythmias. The exercise 
ECG may be particularly useful in patients with symptoms that 
occur during activity. Cardiac imaging plays an important role in 
the detection and characterization of myocardial structural abnor-
malities that may render the heart more susceptible to arrhythmia. 
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias, for instance, occur more frequently in 
patients with ventricular systolic dysfunction and chamber dilation, 
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and in the setting of infiltrative 
diseases such as sarcoidosis. Supraventricular arrhythmias may 
be associated with particular congenital conditions, including AV 
reentry in the setting of Ebstein’s anomaly. Echocardiography is a 
frequently employed imaging technique to screen for disorders of 
cardiac structure and function. Increasingly, magnetic resonance 
imaging of the myocardium is being used to screen for scar burden, 
fibrofatty infiltration of the myocardium as seen in arrhythmogenic 
right ventricular cardiomyopathy, and other structural changes that 
affect arrhythmia susceptibility.
Head-up tilt (HUT) testing is useful in the evaluation of patients 
with syncope in whom there is a suspicion that exaggerated vagal 
tone or vasodepression may play a causal role. The physiologic 
response to HUT is incompletely understood; however, redistribu-
tion of blood volume and increased ventricular contractility occur 
consistently. Exaggerated activation of a central reflex in response 
to HUT produces a stereotypic response of an initial increase in 
heart rate, then a drop in blood pressure followed by a reduction 
in heart rate characteristic of neurally mediated hypotension. Other 
responses to HUT may be observed in patients with orthostatic 
hypotension and autonomic insufficiency. HUT is used most often 
in patients with recurrent syncope, although it may be useful 
in patients with single syncopal episodes with associated injury, 
particularly in the absence of structural heart disease. In patients 
with structural heart disease, HUT may be indicated in those with 
syncope, in whom other causes (e.g., asystole, ventricular tachyar-
rhythmias) have been excluded. HUT has been suggested as a useful 
tool in the diagnosis of and therapy for recurrent idiopathic vertigo, 
chronic fatigue syndrome, recurrent transient ischemic attacks, and 
repeated falls of unknown etiology in the elderly. Importantly, HUT 
is relatively contraindicated in the presence of severe CAD with 
proximal coronary stenoses, known severe cerebrovascular disease, 
severe mitral stenosis, and obstruction to left ventricular outflow 
(e.g., aortic stenosis).
Electrophysiologic testing is central to the understanding and 
treatment of many cardiac arrhythmias. Indeed, most frequently, 
electrophysiologic testing is interventional, providing both diagno-
sis and therapy. The indications for electrophysiologic testing fall 
into several categories: to define the mechanism of an arrhythmia; 
to deliver catheter-based ablative treatment; and to determine the 
etiology of symptoms that may be caused by an arrhythmia (e.g., 
syncope, palpitations). The components of the electrophysiologic 
test are baseline measurements of conduction under resting and 
stressed (rate or pharmacologic) conditions and maneuvers, both 
pacing and pharmacologic, to induce arrhythmias. A number of 
sophisticated electrical mapping and catheter-guidance techniques 
have been developed to facilitate catheter-based therapeutics in the 
electrophysiology laboratory.
TREATMENT
Cardiac Arrhythmias
ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUG THERAPY
The interaction of antiarrhythmic drugs with cardiac tissues and the 
resulting electrophysiologic changes are complex. An incomplete 
understanding of the effects of these drugs has produced serious 
missteps that have had adverse effects on patient outcomes and 
the development of newer pharmacologic agents. Currently, anti-
arrhythmic drugs have been relegated to an ancillary role in the 
treatment of most cardiac arrhythmias.
There are several explanations for the complexity of antiarrhyth-
mic drug action: the structural similarity of target ion channels; 
CHAPTER 238 Principles of Electrophysiology 
1721
regional differences in the levels of expression of channels and trans-
porters, which change with disease; time and voltage dependence 
of drug action; and the effect of these drugs on targets other than 
ion channels. Because of the limitations of any scheme to classify 
antiarrhythmic agents, a shorthand that is useful in describing the 
major mechanisms of action is of some utility. Such a classification 
scheme was proposed in 1970 by Vaughan-Williams and later modi-
fied by Singh and Harrison. The classes of antiarrhythmic action are 
class I, local anesthetic effect due to blockade of Na+ current; class 
II, interference with the action of catecholamines at the β-adrenergic 
receptor; class III, delay of repolarization due to inhibition of K+ cur-
rent or activation of depolarizing current; and class IV, interference 
with calcium conductance (Table 238-2). Class I antiarrhythmics 
have been further subdivided based on the kinetics and potency 
of Na+ channel binding; class Ia agents (quinidine, procainamide) 
are those with moderate potency and intermediate kinetics; class 
Ib agents (lidocaine, mexiletine) are those with low potency and 
rapid kinetics; and class Ic drugs (flecainide, propafenone) are those 
with high potency and the slowest kinetics. The limitations of the 
Vaughan-Williams classification scheme include multiple actions of 
most drugs, overwhelming consideration of antagonism as a mecha-
nism of action, and the fact that several agents have none of the four 
classes of action in the scheme.
CATHETER ABLATION
The use of catheter ablation is based on the principle that there is a 
critical anatomic region of impulse generation or propagation that is 
required for the initiation and maintenance of cardiac arrhythmias. 
Destruction of such a critical region results in the elimination of the 
arrhythmia. The use of RF energy in clinical medicine is nearly a cen-
tury old. The first catheter ablation using a DC energy source was 
performed in the early 1980s by Scheinman and colleagues. By the 
early 1990s, RF had been adapted for use in catheter-based ablation 
in the heart (Fig. 238-5).
The RF band (300–30,000 kHz) is used to generate energy for 
several biomedical applications, including coagulation and cauteri-
zation of tissues. Energy of this frequency will not stimulate skeletal 
muscle or the heart and heats tissue by a resistive mechanism, with 
the intensity of heating and tissue destruction being proportional 
to the delivered power. Alternative, less frequently used energy 
sources for catheter ablation of cardiac arrhythmias include micro-
waves (915 MHz or 2450 MHz), lasers, ultrasound, and freezing 
(cryoablation). Of these alternative ablation techniques, cryoablation 
is being used clinically with the most frequency, especially ablation 
in the region of the AVN. At temperatures just below 32°C, mem-
brane ion transport is disrupted, producing depolarization of cells, 
decreased action potential amplitude and duration, and slowed con-
duction velocity (resulting in local conduction block)—all of which 
are reversible if the tissue is rewarmed in a timely fashion. Tissue 
TABLE 238-2  Antiarrhythmic Drug Actions
DRUG
CLASS ACTIONS
MISCELLANEOUS 
ACTION
I
II
III
IV
Quinidine
++
 
++
 
α-Adrenergic 
blockade
Procainamide
++
 
++
 
Ganglionic 
blockade
Flecainide
+++
 
+
 
 
Propafenone
++
+
 
 
 
Ranolazine
++
 
++
 
Late Na+ current 
blockade
Eleclazine
++
 
 
 
Late Na+ current 
blockade
Sotalol
 
++
+++
 
 
Dofetilide
 
 
+++
 
 
Amiodarone
++
++
+++
+
α-Adrenergic 
blockade
Dronedarone
++
+
+++
++
HCN4 blockade
Ibutilide
 
 
+++
 
Na+ channel 
activator
FIGURE 238-5  Catheter ablation of cardiac arrhythmias. A. A schematic of the catheter system and generator in a patient undergoing radiofrequency catheter ablation 
(RFCA); the circuit involves the catheter in the heart and a dispersive patch placed on the body surface (usually the back). The inset shows a diagram of the heart with 
a catheter located at the AV valve ring for ablation of an accessory pathway. B. A right anterior oblique fluoroscopic image of the catheter position for ablation of a 
left-sided accessory pathway. A catheter is placed in the atrial side of the mitral valve ring (abl) via a transseptal puncture. Other catheters are placed in the coronary 
sinus (CS), in the right atrium (RA), and in the right ventricular (RV) apex to record local electrical activation. C. Body surface electrocardiogram recordings (I, II, V1) and 
endocardial electrograms (HRA, high right atrium; HISp, proximal His bundle electrogram; CS 7, 8, recordings from poles 7 and 8 of a decapolar catheter placed in the 
coronary sinus) during RFCA of a left-sided accessory pathway in a patient with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. The QRS narrows at the fourth complex; the arrow 
shows the His bundle electrogram, which becomes apparent with elimination of ventricular preexcitation over the accessory pathway.
A
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1722
cooling can be used for mapping and ablation. Cryomapping can be 
used to confirm the location of a desired ablation target, such as an 
accessory pathway in WPW syndrome, or can be used to determine 
the safety of ablation around the AVN by monitoring AV conduction 
during cooling. Another advantage of cryoablation is that once the 
catheter tip cools below freezing, it adheres to the tissue, increasing 
catheter stability independent of the rhythm or pacing.
DEVICE THERAPY
Bradyarrhythmias due either to primary sinus node dysfunction 
or to AV conduction defects are readily treated through implanta-
tion of a permanent pacemaker. Clinical indications for pacemaker 
implantation often depend on the presence either of symptomatic 
bradycardia or of an unreliable endogenous escape rhythm and are 
more fully reviewed in Chaps. 239 and 240.
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias, particularly those occurring in the 
context of progressive structural heart diseases such as ischemic car-
diomyopathy or arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, 
may recur despite therapy with antiarrhythmic drugs or catheter 
ablation. In appropriate candidates, implantation of an internal  
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) may reduce mortality rates from 
sudden cardiac death. In a subset of patients with CHF and ven-
tricular mechanical dyssynchrony, ICD, or pacemaker platforms 
can be used to provide cardiac resynchronization therapy, typ-
ically through implantation of a left ventricular pacing lead. In 
patients with dyssynchronous CHF, such therapy has been shown to 
improve both morbidity and mortality rates. The use of a completely 
subcutaneous ICD may be most appropriate in patients at risk for 
arrhythmic sudden death without a need for pacing.
■
■FURTHER READING
Josephson ME: Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology: Techniques and Inter-
pretations, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer, 2016.
Priori SG, Napolitano C: Genetics of channelopathies and clinical 
implications, in Hurst’s The Heart, 13th ed, V Fuster et al (eds). New 
York, McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Saksena S, Camm AJ (eds): Electrophysiological Disorders of the Heart, 
2nd ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Churchill Livingstone, 2012.
Zipes DP, Jalife J (eds): Cardiac Electrophysiology: From Cell to Bedside, 
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2014.
FIGURE 238-5  (Continued)
239 The Bradyarrhythmias:  
Disorders of the  
Sinoatrial Node
David D. Spragg, Gordon F. Tomaselli 
Electrical activation of the heart normally originates in the sinoatrial 
(SA) node, the predominant pacemaker. Other subsidiary pacemakers 
in the atrioventricular (AV) node, specialized conducting system, and 
muscle may initiate electrical activation if the SA node is dysfunctional 
or suppressed. Typically, subsidiary pacemakers discharge at a slower 
rate and, in the absence of an appropriate increase in stroke volume, 
may result in tissue hypoperfusion.
Spontaneous activation and contraction of the heart are a conse-
quence of the specialized pacemaking tissue in these anatomic locales. 
As described in Chap. 238, action potentials in the heart are regionally 
heterogeneous. The action potentials in cells isolated from nodal tissue 
are distinct from those recorded from atrial and ventricular myocytes 
(Fig. 239-1). The complement of ionic currents present in nodal cells 
results in a less negative resting membrane potential compared with 
atrial or ventricular myocytes. Electrical diastole in nodal cells is 
characterized by slow diastolic depolarization (phase 4), which gen-
erates an action potential as the membrane voltage reaches threshold. 
The action potential upstrokes (phase 0) are slow compared with 
atrial or ventricular myocytes, being mediated by calcium rather than 
sodium current. Cells with properties of SA and AV nodal tissue are 
electrically connected to the remainder of the myocardium by cells with 
an electrophysiologic phenotype between that of nodal cells and that 
of atrial or ventricular myocytes. Cells in the SA node exhibit the most 
rapid phase 4 depolarization and thus are the dominant pacemakers in 
a normal heart.
Bradycardia results from a failure of either impulse initiation or 
impulse conduction. Failure of impulse initiation may be caused by 
depressed automaticity resulting from a slowing or failure of phase 4 
diastolic depolarization (Fig. 239-2), which may result from disease or 
exposure to drugs. Prominently, the autonomic nervous system mod-
ulates the rate of phase 4 diastolic depolarization and thus the firing 
rate of both primary (SA node) and subsidiary pacemakers. Failure 
of conduction of an impulse from nodal tissue to atrial or ventricular 
myocardium may produce bradycardia as a result of exit block. Condi-
tions that alter the activation and connectivity of cells (e.g., fibrosis) in 
the heart may result in failure of impulse conduction.
SA node dysfunction and AV conduction block are the most com-
mon causes of pathologic bradycardia. SA node dysfunction may be 
difficult to distinguish from physiologic sinus bradycardia, particularly 
CHAPTER 239 The Bradyarrhythmias: Disorders of the Sinoatrial Node  
1723
current (INa) and is mediated by L-type calcium current 
(ICa-L); and phase 4 depolarization is a result of the aggre-
gate activity of a number of ionic currents. Prominently, 
both L- and T-type (ICa-T) calcium currents, the pacemaker 
current (so-called funny current, or If) formed by hyperpo-
larization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channels, and 
the electrogenic sodium-calcium exchanger provide depo-
larizing current that is antagonized by delayed rectifier 
(IKr) and acetylcholine-gated (IKACh) potassium currents. 
ICa-L, ICa-T, and If are modulated by β-adrenergic stimulation 
and IKACh by vagal stimulation, explaining the exquisite 
sensitivity of diastolic depolarization to autonomic ner-
vous system activity. The slow conduction within the SA 
node is explained by the absence of INa and poor electri-
cal coupling of cells in the node, resulting from sizable 
amounts of interstitial tissue and a low abundance of gap junctions. 
The poor coupling allows for graded electrophysiologic properties 
within the node, with the peripheral transitional cells being silenced by 
electrotonic coupling to atrial myocardium.
■
■ETIOLOGY OF SA NODAL DISEASE
SA nodal dysfunction has been classified as intrinsic or extrinsic. The 
distinction is important because extrinsic dysfunction is often revers-
ible and generally should be corrected before pacemaker therapy is 
considered (Table 239-1). The most common causes of extrinsic SA node 
dysfunction are drugs and autonomic nervous system influences that 
suppress automaticity and/or compromise conduction. Other extrinsic 
causes include hypothyroidism, sleep apnea, and conditions likely to 
occur in critically ill patients such as hypothermia, hypoxia, increased 
Ventricular
Atrial
Nodal
200 ms
1
2
3
0
4
0
120
–100
Voltage, mV
ECa + 120 mV
ENa + 70 mV
0 mV
ECI –30 mV
EK –90 mV
FIGURE 239-1  Action potential profiles recorded in cells isolated from sinoatrial or 
atrioventricular nodal tissue compared with those of cells from atrial or ventricular myocardium. 
Nodal cell action potentials exhibit more depolarized resting membrane potentials, slower phase 
0 upstrokes, and phase 4 diastolic depolarization.
Phase 4
Acetylcholine
Control
0 mV
Depolarizing currents
Repolarizing currents
–50 mV
Ι
Ι
Ι
Ι
Ι
Ι
Ca-T
Ca-L
F
,
,
K, K1, K ACh
FIGURE 239-2  Schematics of nodal action potentials and the currents that 
contribute to phase 4 depolarization. Relative increases in depolarizing L- (ICa-L) 
and T- (ICa-T) type calcium and pacemaker currents (If) along with a reduction in 
repolarizing inward rectifier (IK1) and delayed rectifier (IK) potassium currents 
result in depolarization. Activation of ACh-gated (IKACh) potassium current and beta 
blockade slow the rate of phase 4 and decrease the pacing rate. (Modified from 
J Jalife et al: Basic Cardiac Electrophysiology for the Clinician, Blackwell Publishing, 
1999.)
in the young. SA node dysfunction increases in frequency between the 
fifth and sixth decades of life and should be considered in patients with 
fatigue, exercise intolerance, or syncope and sinus bradycardia.
Permanent pacemaking is the only reliable therapy for symptomatic 
bradycardia in the absence of extrinsic and reversible etiologies such as 
increased vagal tone, hypoxia, hypothermia, and drugs (Table 239-1). 
Approximately 50% of the 160,000 permanent pacemakers implanted 
in the United States and 20–30% of those in Europe were implanted for 
SA node disease.
■
■STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SA NODE
The SA node is composed of a cluster of small fusiform cells in the sul-
cus terminalis on the epicardial surface of the heart at the right atrial–
superior vena caval junction, where they envelop the SA nodal artery. 
The SA node is structurally heterogeneous, but the central prototypic 
nodal cells have fewer distinct myofibrils than does the surrounding 
atrial myocardium, no intercalated disks visible on light microscopy, 
a poorly developed sarcoplasmic reticulum, and no T-tubules. Cells in 
the peripheral regions of the SA node are transitional in both structure 
and function. The SA nodal artery arises from the right coronary artery 
in 55–60% and the left circumflex artery in 40–45% of persons. The SA 
node is richly innervated by sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves 
and ganglia.
Irregular and slow propagation of impulses from the SA node can 
be explained by the electrophysiology of nodal cells and the structure 
of the SA node itself. The action potentials of SA nodal cells are charac-
terized by a relatively depolarized membrane potential (Fig. 239-1) of 
−40 to −60 mV, slow phase 0 upstroke, and relatively rapid phase 4 dia-
stolic depolarization compared with the action potentials recorded in 
cardiac muscle cells. The relative absence of inward rectifier potassium 
current (IK1) accounts for the depolarized membrane potential; the slow 
upstroke of phase 0 results from the absence of available fast sodium 
TABLE 239-1  Etiologies of SA Node Dysfunction
EXTRINSIC
INTRINSIC
Autonomic
  Carotid sinus hypersensitivity
  Vasovagal (cardioinhibitory) 
stimulation
Drugs
  Beta blockers
  Calcium channel blockers
  Digoxin
  Ivabradine
  Antiarrhythmics (class I and III)
  Adenosine
  Clonidine (other sympatholytics)
  Lithium carbonate
  Cimetidine
  Amitriptyline
  Phenothiazines
  Narcotics (methadone)
  Pentamidine
Hypothyroidism
Sleep apnea
Hypoxia
Endotracheal suctioning (vagal 
maneuvers)
Hypothermia
Increased intracranial pressure
Sick-sinus syndrome (SSS)
Coronary artery disease (chronic and 
acute MI)
Inflammatory
  Pericarditis
  Myocarditis (including viral)
  Rheumatic heart disease
  Collagen vascular diseases
  Lyme disease
Senile amyloidosis
Congenital heart disease
  TGA/Mustard and Fontan repairs
Iatrogenic
  Radiation therapy
  Postsurgical
Chest trauma
Familial
  SSS2, AD, OMIM #163800 
(15q24-25)
  SSS1, AR OMIM #608567 (3p21)
  SSS3, AD, OMIM #614090 
(14q11.2)
  SA node disease with myopia, 
OMIM #182190
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, OMIM 
#530000
Myotonic dystrophy
  Type 1, OMIM #160900 
(19q13.2-13.3)
  Type 2, OMIM #602668 
(3q13.3-q24)
Friedreich’s ataxia, OMIM #229300 
(9q13, 9p23-p11)
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; MI, myocardial 
infarction; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (database); TGA, 
transposition of the great arteries.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1724
II
II
V
V
FIGURE 239-3  Sinus slowing and pauses on the electrocardiogram (ECG). The ECG is recorded during sleep in 
a young patient without heart disease. The heart rate before the pause is slow, and the PR interval is prolonged, 
consistent with an increase in vagal tone. The P waves have a morphology consistent with sinus rhythm. The 
recording is from a two-lead telemetry system in which the tracing labeled II mimics frontal lead II and V represents 
Modified Central Lead 1, which mimics lead V1 of the standard 12-lead ECG.
intracranial pressure (Cushing’s response), and endotracheal suction-
ing via activation of the vagus nerve.
Intrinsic sinus node dysfunction is degenerative and often is char-
acterized pathologically by fibrous replacement of the SA node or its 
connections to the atrium. Acute and chronic coronary artery disease 
(CAD) may be associated with SA node dysfunction, although in 
the setting of acute myocardial infarction (MI; typically inferior), the 
abnormalities are transient. Inflammatory processes may alter SA 
node function, ultimately producing replacement fibrosis. Pericarditis, 
myocarditis, and rheumatic heart disease have been associated with 
SA nodal disease with sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, and exit block. 
Carditis associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheuma-
toid arthritis (RA), and mixed connective tissue disorders (MCTDs) 
may also affect SA node structure and function. Senile amyloidosis is 
an infiltrative disorder in patients typically in the ninth decade of life; 
deposition of amyloid protein in the atrial myocardium can impair SA 
node function. Some SA node disease is iatrogenic and results from 
direct injury to the SA node during cardiothoracic surgery.
Rare heritable forms of sinus node disease have been described, and 
several have been characterized genetically. Autosomal dominant sinus 
node dysfunction in conjunction with supraventricular tachycardia 
(i.e., tachycardia-bradycardia variant of sick-sinus syndrome [SSS2]) 
has been linked to mutations in the pacemaker current (If) subunit gene 
HCN4 on chromosome 15. An autosomal recessive form of SSS1 with 
the prominent feature of atrial inexcitability and absence of P waves 
on the electrocardiogram (ECG) is caused by mutations in the cardiac 
sodium channel gene, SCN5A, on chromosome 3. Variants in myosin 
heavy chain 6 (MYH6) increase the susceptibility to SSS (SSS3). SA 
node dysfunction associated with myopia has been described but not 
genetically characterized. There are several neuromuscular diseases, 
including Kearns-Sayre syndrome (ophthalmoplegia, pigmentary 
degeneration of the retina, and cardiomyopathy) and myotonic dystro-
phy that have a predilection for the conducting system and SA node.
SSS in both the young and the elderly is associated with an increase 
in fibrous tissue in the SA node. The onset of SSS may be hastened by 
coexisting disease, such as CAD, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and 
valvular diseases and cardiomyopathies.
■
■CLINICAL FEATURES OF SA NODE DISEASE
SA node dysfunction may be completely asymptomatic and manifest as 
an ECG anomaly such as sinus bradycardia; sinus arrest and exit block; 
or alternating supraventricular tachycardia, usually atrial fibrillation, 
and bradycardia. Symptoms associated with SA node dysfunction, in 
particular tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome, may be related to both 
slow and fast heart rates. For example, tachycardia may be associated 
with palpitations, angina pectoris, and heart failure, and bradycardia 
may be associated with hypotension, syncope, presyncope, fatigue, and 
weakness. In the setting of SSS, overdrive suppression of the SA node 
may result in prolonged pauses and syncope upon termination of the 
tachycardia. In many cases, symptoms associated with SA node dys-
function result from concomitant cardiovascular disease. A significant 
minority of patients with SSS develop signs and symptoms of heart 
failure that may be related to slow or fast heart rates.
One-third to one-half of patients with 
SA node dysfunction develop supraven-
tricular tachycardia, usually atrial fibril-
lation or atrial flutter. The incidence of 
persistent atrial fibrillation in patients 
with SA node dysfunction increases with 
advanced age, hypertension, diabetes 
mellitus, left ventricular dilation, valvu-
lar heart disease, and ventricular pacing. 
Remarkably, some symptomatic patients 
may experience an improvement in symp-
toms with the development of atrial fibril-
lation, presumably from an increase in 
their average heart rate. Patients with the 
tachycardia-bradycardia variant of SSS, 
similar to patients with atrial fibrillation, 
are at risk for thromboembolism, and those at greatest risk, including 
patients aged ≥65 years and patients with a prior history of stroke, val-
vular heart disease, left ventricular dysfunction, or atrial enlargement, 
should be treated with anticoagulants. Up to one-quarter of patients 
with SA node disease will have concurrent AV conduction disease, 
although only a minority will require specific therapy for high-grade 
AV block.
The natural history of SA node dysfunction is one of varying 
intensity of symptoms even in patients who present with syncope. 
Symptoms related to SA node dysfunction may be significant, but 
overall longevity usually is not compromised in the absence of other 
significant comorbid conditions. These features of the natural history 
need to be taken into account in considering therapy for these patients.
■
■ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY OF SA NODE DISEASE
The electrocardiographic manifestations of SA node dysfunction 
include sinus bradycardia, sinus pauses, sinus arrest, sinus exit block, 
tachycardia (in SSS), and chronotropic incompetence. It is often dif-
ficult to distinguish pathologic from physiologic sinus bradycardia. 
By definition, sinus bradycardia is a rhythm driven by the SA node 
with a rate of <60 beats/min; sinus bradycardia is very common and 
typically benign. Resting heart rates <60 beats/min are very common 
in young healthy individuals and physically conditioned subjects. A 
sinus rate of <40 beats/min in the awake state in the absence of phys-
ical conditioning generally is considered abnormal. Sinus pauses and 
sinus arrest result from failure of the SA node to discharge, producing 
a pause without P waves visible on the ECG (Fig. 239-3). Sinus pauses 
of up to 3 s are common in awake athletes, and pauses of this duration 
or longer may be observed in asymptomatic elderly subjects. Intermit-
tent failure of conduction from the SA node produces sinus exit block. 
The severity of sinus exit block may vary in a manner similar to that of 
AV block (Chap. 240). Prolongation of conduction from the sinus node 
will not be apparent on the ECG; second-degree SA block will produce 
intermittent conduction from the SA node and a regularly irregular 
atrial rhythm.
Type I second-degree SA block results from progressive prolonga-
tion of SA node conduction with intermittent failure of the impulses 
originating in the sinus node to conduct to the surrounding atrial 
tissue. Second-degree SA block appears on the ECG as an intermit-
tent absence of P waves (Fig. 239-4). In type II second-degree SA 
block, there is no change in SA node conduction before the pause. 
Complete or third-degree SA block results in no P waves on the ECG. 
Tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome is manifest as alternating sinus 
bradycardia and atrial tachyarrhythmias. Although atrial tachycardia, 
atrial flutter, and atrial fibrillation may be observed, the latter is the 
most common tachycardia. Chronotropic incompetence is the inability 
to increase the heart rate in response to exercise or other stress appro-
priately and is defined in greater detail below.
■
■DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
SA node dysfunction is most commonly a clinical or electrocardio-
graphic diagnosis. Sinus bradycardia or pauses on the resting ECG 
are rarely sufficient to diagnose SA node disease, and longer-term 
CHAPTER 239 The Bradyarrhythmias: Disorders of the Sinoatrial Node  
1725
VI
SAN EG
FIGURE 239-4  Mobitz type I SA nodal exit block. A theoretical SA node electrogram (SAN EG) is shown. Note that there is grouped beating producing a regularly 
irregular heart rhythm. The SA node EG rate is constant with progressive delay in exit from the node and activation of the atria, inscribing the P wave. This produces 
subtly decreasing P-P intervals before the pause, and the pause is less than twice the cycle length of the last sinus interval.
recording and symptom correlation generally are required. Symptoms 
in the absence of sinus bradyarrhythmias may be sufficient to exclude 
a diagnosis of SA node dysfunction.
Electrocardiographic recording plays a central role in the diagnosis 
and management of SA node dysfunction. Despite the limitations of 
the resting ECG, longer-term recording employing Holter or event 
monitors may permit correlation of symptoms with the cardiac rhythm. 
Many contemporary event monitors may be automatically triggered to 
record the ECG when certain programmed heart rate criteria are met. 
Implantable ECG monitors permit long-term recording (12–18 months) 
in particularly challenging patients.
Failure to increase the heart rate with exercise is referred to as 
chronotropic incompetence. This is alternatively defined as failure to 
reach 85% of predicted maximal heart rate at peak exercise or failure to 
achieve a heart rate >100 beats/min with exercise or a maximal heart 
rate with exercise less than two standard deviations below that of an 
age-matched control population. Exercise testing may be useful in dis-
criminating chronotropic incompetence from resting bradycardia and 
may aid in the identification of the mechanism of exercise intolerance.
Autonomic nervous system testing is useful in diagnosing carotid 
sinus hypersensitivity; pauses >3 s are consistent with the diagnosis 
but may be present in asymptomatic elderly subjects. Determining the 
intrinsic heart rate (IHR) may distinguish SA node dysfunction from 
slow heart rates that result from high vagal tone. The normal IHR after 
administration of 0.2 mg/kg propranolol and 0.04 mg/kg atropine is 
117.2 − (0.53 × age) in beats/min; a low IHR is indicative of SA disease.
Electrophysiologic testing may play a role in the assessment of 
patients with presumed SA node dysfunction and in the evaluation 
of syncope, particularly in the setting of structural heart disease. In 
this circumstance, electrophysiologic testing is used to rule out more 
malignant etiologies of syncope, such as ventricular tachyarrhythmias 
and AV conduction block. There are several ways to assess SA node 
function invasively. They include the sinus node recovery time (SNRT), 
defined as the longest pause after cessation of overdrive pacing of the 
right atrium near the SA node (normal: <1500 ms or, corrected for sinus 
cycle length, <550 ms), and the sinoatrial conduction time (SACT), 
defined as one-half the difference between the intrinsic sinus cycle 
length and a noncompensatory pause after a premature atrial stimulus 
(normal <125 ms). The combination of an abnormal SNRT, an abnormal 
SACT, and a low IHR is a sensitive and specific indicator of intrinsic 
SA node disease.
TREATMENT
Sinoatrial Node Dysfunction
Since SA node dysfunction is not associated with increased mor-
tality rates, the aim of therapy is alleviation of symptoms. Exclu-
sion of extrinsic causes of SA node dysfunction and correlation of 
the cardiac rhythm with symptoms is an essential part of patient 
management. Pacemaker implantation is the primary therapeutic 
intervention in patients with symptomatic SA node dysfunction. 
Pharmacologic considerations are important in the evaluation and 
management of patients with SA nodal disease. A number of drugs 
modulate SA node function and are extrinsic causes of dysfunction 
(Table 239-1). Beta blockers and calcium channel blockers increase 
SNRT in patients with SA node dysfunction, and antiarrhythmic 
drugs with class I and III action may promote SA node exit block. In 
general, such agents should be discontinued before decisions regard-
ing the need for permanent pacing in patients with SA node disease 
are made. Chronic pharmacologic therapy for sinus bradyarrhyth-
mias is limited. Some pharmacologic agents may improve SA node 
function; digitalis, for example, has been shown to shorten SNRT in 
patients with SA node dysfunction. Isoproterenol or atropine admin-
istered IV may increase the sinus rate acutely. Theophylline has 
been used both acutely and chronically to increase heart rate but has 
liabilities when used in patients with tachycardia-bradycardia syn-
drome, increasing the frequency of supraventricular tachyarrhyth-
mias, and in patients with structural heart disease, increasing the risk 
of potentially serious ventricular arrhythmias. Currently, there is only 
a single randomized study of therapy for SA node dysfunction. In 
patients with resting heart rates <50 and >30 beats/min on a Holter 
monitor, patients who received dual-chamber pacemakers experi-
enced significantly fewer syncopal episodes and had symptomatic 
improvement compared with patients randomized to theophylline 
or no treatment.
In certain circumstances, sinus bradycardia requires no specific 
treatment or only temporary rate support. Sinus bradycardia is 
common in patients with acute inferior or posterior MI and can be 
exacerbated by vagal activation induced by pain or the use of drugs 
such as morphine. Ischemia of the SA nodal artery probably occurs 
in acute coronary syndromes more typically with involvement with 
the right coronary artery, and even with infarction, the effect on SA 
node function most often is transient.
Sinus bradycardia is a prominent feature of carotid sinus hyper-
sensitivity and neurally mediated hypotension associated with 
vasovagal syncope that responds to pacemaker therapy. Carotid 
hypersensitivity with recurrent syncope or presyncope associated 
with a predominant cardioinhibitory component responds to pace-
maker implantation. Several randomized trials have investigated 
the efficacy of permanent pacing in patients with drug-refractory 
vasovagal syncope, with mixed results. Although initial trials sug-
gested that patients undergoing pacemaker implantation have fewer 
recurrences and a longer time to recurrence of symptoms, at least 
one follow-up study did not confirm these results.
PERMANENT PACEMAKERS
Nomenclature and Complications  The main therapeutic interven-
tion in SA node dysfunction is permanent pacing. Since the first 
implementation of permanent pacing in the 1950s, many advances 
in technology have resulted in miniaturization, increased longevity 
of pulse generators, improvement in leads, and increased function-
ality. To better understand pacemaker therapy for bradycardias, it 
is important to be familiar with the fundamentals of pacemaking. 
Pacemaker modes and function are named using a five-letter code. 
The first letter indicates the chamber(s) that is paced (O, none; A, 
atrium; V, ventricle; D, dual; S, single), the second is the chamber(s) 
in which sensing occurs (O, none; A, atrium; V, ventricle; D, dual; 
S, single), the third is the response to a sensed event (O, none; I, 
inhibition; T, triggered; D, inhibition + triggered), the fourth refers 
to the programmability or rate response (R, rate responsive), and 
the fifth refers to the existence of antitachycardia functions if pres-
ent (O, none; P, antitachycardia pacing; S, shock; D, pace + shock). 
Almost all modern pacemakers are multiprogrammable and have 
the capability for rate responsiveness using one of several rate 
sensors: activity or motion, minute ventilation, or QT interval. The 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1726
most commonly programmed modes of implanted single- and dual-
chamber pacemakers are VVIR and DDDR, respectively, although 
multiple modes can be programmed in modern pacemakers.
Although pacemakers are highly reliable, they are subject to a 
number of complications related to implantation and electronic 
function. In adults, permanent pacemakers are most commonly 
implanted with access to the heart by way of the subclavian– 
superior vena cava venous system. Rare, but possible, acute compli-
cations of transvenous pacemaker implantation include infection, 
hematoma, pneumothorax, cardiac perforation, diaphragmatic/
phrenic nerve stimulation, and lead dislodgment. Limitations of 
chronic pacemaker therapy include infection, erosion, lead failure, 
and abnormalities resulting from inappropriate programming or 
interaction with the patient’s native electrical cardiac function. 
Rotation of the pacemaker pulse generator in its subcutaneous 
pocket, either intentionally or inadvertently, often referred to as 
“twiddler’s syndrome,” can wrap the leads around the generator 
and produce dislodgment with failure to sense or pace the heart. 
The small size and light weight of contemporary pacemakers make 
this a rare complication. Transvenous leads are considered the 
“Achilles heel” of permanent pacing systems. Enhancements in 
battery technology and component design have produced a pacing 
system small enough to be implanted in the heart without the need 
for a transvenous lead. These “leadless” pacemakers are appro-
priate for patients with indications for single chamber ventricular 
(right ventricle) pacing (see Chap. 240).
Complications stemming from chronic cardiac pacing also result 
from disturbances in AV synchrony and/or left ventricular mechan-
ical synchrony. Pacing modes that interrupt or fail to restore AV 
synchrony may lead to a constellation of signs and symptoms, 
collectively referred to as pacemaker syndrome, that include neck 
pulsation, fatigue, palpitations, cough, confusion, exertional dysp-
nea, dizziness, syncope, elevation in jugular venous pressure, canon 
A waves, and stigmata of congestive heart failure, including edema, 
rales, and a third heart sound. Right ventricular apical pacing can 
induce dyssynchronous activation of the left ventricle, leading to 
compromised left ventricular systolic function, mitral valve regur-
gitation, and the previously mentioned stigmata of congestive heart 
failure. Maintenance of AV synchrony can minimize the sequelae 
of pacemaker syndrome. Selection of pacing modes that minimize 
unnecessary ventricular pacing or implantation of a device capable 
of right and left ventricular pacing (biventricular pacing) can help 
minimize the deleterious consequences of pacing-induced mechani-
cal dyssynchrony at the ventricular level.
Pacemaker Therapy in SA Node Dysfunction  Pacing in SA nodal 
disease is indicated to alleviate symptoms of bradycardia. Con-
sensus guidelines published by the American Heart Association 
(AHA)/American College of Cardiology/Heart Rhythm Society 
(ACC/HRS) outline the indications for the use of pacemakers and 
categorize them by class based on levels of evidence. Class I condi-
tions are those for which there is evidence or consensus of opinion 
that therapy is useful and effective. In class II conditions, there is 
conflicting evidence or a divergence of opinion about the efficacy of 
a procedure or treatment; in class IIa conditions, the weight of evi-
dence or opinion favors treatment; and in class IIb conditions, effi-
cacy is less well established by the evidence or opinion of experts. 
In class III conditions, the evidence or weight of opinion indicates 
that the therapy is not efficacious or useful and may be harmful.
Class I indications for pacing in SA node dysfunction include 
documented symptomatic bradycardia, sinus node dysfunction–
associated long-term drug therapy for which there is no alternative, 
and symptomatic chronotropic incompetence. Class IIa indications 
include those outlined previously in which sinus node dysfunction 
is suspected but not documented and for syncope of unexplained 
origin in the presence of major abnormalities of SA node dysfunc-
tion. Mildly symptomatic individuals with heart rates consistently 
<40 beats/min constitute a class IIb indication for pacing. Pacing is 
not indicated in patients with SA node dysfunction who do not have 
symptoms and in those in whom bradycardia is associated with the 
use of nonessential drugs (Table 239-2).
There is some controversy about the mode of pacing that should be 
employed in SA node disease. A number of randomized, single-blind 
trials of pacing mode have been performed. There are no trials that 
demonstrate an improvement in mortality rate with AV synchro-
nous pacing compared with single-chamber pacing in SA node dis-
ease. In some of these studies, the incidence of atrial fibrillation and 
thromboembolic events was reduced with AV synchronous pacing. 
In trials of patients with dual-chamber pacemakers designed to com-
pare single-chamber with dual-chamber pacing by crossover design, 
the need for AV synchronous pacing due to pacemaker syndrome 
was common. Pacing modes that preserve AV synchrony appear to 
be associated with a reduction in the incidence of atrial fibrillation 
and improved quality of life. Because of the low but finite incidence 
of AV conduction disease, patients with SA node dysfunction usu-
ally undergo dual-chamber pacemaker implantation.
Pacemaker Therapy in Carotid Sinus Hypersensitivity and Vaso-
vagal Syncope  Carotid sinus hypersensitivity, if accompanied by 
a significant cardioinhibitory component, responds well to pacing. 
In this circumstance, pacing is required only intermittently and  
single-chamber ventricular pacing is often sufficient. The mecha-
nism of vasovagal syncope is incompletely understood but appears 
to involve activation of cardiac mechanoreceptors with consequent 
activation of neural centers that mediate vagal activation and with-
drawal of sympathetic nervous system tone. Several randomized 
clinical trials have been performed in patients with drug-refractory 
vasovagal syncope, with some studies suggesting reduction in the 
frequency and the time to recurrent syncope in patients who were 
paced compared with those who were not. A recent follow-up study 
to one of those initial trials, however, found less convincing results, 
casting some doubt on the utility of pacing for vagally mediated 
syncope.
■
■FURTHER READING
Epstein AE et al: ACC/AHA/HRS 2008 Guidelines for Device-Based 
Therapy of Cardiac Rhythm Abnormalities: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
TABLE 239-2  Summary of Guidelines for Pacemaker Implantation in 
SA Node Dysfunction
Class I
1.  SA node dysfunction with symptomatic bradycardia or sinus pause
2.  Symptomatic SA node dysfunction as a result of essential long-term drug 
therapy with no acceptable alternatives
3.  Symptomatic chronotropic incompetence
4.  Atrial fibrillation with bradycardia and pauses >5 s
Class IIa
1.  SA node dysfunction with heart rates <40 beats/min without a clear and 
consistent relationship between bradycardia and symptoms
2.  SA node dysfunction with heart rates <40 beats/min on an essential long-
term drug therapy with no acceptable alternatives, without a clear and 
consistent relationship between bradycardia and symptoms
3.  Syncope of unknown origin when major abnormalities of SA node 
dysfunction are discovered or provoked by electrophysiologic testing
Class IIb
1.  Mildly symptomatic patients with waking chronic heart rates <40 beats/min
Class III
1.  SA node dysfunction in asymptomatic patients, even those with heart rates 
<40 beats/min
2.  SA node dysfunction in which symptoms suggestive of bradycardia are not 
associated with a slow heart rate
3.  SA node dysfunction with symptomatic bradycardia due to nonessential 
drug therapy
Source: Data from AE Epstein et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 51:e1, 2008 and CM 
Tracy et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 61:e6, 2013.
CHAPTER 240 The Bradyarrhythmias: Disorders of the Atrioventricular Node
1727
Practice Guidelines (writing Committee to Revise the ACC/AHA/
NASPE 2002 Guideline Update for Implantation of Cardiac Pacemak-
ers and Antiarrhythmia Devices) developed in collaboration with the 
American Association for Thoracic Surgery and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol 51:el, 2008.
Epstein AE et al: ACC/AHA/NASPE 2008 Guidelines for device-
based therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities. J Am Coll Cardiol 
51:21, 2008.
Epstein AE et al: 2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS Focused Update Incorpo-
rated into the ACCF/AHA/HRS 2008 Guidelines for Device-Based 
Therapy of Cardiac Rhythm Abnormalities: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society devel-
oped in collaboration with the American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol 
61:e6, 2013.
Goldschlager N et al: Sinus node dysfunction, in Electrophysiological 
Disorders of the Heart, 2nd ed, S Saksena, AJ Camm (eds). Philadelphia, 
Elsevier Churchill Livingstone, 2012.
Josephson ME: Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology: Techniques and Inter-
pretations, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer, 2016.
Vijayaraman P, Ellenbogen KA: Bradyarrhythmias and pacemakers, 
in Hurst’s The Heart, 13th ed, V Fuster et al (eds). New York, McGraw-
Hill, 2011.
Impulses generated in the sinoatrial (SA) node or in ectopic atrial loci 
are conducted to the ventricles through the electrically and anatomi-
cally complex atrioventricular (AV) node. As described in Chap. 239, 
the electrophysiologic properties of nodal tissue are distinct from atrial 
and ventricular myocardium. Cells located in the AV node sit at a rel-
atively higher resting membrane potential than surrounding atrial and 
ventricular myocytes, exhibit spontaneous depolarization during phase 
4 of the action potential, and have slower phase 0 depolarization (medi-
ated by calcium influx in nodal tissue) than that seen in ventricular 
tissue (mediated by sodium influx).
Bradycardia may occur when conduction across the AV node is 
compromised, resulting in slow ventricular rates, with the possibility 
of attendant symptoms, including fatigue, syncope, and (if subsidiary 
pacemaker activity is insufficient) even death. It is important to rec-
ognize that in the setting of disturbed AV conduction, SA activation 
and atrial systole may occur at normal or even accelerated rates, while 
ventricular activation is either slowed or nonexistent. Transient AV 
conduction block is common in the young and is most likely the result 
of high vagal tone found in up to 10% of young adults. Acquired and 
persistent failure of AV conduction is decidedly rare in healthy adult 
populations, with an estimated incidence of 200 per million population 
per year. In the setting of myocardial ischemia, aging and fibrosis, or 
cardiac infiltrative diseases, however, persistent AV block is much more 
common.
As with symptomatic bradycardia arising from SA node dysfunc-
tion, permanent pacing is the only reliable therapy for symptoms 
arising from AV conduction block. Approximately 50% of the 160,000 
permanent pacemakers implanted in the United States and 70–80% of 
those in Europe are implanted for disorders of AV conduction.
■
■STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE AV NODE
The AV conduction axis is structurally complex, involving the atria and 
ventricles as well as the AV node. Unlike the SA node, the AV node is a 
240 The Bradyarrhythmias: 
Disorders of the 
Atrioventricular Node
David D. Spragg, Gordon F. Tomaselli 
subendocardial structure originating in the transitional zone, which is 
composed of aggregates of cells in the posterior-inferior right atrium. 
Superior, medial, and posterior transitional atrionodal bundles con-
verge on the compact AV node. The compact AV node (~1 × 3 × 5 mm) 
is situated at the apex of the triangle of Koch, which is defined by the 
coronary sinus ostium posteriorly, the septal tricuspid valve annulus 
anteriorly, and the tendon of Todaro superiorly. The compact AV node 
continues as the penetrating AV bundle where it immediately traverses 
the central fibrous body and is in close proximity to the aortic, mitral, 
and tricuspid valve annuli; thus, it is subject to injury in the setting of 
valvular heart disease or its surgical treatment. The penetrating AV 
bundle continues through the annulus fibrosis and emerges along the 
ventricular septum adjacent to the membranous septum as the bundle 
of His. The right bundle branch (RBB) emerges from the distal AV 
bundle in a band that traverses the right ventricle (moderator band). In 
contrast, the left bundle branch (LBB) is a broad subendocardial sheet 
of tissue on the septal left ventricle. The Purkinje fiber network emerges 
from the RBB and LBB and extensively ramifies on the endocardial 
surfaces of the right and left ventricles, respectively.
The blood supply to the penetrating AV bundle is from the AV nodal 
artery and first septal perforator of the left anterior descending coro-
nary artery. The bundle branches also have a dual blood supply from 
the septal perforators of the left anterior descending coronary artery 
and branches of the posterior descending coronary artery. The AV node 
is highly innervated with postganglionic sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic nerves. The bundle of His and distal conducting system are 
minimally influenced by autonomic tone.
The cells that constitute the AV node complex are heterogeneous 
with a range of action potential profiles. In the transitional zones, the 
cells have an electrical phenotype between those of atrial myocytes 
and cells of the compact node (see Fig. 239-1). Atrionodal transitional 
connections may exhibit decremental conduction, defined as slowing 
of conduction with increasingly rapid rates of stimulation. Fast and 
slow AV nodal pathways have been described, but it is controversial 
whether these two types of pathway are anatomically distinct or rep-
resent functional heterogeneities in different regions of the AV nodal 
complex. Myocytes that constitute the compact node are depolarized 
(resting membrane potential ~–60 mV) and exhibit action potentials 
with low amplitudes, slow upstrokes of phase 0 (<10 V/s), and phase 
4 diastolic depolarization; high-input resistance; and relative insen-
sitivity to external [K+]. The action potential phenotype is explained 
by the complement of ionic currents expressed. AV nodal cells lack a 
robust inward rectifier potassium current (IK1) and fast sodium cur-
rent (INa); L-type calcium current (ICa-L) is responsible for phase 0; and 
phase 4 depolarization reflects the composite activity of the depolar-
izing currents—funny current (If), ICa-L, T-type calcium current (ICa-T), 
and sodium calcium exchanger current (INCX)—and the repolarizing 
currents—delayed rectifier (IKr) and acetylcholine-gated (IKACh) potas-
sium currents. Electrical coupling between cells in the AV node is ten-
uous due to the relatively sparse expression of gap junction channels 
(predominantly connexin-40) and increased extracellular volume.
The His bundle and the bundle branches are insulated from ventric-
ular myocardium. The most rapid conduction in the heart is observed 
in these tissues. The action potentials exhibit very rapid upstrokes 
(phase 0), prolonged plateaus (phase 2), and modest automaticity 
(phase 4 depolarization). Gap junctions, composed largely of con-
nexin-40, are abundant, but bundles are poorly connected transversely 
to ventricular myocardium.
■
■ETIOLOGY OF AV CONDUCTION DISEASE
Conduction block from the atrium to the ventricle can occur for a variety 
of reasons in a number of clinical situations, and AV conduction block 
may be classified in a number of ways. The etiologies may be functional 
or structural, in part analogous to extrinsic and intrinsic causes of SA 
nodal dysfunction. The block may be classified by its severity from first 
to third degree or complete AV block or by the location of block within 
the AV conduction system. Table 240-1 summarizes the etiologies of 
AV conduction block. Those that are functional (autonomic, meta-
bolic/endocrine, and drug-related) tend to be reversible. Most other 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1728
etiologies produce structural changes, typically fibrosis, in segments of 
the AV conduction axis that are generally permanent. Heightened vagal 
tone during sleep or in well-conditioned individuals can be associated 
with all grades of AV block. Carotid sinus hypersensitivity, vasovagal 
syncope, and cough and micturition syncope may be associated with 
SA node slowing and AV conduction block. Transient metabolic and 
endocrinologic disturbances as well as a number of pharmacologic 
agents also may produce reversible AV conduction block.
Several infectious diseases have a predilection for the conducting 
system. Lyme disease may involve the heart in up to 50% of cases; 10% 
of patients with Lyme carditis develop AV conduction block, which 
is generally reversible but may require temporary pacing support. 
Chagas’ disease, which is common in Latin America, and syphilis may 
produce more persistent AV conduction disturbances. Some autoim-
mune and infiltrative diseases may produce AV conduction block, 
including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis, 
mixed connective tissue disease, scleroderma, amyloidosis (primary 
and secondary), sarcoidosis, and hemochromatosis; rare malignancies 
also may impair AV conduction.
Idiopathic progressive fibrosis of the conduction system is one of the 
more common and degenerative causes of AV conduction block. Aging 
is associated with degenerative changes in the summit of the ventricu-
lar septum, central fibrous body, and aortic and mitral annuli and has 
been described as “sclerosis of the left cardiac skeleton.” The process 
typically begins in the fourth decade of life and may be accelerated by 
atherosclerosis, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. Accelerated forms 
of progressive familial heart block have been identified in families with 
mutations in the cardiac sodium channel gene (SCN5A) and other loci 
that have been mapped to chromosomes 1 and 19.
AV conduction block has been associated with heritable neuromuscu-
lar diseases, including the nucleotide repeat disease myotonic dystrophy, 
the mitochondrial myopathy Kearns-Sayre syndrome (Chap. 441), and 
several of the monogenic muscular dystrophies. Congenital AV block 
may be observed in complex congenital cardiac anomalies (Chap. 264), 
such as transposition of the great arteries, ostium primum atrial septal 
defects (ASDs), ventricular septal defects (VSDs), endocardial cushion 
defects, and some single-ventricle defects. Congenital AV block in the 
setting of a structurally normal heart has been seen in children born 
to mothers with SLE. Iatrogenic AV block may occur during mitral or 
aortic valve surgery, rarely in the setting of thoracic radiation, and as 
a consequence of catheter ablation. AV block is a decidedly rare com-
plication of the surgical repair of VSDs or ASDs but may complicate 
repairs of transposition of the great arteries.
Coronary artery disease may produce transient or persistent AV 
block. In the setting of coronary spasm, ischemia, particularly in the 
right coronary artery distribution, may produce transient AV block. 
In acute myocardial infarction (MI), AV block transiently develops in 
10–25% of patients; most commonly, this is first- or second-degree AV 
block, but complete heart block (CHB) may also occur. Second-degree 
and higher-grade AV block tends to occur more often in inferior than 
in anterior acute MI; however, the level of block in inferior MI tends 
to be in the AV node with more stable, narrow escape rhythms. In 
contrast, acute anterior MI is associated with block in the distal AV 
nodal complex, His bundle, or bundle branches and results in wide 
complex, unstable escape rhythms and a worse prognosis with high 
mortality rates.
■
■ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY AND 
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF AV CONDUCTION BLOCK
AV conduction block typically is diagnosed electrocardiographically, 
which characterizes the severity of the conduction disturbance and 
allows one to draw inferences about the location of the block. AV con-
duction block manifests as slow conduction in its mildest forms and 
failure to conduct, either intermittent or persistently, in more severe vari-
eties. First-degree AV block (PR interval >200 ms) is a slowing of conduc-
tion through the AV junction (Fig. 240-1). The site of delay is typically 
in the AV node but may be in the atria, bundle of His, or His-Purkinje 
system. A wide QRS is suggestive of delay in the distal conduction sys-
tem, whereas a narrow QRS suggests delay in the AV node proper or, 
less commonly, in the bundle of His. In second-degree AV block there 
is an intermittent failure of electrical impulse conduction from atrium 
to ventricle. Second-degree AV block is subclassified as Mobitz type I 
(Wenckebach) or Mobitz type II. The periodic failure of conduction in 
Mobitz type I block is characterized by a progressively lengthening PR 
interval, shortening of the RR interval, and a pause that is less than two 
times the immediately preceding RR interval on the electrocardiogram 
(ECG). The ECG complex after the pause exhibits a shorter PR interval 
than that immediately preceding the pause (Fig. 240-2). This ECG pat-
tern most often arises because of decremental conduction of electrical 
impulses in the AV node.
It is important to distinguish type I from type II second-degree AV 
nodal block because the latter has more serious prognostic implica-
tions. Type II second-degree AV block is characterized by intermittent 
failure of conduction of the P wave without changes in the preceding 
PR or RR intervals. When AV block is 2:1, it may be difficult to dis-
tinguish type I from type II block. Type II second-degree AV block 
typically occurs in the distal or infra-His conduction system, is often 
associated with intraventricular conduction delays (e.g., bundle branch 
TABLE 240-1  Etiologies of Atrioventricular Block
Autonomic
 
Carotid sinus hypersensitivity
Vasovagal
Metabolic/Endocrine
 
Hyperkalemia
Hypothyroidism
Hypermagnesemia
Adrenal insufficiency
Drug-Related
 
Beta blockers
Adenosine
Calcium channel blockers
Antiarrhythmics (class I and III)
Digitalis
Lithium
Infectious
 
Endocarditis
Tuberculosis
Lyme disease
Diphtheria
Chagas’ disease
Toxoplasmosis
Syphilis
 
Heritable/Congenital
 
Congenital heart disease
Maternal SLE
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, OMIM 
#530000
Myotonic dystrophy
  Type 1, OMIM #160900 
(19q13.2-13.3)
  Type 2, OMIM #602668 
(3q13.3-q24)
Facioscapulohumeral MD, OMIM 
#158900 (4q35)
Emery-Dreifuss MD, OMIM #310300 
(Xq28)
Progressive familial heart block, type 
IA OMIM #113900 (3p21)
Progressive familial heart block, type 
IB, OMIM #604559 (19q13.32)
Progressive familial heart block, type 
II, OMIM %140400 (1q32)
Inflammatory
 
SLE
MCTD
Rheumatoid arthritis
Scleroderma
Infiltrative
 
Amyloidosis
Hemochromatosis
Sarcoidosis
 
Neoplastic/Traumatic
 
Lymphoma
Radiation
Mesothelioma
Catheter ablation
Melanoma
 
Degenerative
 
Lev’s disease
Lenègre’s disease
Coronary Artery Disease
 
Acute MI
 
Abbreviations: MCTD, mixed connective tissue disease; MI, myocardial infarction; 
OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (database; designations:  
#, phenotypic description, molecular basis known; %, phenotypic description); 
SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
CHAPTER 240 The Bradyarrhythmias: Disorders of the Atrioventricular Node
1729
I
II
V1
V6
HIS
RV
A
H
V
A
H
200 ms
V
137 msec
FIGURE 240-1  First-degree AV block with slowing of conduction in the AV node as indicated by the prolonged atrial-to-His bundle electrogram (AH) interval, in this 
case 157 ms. The His bundle-to-earliest ventricular activation on the surface ECG (HV) interval is normal. The normal HV interval suggests normal conduction below 
the AV node to the ventricle. I and V1 are surface ECG leads, and HIS is the recording of the endocavitary electrogram at the His bundle position. A, H, and V are labels 
for the atrial, His bundle, and right ventricular electrograms, respectively.
II
A
AV
V
1 sec
0.32
0.30
0.53
0.40
FIGURE 240-2  Mobitz type I second-degree AV block. The PR interval prolongs before the pause, as shown in the ladder diagram. The ECG pattern results from slowing 
of conduction in the AV node.
block), and is more likely to proceed to higher grades of AV block than 
is type I second-degree AV block. Second-degree AV block (particularly 
type II) may be associated with a series of nonconducted P waves, 
referred to as paroxysmal AV block (Fig. 240-3), and implies significant 
conduction system disease and is an indication for permanent pacing. 
Complete failure of conduction from atrium to ventricle is referred to 
as complete or third-degree AV block. AV block that is intermediate 
between second degree and third degree is referred to as high-grade 
AV block and, as with CHB, implies advanced AV conduction system 
disease. In both cases, the block is most often distal to the AV node, 
and the duration of the QRS complex can be helpful in determining the 
level of the block. In the absence of a preexisting bundle branch block, a 
wide QRS escape rhythm (Fig. 240-4B) implies a block in the distal His 
or bundle branches; in contrast, a narrow QRS rhythm implies a block 
in the AV node or proximal His and an escape rhythm originating in the 
AV junction (Fig. 240-4A). Narrow QRS escape rhythms are typically 
faster and more stable than wide QRS escape rhythms and originate 
more proximally in the AV conduction system.
■
■DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Diagnostic testing in the evaluation of AV block is aimed at determining 
the level of conduction block, particularly in asymptomatic patients, 
since the prognosis and therapy depend on whether the block is in or 
below the AV node. Vagal maneuvers, carotid sinus massage, exercise, 
and administration of drugs such as atropine and isoproterenol may be 
diagnostically informative. Owing to the differences in the innervation 
of the AV node and infranodal conduction system, vagal stimulation 
and carotid sinus massage slow conduction in the AV node but have 
less of an effect on infranodal tissue and may even improve conduc-
tion due to a reduced rate of activation of distal tissues. Conversely, 
atropine, isoproterenol, and exercise improve conduction through the 
AV node and impair infranodal conduction. In patients with congenital 
CHB and a narrow QRS complex, exercise typically increases heart rate; 
by contrast, those with acquired CHB, particularly with wide QRS, do 
not respond to exercise with an increase in heart rate.
Additional diagnostic evaluation, including electrophysiologic test-
ing, may be indicated in patients with syncope and suspected high-
grade AV block. This is particularly relevant if noninvasive testing does 
not reveal the cause of syncope or if the patient has structural heart dis-
ease with ventricular tachyarrhythmias as a cause of symptoms. Elec-
trophysiologic testing provides more precise information regarding the 
location of AV conduction block and permits studies of AV conduction 
under conditions of pharmacologic stress and exercise. Recording of 
the His bundle electrogram by a catheter positioned at the superior 
margin of the tricuspid valve annulus provides information about 
conduction at all levels of the AV conduction axis. A properly recorded 
His bundle electrogram reveals local atrial activity, the His electrogram, 
and local ventricular activation; when it is monitored simultaneously 
with recorded body surface electrocardiographic traces, intraatrial, AV 
nodal, and infranodal conduction times can be assessed (Fig. 240-1). 
The time from the most rapid deflection of the atrial electrogram in the 
His bundle recording to the His electrogram (AH interval) represents 
conduction through the AV node and is normally <130 ms. The time 
from the His electrogram to the earliest onset of the QRS on the surface 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1730
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
V1
V1
A
B
FIGURE 240-4  High-grade AV block. A. Multiple nonconducted P waves with a regular narrow complex QRS escape rhythm probably emanating from the AV junction. 
B. A wide complex QRS escape and a single premature ventricular contraction. In both cases, there is no consistent temporal relationship between the P waves and 
QRS complexes.
ECG (HV interval) represents the conduction time through the His-
Purkinje system and is normally ≤55 ms.
Rate stress produced by pacing can unveil abnormal AV conduction. 
Mobitz I second-degree AV block at short atrial paced cycle lengths is a 
normal response. However, when it occurs at atrial cycle lengths >500 
ms (<120 beats/min) in the absence of high vagal tone, it is abnormal. 
Typically, type I second-degree AV block is associated with prolonga-
tion of the AH interval, representing conduction slowing and block in 
the AV node. AH prolongation occasionally is due to the effect of drugs 
(beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, digitalis) or increased vagal 
tone. Atropine can be used to reverse high vagal tone; however, if AH 
prolongation and AV block at long pacing cycle lengths persist, intrin-
sic AV node disease is likely. Type II second-degree block is typically 
infranodal, often in the His-Purkinje system. Block below the node 
with prolongation of the HV interval or a His bundle electrogram with 
no ventricular activation (Fig. 240-5) is abnormal unless it is elicited at 
fast pacing rates or short coupling intervals with extra stimulation. It is 
often difficult to determine the type of second-degree AV block when 
2:1 conduction is present; however, the finding of a His bundle electro-
gram after every atrial electrogram indicates that block is occurring in 
the distal conduction system.
Intracardiac recording at electrophysiologic study that reveals pro-
longation of conduction through the His-Purkinje system (i.e., long HV 
interval) is associated with an increased risk of progression to higher 
grades of block and is generally an indication for pacing. In the setting 
of bundle branch block, the HV interval may reveal the condition of the 
unblocked bundle and the prognosis for developing more advanced 
AV conduction block. Prolongation of the HV interval in patients with 
asymptomatic bundle branch block is associated with an increased risk 
of developing higher-grade AV block. The risk increases with greater 
prolongation of the HV interval such that in patients with an HV inter-
val >100 ms, the annual incidence of complete AV block approaches 
10%, indicating a need for pacing. In patients with acquired CHB, even 
if intermittent, there is little role for electrophysiologic testing, and 
pacemaker implantation is almost always indicated.
TREATMENT
Management of AV Conduction Block
Temporary or permanent artificial pacing is the most reliable treat-
ment for patients with symptomatic AV conduction system disease. 
However, exclusion of reversible causes of AV block and the need for 
temporary heart rate support based on the hemodynamic condition 
of the patient are essential considerations in each patient. Correction 
of electrolyte derangements and ischemia, inhibition of excessive 
vagal tone, and withholding of drugs with AV nodal blocking 
properties may increase the heart rate. Adjunctive pharmacologic 
treatment with atropine or isoproterenol may be useful if the block is 
in the AV node. Since most pharmacologic treatment may take some 
time to initiate and become effective, temporary pacing may be nec-
essary. The most expeditious technique is the use of transcutaneous 
pacing, where pacing patches are placed anteriorly over the cardiac 
apex (cathode) and posteriorly between the spine and the scapula 
or above the right nipple (anode). Acutely, transcutaneous pacing 
is highly effective, but its duration is limited by patient discomfort 
and longer-term failure to capture the ventricle owing to changes 
in lead impedance. If a patient requires more than a few minutes 
of pacemaker support, transvenous temporary pacing should be 
II
III
V1
FIGURE 240-3  Paroxysmal AV block. Multiple nonconducted P waves after a period of sinus bradycardia with a normal PR interval. This implies significant conduction 
system disease, requiring permanent pacemaker implantation.
CHAPTER 240 The Bradyarrhythmias: Disorders of the Atrioventricular Node
1731
I
II
III
V1
HI Sd
HI Sp
RVA
HRA
H
A
H
A
H
A
H
A
H
A
H
A
V
FIGURE 240-5  High-grade AV block below the His. The AH interval is normal and is not changing before the block. Atrial and His bundle electrograms are recorded 
consistent with block below the distal AV junction. I, II, III, and V1 are surface ECG leads. HISp, HISd, and RVA are the proximal HIS, distal HIS, and right ventricular apical 
electrical recordings, respectively. A, H, and V represent the atrial, His, and ventricular electrograms on the His bundle recording, respectively. (Used with permission 
from Dr. Joseph Marine.)
myotonic dystrophy and other muscular dystrophies, and Kearns-
Sayre syndrome.
PACEMAKER THERAPY IN MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
AV block in acute MI is often transient, particularly in inferior 
infarction. The circumstances in which pacing is indicated in acute 
MI are persistent second- or third-degree AV block, particularly if 
symptomatic, and transient second- or third-degree AV block associ-
ated with bundle branch block (Table 240-3). Pacing is generally not 
indicated in the setting of transient AV block in the absence of intra-
ventricular conduction delays or in the presence of fascicular block 
or first-degree AV block that develops in the setting of preexisting 
bundle branch block. Fascicular blocks that develop in acute MI in 
the absence of other forms of AV block also do not require pacing 
(Table 240-3 and Table 240-4).
PACEMAKER THERAPY IN BIFASCICULAR AND TRIFASCICULAR 
BLOCK
Distal forms of AV conduction block may require pacemaker 
implantation in certain clinical settings. Patients with bifascicu-
lar or trifascicular block and symptoms, particularly syncope that 
is not attributable to other causes, should undergo pacemaker 
implantation. Pacemaking is indicated in asymptomatic patients 
with bifascicular or trifascicular block who experience intermittent 
third-degree, type II second-degree AV block or alternating bundle 
branch block. In patients with fascicular block who are undergoing 
electrophysiologic study, a markedly prolonged HV interval or 
block below the His at long cycle lengths also may constitute an indi-
cation for permanent pacing. Patients with fascicular block and the 
neuromuscular diseases previously described should also undergo 
pacemaker implantation (Table 240-4).
instituted. Temporary pacing leads can be placed from the jugular 
or subclavian venous system and advanced to the right ventricle, 
permitting stable temporary pacing for many days, if necessary. In 
most circumstances, in the absence of prompt resolution, conduction 
block distal to the AV node requires permanent pacemaking.
PACEMAKERS IN AV CONDUCTION DISEASE
There are no randomized trials that evaluate the efficacy of pacing 
in patients with AV block, as there are no reliable therapeutic alter-
natives for AV block and untreated high-grade AV block is poten-
tially lethal. The consensus guidelines for pacing in acquired AV 
conduction block in adults provide a general outline for situations 
in which pacing is indicated (Table 240-2). Pacemaker implantation 
should be performed in any patient with symptomatic bradycardia 
and irreversible second- or third-degree AV block, regardless of the 
cause or level of block in the conducting system. Symptoms may 
include those directly related to bradycardia and low cardiac output 
or to worsening heart failure, angina, or intolerance to an essential 
medication. Pacing in patients with asymptomatic AV block should 
be individualized; situations in which pacing should be considered 
are patients with acquired CHB, particularly in the setting of cardiac 
enlargement; left ventricular dysfunction; and waking heart rates 
≤40 beats/min. Patients who have asymptomatic second-degree AV 
block of either type should be considered for pacing if the block is 
demonstrated to be intra- or infra-His or is associated with a wide 
QRS complex. Pacing may be indicated in asymptomatic patients 
in special circumstances, in patients with profound first-degree 
AV block and left ventricular dysfunction in whom a shorter AV 
interval produces hemodynamic improvement, and in the setting 
of milder forms of AV conduction delay (first-degree AV block, 
intraventricular conduction delay) in patients with neuromuscular 
diseases that have a predilection for the conduction system, such as 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1732
TABLE 240-3  Guideline Summary for Pacemaker Implantation in AV 
Conduction Block in Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI)
Class I
1.  Persistent second-degree AV block in the His-Purkinje system with bilateral 
bundle branch block or third-degree block within or below the His after AMI
2.  Transient advanced (second- or third-degree) infranodal AV block and 
associated bundle branch block. If the site of block is uncertain, an 
electrophysiologic study may be necessary
3.  Persistent and symptomatic second- or third-degree AV block
Class IIb
1.  Persistent second- or third-degree AV block at the AV node level
Class III
1.  Transient AV block in the absence of intraventricular conduction defects
2.  Transient AV block in the presence of isolated left anterior fascicular block
3.  Acquired left anterior fascicular block in the absence of AV block
4.  Persistent first-degree AV block in the presence of bundle branch block that 
is old or age-indeterminate
Source: Data from AE Epstein et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 51:e1, 2008.
TABLE 240-4  Indications for Pacemaker Implantation in Chronic 
Bifascicular and Trifascicular Block
Class I
1.  Intermittent third-degree AV block
2.  Type II second-degree AV block
3.  Alternating bundle branch block
Class IIa
1.  Syncope not demonstrated to be due to AV block when other likely causes 
(e.g., ventricular tachycardia) have been excluded
2.  Incidental finding at electrophysiologic study of a markedly prolonged HV 
interval (>100 ms) in asymptomatic patients
3.  Incidental finding at electrophysiologic study of pacing-induced infra-His 
block that is not physiologic
Class IIb
1.  Neuromuscular diseases such as myotonic dystrophy, Kearns-Sayre 
syndrome, Erb dystrophy, and peroneal muscular atrophy with any degree 
of fascicular block regardless of the presence of symptoms, because there 
may be unpredictable progression of AV conduction disease
Class III
1.  Fascicular block without AV block or symptoms
2.  Fascicular block with first-degree AV block without symptoms
Source: Data from AE Epstein et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 51:e1, 2008.
TABLE 240-2  Guideline Summary for Pacemaker Implantation in 
Acquired AV Block
Class I
1.  Third-degree or high-grade AV block at any anatomic level associated with:
a.  Symptomatic bradycardia
b.  Essential drug therapy that produces symptomatic bradycardia
c.  Periods of asystole >3 s or any escape rate <40 beats/min while 
awake, or an escape rhythm originating below the AV node
d.  Postoperative AV block not expected to resolve
e.  Catheter ablation of the AV junction
f.  Neuromuscular diseases such as myotonic dystrophy, Kearns-Sayre 
syndrome, Erb dystrophy, and peroneal muscular atrophy, regardless of 
the presence of symptoms
2.  Second-degree AV block with symptomatic bradycardia
3.  Type II second-degree AV block with a wide QRS complex with or without 
symptoms
4.  Exercise-induced second- or third-degree AV block in the absence of 
ischemia
5.  Atrial fibrillation with bradycardia and pauses >5 s
Class IIa
1.  Asymptomatic third-degree AV block regardless of level
2.  Asymptomatic type II second-degree AV block with a narrow QRS complex
3.  Asymptomatic type II second-degree AV block with block within or below the 
His at electrophysiologic study
4.  First- or second-degree AV block with symptoms similar to pacemaker 
syndrome
Class IIb
1.  AV block in the setting of drug use/toxicity, when the block is expected to 
recur even with drug discontinuation
2.  Neuromuscular diseases such as myotonic dystrophy, Kearns-Sayre 
syndrome, Erb dystrophy, and peroneal muscular atrophy with any degree of 
AV block regardless of the presence of symptoms
Class III
1.  Asymptomatic first-degree AV block
2.  Asymptomatic type I second-degree AV block at the AV node level
3.  AV block that is expected to resolve or is unlikely to recur (Lyme disease, 
drug toxicity)
Source: Data from AE Epstein et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 51:e1, 2008.
SELECTION OF PACING MODE
In general, a pacing mode that maintains AV synchrony reduces 
complications of pacing such as pacemaker syndrome and pace-
maker-mediated tachycardia. This is particularly true in younger 
patients; the importance of dual-chamber pacing in the elderly, 
however, is not well established. The availability of leadless min-
iaturized pacing systems may be appropriate in patients with 
indications for single chamber ventricular pacing, such as patients 
with atrial fibrillation and AV conduction block. Several studies 
have failed to demonstrate a difference in mortality rate in older 
patients with AV block treated with a single-(VVI) compared with 
a dual-(DDD) chamber pacing mode. In some of the studies that 
randomized pacing mode, the risk of chronic atrial fibrillation and 
stroke risk decreased with physiologic pacing. In patients with 
sinus rhythm and AV block, the very modest increase in risk with 
dual-chamber pacemaker implantation appears to be justified to 
avoid the possible complications of single-chamber pacing.
■
■FURTHER READING
Epstein AE et al: ACC/AHA/HRS 2008 Guidelines for Device-Based 
Therapy of Cardiac Rhythm Abnormalities: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines (writing Committee to Revise the ACC/AHA/
NASPE 2002 Guideline Update for Implantation of Cardiac Pacemak-
ers and Antiarrhythmia Devices) developed in collaboration with the 
American Association for Thoracic Surgery and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol 51:el, 2008.
Epstein AE et al: 2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS Focused Update Incorpo-
rated Into the ACCF/AHA/HRS 2008 Guidelines for Device-Based 
Therapy of Cardiac Rhythm Abnormalities: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society devel-
oped in collaboration with the American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol 
61:e6, 2013.
Goldschlager N et al: Atrioventricular block, in Electrophysiological 
Disorders of the Heart, 2nd ed, S Saksena, AJ Camm (eds). Philadelphia, 
Elsevier Churchill Livingstone, 2012.
CHAPTER 241 Approach to Supraventricular Tachyarrhythmias
1733
Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias originate from or are dependent 
on conduction through the atrium or atrioventricular (AV) node to 
the ventricles. Most produce narrow QRS-complex tachycardia (QRS 
duration <120 ms) characteristic of ventricular activation over the 
Purkinje system. Conduction block in the left or right bundle branch 
or activation of the ventricles from an accessory pathway produces a 
wide QRS complex during supraventricular tachycardia that must be 
distinguished from ventricular tachycardia (Chap. 249). Mechanisms 
of supraventricular tachyarrhythmia can be divided into physiologic 
sinus tachycardia and pathologic tachycardia (Table 241-1). Pathologic 
tachycardia can be further sub-classified in terms of mechanism as 
reentrant arrhythmias dependendent on AV nodal conduction (e.g., AV 
reentry), large reentry circuits within the atrial tissue alone (e.g., atrial 
flutter) or focal atrial tachycardias that can be due to automaticity or 
small reentry circuits (see Figs. 243-3 and 245-1). The prognosis and 
treatment vary considerably depending on the mechanism and under-
lying heart disease.
Supraventricular tachycardia can be of brief duration, termed 
nonsustained, or can be sustained such that an intervention, such as 
cardioversion or drug administration, is required for termination. Epi-
sodes that occur with sudden onset and termination are referred to as 
paroxysmal. Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT) refers to a 
family of tachycardias including AV node reentry, AV reentry using an 
accessory pathway, and atrial tachycardia.
■
■CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Symptoms of supraventricular arrhythmia vary depending on the 
rate, duration, associated heart disease, and comorbidities and include 
palpitations, chest pain, dyspnea, diminished exertional capacity, and 
occasionally syncope. Rarely, a supraventricular arrhythmia precip-
itates cardiac arrest in patients with the Wolff-Parkinson-White syn-
drome or severe heart disease, such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Initial Evaluation  Diagnosis requires obtaining an electrocar-
diogram (ECG) at the time of symptoms. When the arrhythmia 
is ongoing, the ECG usually establishes or suggests the diagnosis 
(Figs. 241-1 to 241-3 and Table 241-2). Treatment is determined by the 
type of arrhythmia and its hemodynamic effect. For transient arrhyth-
mias, ambulatory ECG recording is warranted. Exercise testing is use-
ful for assessing exercise-related symptoms. Occasionally an invasive 
electrophysiology study is warranted to provoke the arrhythmia with 
pacing, confirm the mechanism, and usually, perform catheter ablation.
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia is most commonly 
encountered in patients who do not have structural heart disease. 
Other supraventricular arrhythmias, particularly atrial fibrillation, are 
associated with a variety of heart diseases. At initial evaluation history 
and examination should assess possible underlying heart disease. Any 
abnormal findings may warrant further cardiac evaluation.
The most common supraventricular tachycardia is sinus tachycardia 
in response to physiologic stress, such as exercise, but it can also be 
a manifestation acute illness. The first step in diagnosis of supraven-
tricular tachycardia is to consider the possibility of sinus tachycardia. 
(Chap. 242). Therapy is then determined by the clinical findings. If 
the arrhythmia is ongoing and is not due to sinus tachycardia, ini-
tial assessment determines whether immediate therapy is needed 
241
TABLE 241-1  Supraventricular Tachycardia
I.  Physiologic sinus tachycardia
Defining feature: normal sinus mechanism precipitated by exertion, stress, 
concurrent illness (Table 242-1)
II.  Pathologic supraventricular tachycardia
A.  Tachycardias originating from the atrium
Defining feature: tachycardia may continue despite beats that fail to 
conduct to the ventricles, indicating that the AV node is not participating in 
the tachycardia circuit
1.  Inappropriate sinus tachycardia
Defining feature: tachycardia from the normal sinus node area that occurs 
without an identifiable precipitating factor as a result of dysfunctional 
autonomic regulation
2.  Focal atrial tachycardia (AT)
Defining feature: Regular atrial tachycardia with defined p wave; may be 
sustained, nonsustained, paroxysmal, or incessant. Frequent sites of 
origin occur along the valve annuli of left or right atrium, pulmonary veins, 
coronary sinus musculature, superior vena cava
3. Atrial flutter—macroreentrant atrial tachycardia
Defining feature: organized reentry creates organized atrial activity, 
commonly seen as sawtooth flutter waves at rates typically faster than  
200 beats/min
a.  Common atrial flutter
i.  Right atrial reentry parallel to the tricuspid annulus and 
dependent on conduction through the isthmus between the 
inferior vena cava and tricuspid annulus
1.  Counterclockwise (as viewed from the ventricular aspect)
2.  Clockwise
b.  Atypical atrial flutter
i.  Usually due to reentry in left or right atrium associated with 
scars usually from prior surgery or catheter ablation for atrial 
fibrillation, but may be idiopathic
4. Atrial fibrillation
Defining feature: chaotic rapid atrial electrical activity with variable 
ventricular rate; the most common sustained cardiac arrhythmia in older 
adults
5.  Multifocal atrial tachycardia
Defining feature: multiple discrete p waves often seen in patients with 
pulmonary disease during acute exacerbations of pulmonary insufficiency
B.  AV nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT)
Defining feature: paroxsymal regular tachycardia with P waves visible  
at the end of the QRS complex or not visible at all; the most common 
paroxysmal sustained tachycardia in healthy young adults; more common 
in women
C.  Tachycardias associated with accessory atrioventricular pathways
1.  Orthodromic AV reentry tachycardia (AVRT)
Defining feature: paroxysmal sustained tachycardia similar to AV nodal 
reentry; during sinus rhythm, evidence of ventricular preexcitation may be 
present (Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome) or absent (concealed accessory 
pathway)
2. Preexcited tachycardia
Defining feature: wide QRS tachycardia with QRS morphology similar  
to VT
a.  Antidromic AV reentry—regular paroxysmal tachycardia
b.  Atrial fibrillation with preexcitation—irregular wide complex, or 
intermittently wide complex tachycardia, some with dangerously rapid 
rates faster than 250/min
c.  Atrial tachycardia or flutter with preexcitation
Abbreviations: AV, atrioventricular; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Approach to Supraventricular 
Tachyarrhythmias
Gregory F. Michaud,  William G. Stevenson 
to terminate the arrhythmia or slow the rate. Arrhythmias causing 
hypotension, impaired consciousness, angina, or heart failure warrant 
immediate therapy, guided by the type of arrhythmia.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1734
NARROW COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA – OBTAIN FULL
12-LEAD ECG WITH LONG RHYTHM STRIP
Regular
atrial rate
Irregular atrial
and ventricular
rates
Atrial fibrillation
VA block: more
V’s than A’s
AV block: more
A’s than V’s
1:1 AV
response
• Junctional
 tachycardia
• AVNRT
• ORT
• AT
• Rarely
 atrial flutter
• Atrial
 flutter
• Atrial
 tachycardia
• Rarely
 AVNRT with
 2:1 block
 below the
 His bundle
Multifocal atrial
tachycardia
FIGURE 241-1  Diagnostic possibilities based on the appearance of the 12-lead ECG recorded during an episode of SVT. AVNRT, AV nodal reentry tachycardia; 
ORT, orthodromic AV reentry tachycardia; AT, focal atrial tachycardia.
FIGURE 241-3  12-lead ECG of ORT due to an accessory pathway between the left ventricle and left atrium. The ECG is from an otherwise healthy young woman who had 
recurrent episodes of tachycardia, sometimes terminating with vagal maneuvers and always terminated by administration of adenosine. Termination with AV node blocking 
agents make atrial flutter and atrial tachycardia unlikely and are consistent with mechanisms dependent on AV nodal conduction, such as ORT or AVNRT. The 12-lead ECG 
shows a narrow complex tachycardia with a regular atrial rate and 1:1 atrioventricular response. Using the algorithm shown in Fig. 241-2, the most likely mechanisms are 
AVNRT or ORT. The P wave can be seen in the ST segment (arrows) and appears to be positive in lead III and negative in leads I and aVL, which suggests a left free wall 
origin. Ablation of the left free wall accessory pathway eliminated further episodes of SVT. (See Chap. 244 for further discussion of ORT and accessory pathways).
Orthodromic AV
reentry (ORT)
Atrial
tachycardia (AT)
AV NODAL BLOCKADE
Atrial flutter
AVNRT
Terminates
tachycardia
Increased AV
block with
continuation
of AT. May
terminate
tachcyardia
Increased AV
block with
continuation of
atrial flutter
exposes
underlying
flutter waves
Terminates
tachycardia
FIGURE 241-2  Diagnostic effect of increasing AV node blockade with vagal maneuvers, adenosine, verapamil or beta blockers.
CHAPTER 242 Physiologic and Nonphysiologic Sinus Tachycardia 
1735
TABLE 241-2  Usual Relation of P-wave to QRS in Paroxysmal 
Supraventricular Tachycardias (see also Fig. 241-3)
Regular tachycardia with 1:1 AV conduction:
– AVNRT either has no discernible p-waves because they are synchronous with 
the QRS, or p-waves that are negative in II, III, aVF immediately following the 
QRS (referred to as short R-P tachycardia). Atypical forms may have a longer 
R-P interval.
– ORT has p-waves following the QRS, although they may be difficult to define 
when simultaneous with the T-wave. (See example in Fig. 241-3.)
– AT typically has p-waves preceding the QRS (R-P) interval > P-R interval. P 
wave morphology depends on the focus location and is different compared 
to sinus rhythm unless the focus is near the sinus node.
Note: Further analysis of SVT with a regular ventricular rate may allow 
discrimination among the three most common forms: atrioventricular nodal 
reentry tachycardia (AVNRT), orthodromic reentrant tachycardia (ORT), or atrial 
tachycardia (AT).
■
■FURTHER READING
Appelboam A et al: Postural modification to the standard Valsalva 
manoeuvre for emergency treatment of supraventricular tachycardias 
(REVERT): A randomised controlled trial. Lancet 386:1747, 2015.
Page RL et al: 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline for the Management 
of Adult Patients with Supraventricular Tachycardia: A Report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. 
Circulation 133:e506, 2016.
242 Physiologic and  
Nonphysiologic Sinus 
Tachycardia
Gregory F. Michaud, William G. Stevenson 
Physiologic Sinus Tachycardia  The sinus node is comprised of 
a group of cells dispersed within the superior aspect of the thick ridge 
of muscle known as the crista terminalis where the posterior smooth 
atrial wall derived from the sinus venosus meets the trabeculated 
A
B
II, III, aVF
V1
aVR
SVC
Compact
AVN
Sinus
node
IVC
Triangle of Koch
TVA
Pectinate
muscles
FO
Crista terminalis
CS Os
Eustachian
ridge
FIGURE 242-1  Right atrial anatomy pertinent to normal sinus rhythm and supraventricular tachycardia. A. Typical P-wave morphology during normal sinus rhythm 
based on standard 12-lead electrocardiogram. There is a positive P wave in leads II, III, and aVF; biphasic, initially positive P wave in V1; and negative P wave in aVR. 
B. Right atrial anatomy seen from a right lateral perspective with the lateral wall opened to view the septum. AVN, atrioventricular node; CS Os, coronary sinus ostium; 
FO, fossa ovalis; IVC, inferior vena cava; SVC, superior vena cava; TVA, tricuspid valve annulus.
anterior portion of the right atrium (Fig. 242-1). Sinus p waves are char-
acterized by a frontal plane axis directed inferiorly and leftward, with 
positive p waves in leads II, III, and aVF; a negative p wave in aVR; 
and an initially positive biphasic p wave in V1. Normal sinus rhythm 
has a range of rates between 60–100 beats/min. Sinus tachycardia 
(>100 beats/min) typically occurs in response to sympathetic stimula-
tion and vagal withdrawal, whereby the rate of spontaneous depolar-
ization of the sinus node increases and the focus of earliest activation 
within the node typically shifts more leftward and closer to the supe-
rior septal aspect of the crista terminalis, thus producing taller p waves 
in the inferior limb leads when compared to normal sinus rhythm. 
Sinus bradycardia is defined as rates less than 60 beats/min; however, 
bradycadia can be normal during sleep and in fit individuals.
Sinus tachycardia is considered physiologic when it is an appropriate 
response to exercise, stress, or illness. Sinus tachycardia can be difficult 
to distinguish from focal atrial tachycardia (see below) that originates 
near the sinus node. A causative factor (such as exertion) and a gradual 
increase and decrease in rate favor sinus tachycardia, whereas abrupt 
onset and offset favor atrial tachycardia. The distinction can be difficult 
and occasionally requires extended ECG monitoring or even invasive 
electrophysiology study. Treatment for physiologic sinus tachycardia 
is aimed at the underlying condition (Table 242-1), but frequently no 
therapy is necessary.
Nonphysiologic Sinus Tachycardia  Inappropriate sinus tachy-
cardia is an uncommon condition in which the sinus rate increases 
spontaneously at rest or out of proportion to physiologic stress or exer-
tion and is within a spectrum of ill-defined conditions associated with 
autonomic dysregulation. Affected individuals are often women in the 
third or fourth decade of life. Fatigue, dizziness, and even syncope may 
accompany palpitations, which can be disabling. Additional symptoms 
TABLE 242-1  Common Causes of Physiologic Sinus Tachycardia
1.  Exercise
2.  Acute illness with fever, infection, pain
3.  Hypovolemia, anemia
4.  Hyperthyroidism
5.  Pulmonary insufficiency
6.  Drugs that have sympathomimetic, vagolytic, or vasodilator properties, e.g., 
albuterol, theophylline, tricyclic antidepressants, nifedipine, hydralazine
7.  Pheochromocytoma
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1736 of chest pain, headaches, and gastrointestinal upset are common. It 
must be distinguished from appropriate sinus tachycardia and from 
focal atrial tachycardia. The distinction between physiologic sinus 
tachycardia due to an anxiety disorder and inappropriate sinus tachy-
cardia can be difficult. Therapy is often ineffective or poorly tolerated. 
Careful titration of beta blockers and/or calcium channel blockers may 
reduce symptoms. Clonidine and serotonin reuptake inhibitors have 
also been used. Ivabradine, a drug that blocks the If current that causes 
sinus node depolarization, is now approved in the United States for use 
in heart failure, but it has also been effective in the treatment of inap-
propriate sinus tachycardia. Catheter ablation of the sinus node has 
been performed, but long-term control of symptoms is usually poor, 
and it often leaves young individuals with a permanent pacemaker.
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is characterized by 
symptomatic sinus tachycardia that occurs with postural change from 
a supine position to standing. The sinus rate increases by 30 beats/
min or to >120 beats/min within 10 min of standing and in the absence 
of hypotension. Symptoms are often similar to those in patients with 
inappropriate sinus tachycardia. POTS is sometimes due to autonomic 
dysfunction following a viral illness and may resolve spontaneously 
over 3–12 months. Volume expansion with salt supplementation, oral 
fludrocortisone, compression stockings, and the α-agonist midodrine, 
often in combination, can be helpful. Exercise training has also been 
purported to improve symptoms.
■
■FURTHER READING
George SA et al: The international POTS registry: Evaluating the 
efficacy of an exercise training intervention in a community setting. 
Heart Rhythm 13:943, 2016.
Nwazue VC et al: Postural tachycardia syndrome and inappropriate 
sinus tachycardia: Role of autonomic modulation and sinus node 
automaticity. J Am Heart Assoc 3:e000700, 2014.
Salazar Adum JP, Arora R: Treatment for inappropriate sinus tachy-
cardia. Am J Ther 24:e574, 2017.
Sheldon RS et al: 2015 Heart Rhythm Society expert consensus 
statement on the diagnosis and treatment of postural tachycardia 
syndrome, inappropriate sinus tachycardia, and vasovagal syncope. 
Heart Rhythm 12:e41–63, 2015.
Focal atrial tachycardia (AT) can be due to abnormal automaticity, 
triggered automaticity, or a small reentry circuit confined to the 
atrium or atrial tissue extending into a pulmonary vein, the coronary 
sinus, or vena cava. It can be sustained, nonsustained, paroxysmal, or 
incessant. Focal AT accounts for ~10% of PSVTs in patients referred 
for catheter ablation. Nonsustained AT is commonly observed on 24-h 
ambulatory ECG recordings, and the prevalence increases with age. In 
fact, frequent atrial ectopy and nonsustained AT is often a precursor 
to more significant arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation and flutter. 
Though unsustained, frequent atrial ectopy or short bursts of AT 
may be symptomatic and require therapy similar to that required for 
focal AT.
AT can occur in the absence of structural heart disease or may be 
associated with any condition that causes atrial fibrosis, including 
prior catheter ablation. Areas of fibrosis can be a nidus for abnormal 
automaticity from damaged cells or microreentry within zones of slow 
conduction within and on the border of fibrotic areas. Sympathetic 
243
Focal Atrial Tachycardia
Gregory F. Michaud,   
William G. Stevenson 
stimulation is a promoting factor and the emergence of AT can be a sign 
of underlying illness. AT with AV block may occur in digitalis toxicity. 
Symptoms from AT are highly variable but similar to other supraven-
tricular tachycardias (SVTs). Incessant AT can cause tachycardia- 
induced cardiomyopathy.
AT typically presents with 1:1 AV conduction or with AV block that 
can be Wenckebach type conduction or fixed (e.g., 2:1 or 3:1). Because 
it is not dependent on AV nodal conduction, AT will not terminate 
with AV block, and the atrial rate will not be affected, which distin-
guishes AT from most AV nodal–dependent SVTs, such as AV nodal 
reentry and AV reentry using an accessory pathway (see below). An 
accelerated warm-up phase after initiation or cool-down phase prior 
to termination also favors AT rather than AV nodal–dependent SVT, 
as this is a common observation with triggered automaticity. P waves 
are often discrete, with an intervening isoelectric segment, in contrast 
to atrial flutter and macroreentrant AT (see below) because atrial 
activation from a focal source occurs though a small portion of the 
tachycardia cycle. When 1:1 conduction to the ventricles is present, the 
arrhythmia can resemble sinus tachycardia typically with a P-R interval 
shorter than the R-P interval (Fig. 243-1), particularly when sympathetic 
tone produces rapid AV nodal conduction. It can be distinguished from 
sinus tachycardia by the P-wave morphology, which usually differs 
from sinus p waves depending on the location of the focus. Focal AT 
tends to originate in areas of complex atrial anatomy, such as the crista 
terminalis, valve annuli, atrial septum, and atrial muscle extending 
along cardiac thoracic veins (superior vena cava, coronary sinus, and 
pulmonary veins) (Fig. 243-2), and the location can often be estimated 
by the P-wave morphology. AT from the atrial septum will frequently 
have a narrower P-wave duration than sinus rhythm. AT from the left 
atrium will usually have a monophasic, positive P wave in lead V1 and 
negative P waves in I and aVL indicating movement away from the left 
atrial free wall. AT that originates from superior atrial locations, such as 
the superior vena cava or superior pulmonary veins, will be positive in 
the inferior limb leads II, III, and aVF, whereas AT from a more inferior 
location, such as the ostium of the coronary sinus, will inscribe negative 
P waves in these same leads. When the focus is in the superior aspect of 
the crista terminalis, close to the sinus node, however, the p wave will 
resemble that of sinus tachycardia. Abrupt onset and offset then favor 
AT rather than sinus tachycardia. Depending on the atrial rate, the P 
wave may fall on top of the T wave or, during 2:1 conduction, may 
fall coincident with the QRS. Maneuvers that increase AV block, such 
as carotid sinus massage, Valsalva maneuver, or administration of AV 
nodal–blocking agents, such as adenosine, are useful to create AV block 
that will expose the p wave (Fig. 243-3).
Acute management of sudden-onset, sustained AT is the same as for 
other forms of PSVT (Chaps. 241 and 244), but the response to phar-
macologic therapy is variable, likely depending on the mechanism. For 
AT due to reentry, administration of adenosine or vagal maneuvers 
may transiently increase AV block without terminating tachycardia. 
Some ATs terminate with a sufficient dose of adenosine, consistent with 
triggered activity as the mechanism. Cardioversion can be effective in 
some, but fails in others because of immediate recurrence, suggesting 
automaticity as the mechanism in these cases. Beta blockers and cal-
cium channel blockers may slow the ventricular rate by increasing AV 
block, which can improve tolerance of the arrhythmias, but large doses 
are sometimes required. Potential precipitating factors and intercur-
rent illness should be sought and corrected. Underlying heart disease 
should be considered and excluded.
For patients with recurrent episodes, beta blockers, calcium channel 
blockers such as diltiazem or verapamil, and antiarrhythmic drugs 
such as flecainide, propafenone, disopyramide, sotalol, and amiodar-
one can be effective, but potential toxicities and adverse effects often 
warrant avoidance for long term use (Tables 243-1, 243-2, and 243-3). 
Catheter ablation targeting the AT focus is effective in more than 80% 
of patients and is recommended for recurrent symptomatic AT when 
drugs fail or are not desired or for incessant AT causing tachycardia- 
induced cardiomyopathy.
CHAPTER 243 Focal Atrial Tachycardia
1737
VI
VI
A
B
FIGURE 243-3  Atrial tachycardia (AT) with 1:1 and 2:1 atrioventricular (AV) conduction. Arrows indicate P waves. A. AT with 1:1 AV relationship and R-P > P-R. B. 
Same AT with 2:1 AV relationship after AV nodal–blocking agent administered. (Adapted from F Marchlinski: The tachyarrhythmias in DL Longo et al [eds]: Harrison’s 
Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2012, pp 1878–1900.)
LSV
LIV
RIV
SVC
IVC
RSV
LAA
aVL
V1
Left atrium
Right atrium
Lateral left atrium
Posterior septum
narrow P-wave
II, III, aVF
RAA
FIGURE 243-2  Location of focal atrial tachycardia focus estimated by P-wave morphology. LAA, left atrial appendage; LIV, left inferior pulmonary vein; LSV, left superior 
pulmonary vein; RAA, right atrial appendage; RIV, right inferior pulmonary vein; RSV, right superior pulmonary vein; SVC, superior vena cava.
AT
AVRT
AVNRT
• AV node reentry
No P-wave visible
No P-wave visible
RP < PR
RP > PR
RP < PR
RP > PR
• AV node reentry
• AV reentry using an
accessory pathway 
• Focal atrial tachycardia
• AV reentry using an
accessory pathway
• AV node reentry
uncommon form
A
B
FIGURE 243-1  Common mechanisms underlying paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia along with typical R-P relationships. A. Schematic showing a four-chamber 
view of the heart with atrioventricular node in green and an accessory pathway between the left atrium and left ventricle in blue. Atrial tachycardia (AT; red circuit) 
is confined completely to atrial tissue. Atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT; blue circuit) uses atrioventricular (AV) nodal and perinodal atrial tissue. 
Atrioventricular reentry tachycardia (AVRT; black circuit) uses atrial and ventricular tissue, accessory pathway, AV node, and specialized conduction fibers (His-Purkinje) 
as part of the reentry circuit. B. Typical relation of the P wave to QRS, commonly described as the R-P to P-R relationships for the different tachycardia mechanisms.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1738
TABLE 243-3  Common and Proarrhythmic Toxicities of Antiarrhythmic Agents
DRUG
POTENTIAL PROARRHYTHMIC TOXICITIES
COMMON TOXICITIES
Amiodarone
Sinus bradycardia, AV block, increase in defibrillation threshold. Rare:  
long QT and torsades des pointes, incessant slow VT in heart disease
Tremor, peripheral neuropathy, pulmonary fibrosis or 
inflammation, hypo- and hyperthyroidism, hepatitis, 
photosensitivity
Adenosine
Transient profound pauses, atrial fibrillation
Cough, flushing, chest pain, anxiety
Digoxin
AV block, fascicular tachycardia, accelerated junctional rhythm, atrial 
tachycardia with AV block
Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, visual changes
Disopyramide
Long QT and torsades des pointes, 1:1 ventricular response to atrial  
flutter
Anticholinergic effects, acute urinary retention (males), negative 
inotropy
Dofetilide
Long QT and torsades des pointes
Nausea
Dronedarone
Bradyarrhythmias and AV block, long QT and torsades des pointes (rare)
Gastrointestinal intolerance, exacerbation of heart failure
Flecainide
1:1 Ventricular response to atrial flutter; increased risk of ventricular 
tachycardias in patients with structural heart disease; sinus bradycardia
Dizziness, nausea, headache, decreased myocardial contractility
Ibutilide
Long QT and torsades des pointes
Nausea
Lidocaine
Slow VT in some patients with structural heart disease
Dizziness, confusion, delirium, seizures, coma
Mexiletine
Slow VT in patients with structural heart disease
Ataxia, tremor, gait disturbances, rash, nausea
Procainamide
Long QT and torsades des pointes, accelerated ventricular rate in AF or flutter
Lupus erythematosus–like syndrome (more common in slow 
acetylators), anorexia, nausea, neutropenia
Propafenone
1:1 Ventricular response to atrial flutter; increased risk ventricular 
tachycardias in patients with structural heart disease; sinus bradycardia
Taste disturbance, dyspepsia, nausea, vomiting
Quinidine
Long QT and torsades des pointes, accelerated ventricular rate in AF or flutter
Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, cinchonism, thrombocytopenia
Sotalol
Long QT and torsades des pointes
Hypotension, bronchospasm from β-blocking effect
Abbreviations: AF, atrial fibrillation; AV, atrioventricular; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
TABLE 243-2  Commonly Used Antiarrhythmic Agents: Chronic Oral Dosing/Primary Indications
DRUG
DOSING ORAL, mg, 
MAINTENANCE
HALF-LIFE, h
PRIMARY ROUTE(S) OF 
METABOLISM/ELIMINATION
MOST COMMON INDICATION
CLASSa
Acebutolol
200–400 q12h
6–7
Renal/hepatic
AF rate control/SVT
II
 
 
 
 
Long QT/RVOT VT
 
Amiodarone
100–400 qd
40–55 d
Hepatic
AF/VT prevention
IIIb
Atenolol
25–100 per d
6–9
Renal
AF rate control/SVT
II
 
 
 
 
Long QT/RVOT VT
 
Digoxin
0.125–0.25 qd
38–48
Renal
AF rate control
—
Diltiazem
30–60 q6h
3–4.5
Hepatic
AF rate control/SVT
IV
Disopyramide
100–300 q6–8h
4–10
Renal 50%/hepatic
AF/SVT prevention
Ia
Dofetilide
0.125–0.5 q12h
10
Renal
AF prevention
III
Dronedarone
400 q12h
13–19
Hepatic
AF prevention
IIIb
Flecainide
50–200 q12h
7–22
Hepatic 75%/renal
AF/SVT/VT prevention
Ic
Metoprolol
25–100 q6h
3–8
Hepatic
AF rate control/SVT
II
 
 
 
 
Long QT/RVOT VT
 
Mexiletine
150–300 q8–12h
10–14
Hepatic
VT prevention
Ib
Nadolol
40–240 per d
10–24
Renal
Same as metoprolol
II
Propafenone
150–300 q8h
2–8
Hepatic
AF/SVT/VT prevention
Ic
Quinidine
300–600 q6h
6–8
Hepatic 75%/renal
AF/SVT/VT prevention
Ia
Sotalol
80–160 q12h
12
Renal
AF/VT prevention
III
Verapamil
80–120 q6–8h
4.5–12
Hepatic/renal
AF rate control/RVOT VT
IV
 
 
 
 
Idiopathic LV VT
 
aClassification of antiarrhythmic drugs: class I—agents that primarily block inward sodium current; class II—antisympathetic agents; class III—agents that primarily prolong action 
potential duration; class IV—calcium channel-blocking agents. bAmiodarone and dronedarone both are grouped in class III, but both also have class I, II, and IV properties.
Abbreviations: AF, atrial fibrillation; LV, left ventricular; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
TABLE 243-1  Commonly Used Antiarrhythmic Agents—Intravenous Dose Range/Primary Indication
DRUG
LOADING
MAINTENANCE
PRIMARY INDICATION
CLASSa
Adenosine
6–18 mg (rapid bolus)
N/A
Terminate reentrant SVT involving AV node
—
Amiodarone
15 mg/min for 10 min, 1 mg/min for 6 h
0.5–1 mg/min
AF, AFL, SVT, VT/VF
III
Digoxin
0.25 mg q2h until 1 mg total
0.125–0.25 mg/d
AF/AFL rate control
—
Diltiazem
0.25 mg/kg over 3–5 min (max 20 mg)
5–15 mg/h
SVT, AF/AFL rate control
IV
Esmolol
500 μg/kg over 1 min
50 μg/kg per min
AF/AFL rate control
II
Ibutilide
1 mg over 10 min if over 60 kg
N/A
Terminate AF/AFL
III
Lidocaine
1–3 mg/kg at 20–50 mg/min
1–4 mg/min
VT
IB
Metoprolol
5 mg over 3–5 min × 3 doses
1.25–5 mg q6h
SVT, AF rate control; exercise-induced VT; long QT
II
Procainamide
15 mg/kg over 60 min
1–4 mg/min
Convert/prevent AF/VT
IA
Quinidine
6–10 mg/kg at 0.3–0.5 mg/kg per min
N/A
Convert/prevent AF/VT
IA
Verapamil
5–10 mg over 3–5 min
2.5–10 mg/h
SVT, AF rate control
IV
aClassification of antiarrhythmic drugs: class I—agents that primarily block inward sodium current; class IA agents also prolong action potential duration; class II—
antisympathetic agents; class III—agents that primarily prolong action potential duration; class IV—calcium channel–blocking agents.
Abbreviations: AF, atrial fibrillation; AFL, atrial flutter; AV, atrioventricular; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
CHAPTER 244 Paroxysmal Supraventricular Tachycardias
1739
■
■FURTHER READING
Link MS: Clinical practice. Evaluation and initial treatment of supraven-
tricular tachycardia. N Engl J Med 367:1438, 2012.
Liu CF et al: Unifying algorithm for mechanistic diagnosis of atrial 
tachycardia. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 9: pii: e004028, 2016.
Page RL et al: 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline for the Management 
of Adult Patients with Supraventricular Tachycardia: A Report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. 
Circulation 133:e506, 2016.
244 Paroxysmal Supraventricular 
Tachycardias
Gregory F. Michaud, William G. Stevenson 
Atrioventricular Nodal Reentry Tachycardia 
AV nodal 
reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) is the most common form of paroxys-
mal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT), representing ~60% of cases 
referred for catheter ablation. It most commonly manifests in the second 
to fourth decades of life, often in women. It is often well tolerated, but 
rapid tachycardia, particularly in the elderly, may cause angina, pulmo-
nary edema, hypotension, or syncope. It is not usually associated with 
structural heart disease.
The mechanism is reentry involving the AV node and the perinodal 
atrium, made possible by the existence of multiple pathways for 
conduction from the atrium into the AV node that are capable of con-
duction in two directions (Fig. 244-1). Most forms of AVNRT utilize a 
slowly conducting AV nodal pathway (right inferior extension) that 
extends from the compact AV node near the His bundle, inferiorly 
along the tricuspid valve annulus to the floor of the coronary sinus. 
The reentry wavefront propagates up this slowly conducting pathway 
to the compact AV node and then exits from the fast pathway at the top 
of the AV node. The path back to the slow pathway probably involves 
the left atrial septum which has connections to the coronary sinus mus-
culature. More unusual forms of AVNRT utilize a left inferior extension 
that connects to the compact AV node through the roof of the coronary 
sinus, or in extremely rare cases, directly from the mitral valve annulus 
avoiding the coronary sinus musculature altogether. In typical forms, 
the conduction time from the compact AV node region to the atrium is 
similar to that from the compact node to the His bundle and ventricles, 
such that atrial activation occurs at about the same time as ventricular 
activation. The P wave is therefore inscribed during, slightly before, or 
slightly after the QRS and can be difficult to discern. Often the P wave 
is seen at the end of the QRS complex as a pseudo-r′ in lead V1 and 
pseudo-S waves in leads II, III, and aVF (Fig. 244-1A). More unusual 
forms of AVNRT have P waves falling later, anywhere between QRS 
complexes, in which case an inverted P wave is seen in the inferior 
limb leads as seen in Fig. 244-2 where the inverted P wave is seen in the 
T wave. The rate can vary with sympathetic tone. Simultaneous atrial 
and ventricular contraction results in atrial contraction against a closed 
tricuspid valve producing cannon a wave visible in the jugular venous 
pulse often perceived as a fluttering sensation in the neck. Elevated 
venous pressures may also lead to release of natriuretic peptides that 
cause post-tachycardia diuresis. In contrast to ATs, maneuvers or med-
ications that produce AV nodal block terminate the arrhythmia.
Acute treatment is the same as for other forms of PSVT (discussed 
below). Whether ongoing therapy is warranted depends on the severity 
of symptoms and frequency of episodes. Reassurance and instruction 
as to how to perform the Valsalva maneuver to terminate episodes are 
sufficient for many patients. Administration of an oral beta blocker, 
verapamil, or diltiazem at the onset of an episode has been used to 
facilitate termination. Chronic therapy with these medications or fle-
cainide is an option if prophylactic therapy is needed. Catheter ablation 
of the slow AV nodal pathway is recommended for patients with recur-
rent or severe episodes or when drug therapy is ineffective, not toler-
ated, or not desired by the patient. Catheter ablation is curative in >95% 
of patients. The major risk is atrioventricular (AV) block requiring 
permanent pacemaker implantation, which occurs in <1% of patients.
Junctional Tachycardia  Junctional ectopic tachycardia (JET) is 
due to automaticity within the AV node. It is rare in adults and more fre-
quently encountered as an incessant tachycardia in children, often in the 
perioperative period of surgery for congenital heart disease. It presents 
as a narrow QRS tachycardia, often with ventriculoatrial (VA) block, 
such that AV dissociation is present. JET can occur as a manifestation of 
increased adrenergic tone and may be seen after administration of iso-
proterenol, particularly after catheter ablation in the perinodal region. 
It may also occur for a short period of time after ablation for AVNRT.
Accelerated junctional rhythm is a junctional automatic rhythm 
between 50 and 100 beats/min. Initiation may occur with gradual 
acceleration in rate, suggesting an automatic focus, or after a premature 
ventricular contraction, suggesting a focus of triggered automatic-
ity. VA conduction is usually present, 
with P-wave morphology and timing 
such that it resembles AVNRT at a 
slow rate. It can be related to increased 
sympathetic tone and may produce pal-
pitations. It usually does not require 
specific therapy.
■
■ACCESSORY PATHWAYS 
AND THE WOLFF-PARKINSON-
WHITE SYNDROME
Accessory pathways (APs) occur in 1 
in 1500–2000 people and are associated 
with a variety of arrhythmias including 
narrow-complex PSVT, wide-complex 
tachycardias, and, rarely, sudden death. 
Most patients have structurally normal 
hearts, but APs are associated with 
Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve 
and forms of hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy including PRKAG2 mutations, 
Danon’s disease, and Fabry’s disease.
APs are abnormal connections that 
allow conduction between the atrium 
and ventricles across the AV ring 
II
V1
CS
Tricuspid
valve
P waves
A
B
Inferior AV node
extension:
Slow pathway
Compact AV node:
Fast pathway
FIGURE 244-1  Atrioventricular (AV) node reentry. A. Leads II and V1 are shown. P waves are visible at the end of the 
QRS complex and are negative in lead II, and may give the impression of S waves in the inferior limb leads II, III, and 
aVF and an R’ in lead V1. B. Stylized version of the AV nodal reentry circuit within the triangle of Koch (see Fig. 242-1) 
that involves AV node and its extensions along with perinodal atrial tissue.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1740
(Fig. 244-3). They are present from birth and are due to failure of com-
plete partitioning of atrium and ventricle by the fibrous AV rings. They 
occur across either an AV valve annulus or the septum, most frequently 
between the left atrium and free wall of the left ventricle, followed 
by posteroseptal, right free wall, and anteroseptal locations. If the 
impulse from the sinus node conducts through the AP to the ventricle 
(antegrade) before the impulse conducts through the AV node and His 
bundle, then the ventricles are preexcited during sinus rhythm, and 
the ECG shows a short P-R interval (<0.12 s), slurred initial portion of 
the QRS (delta wave), and prolonged QRS duration produced by slow 
conduction through direct activation of ventricular myocardium over 
the AP (Fig. 244-3A). The morphology of the QRS and delta wave is 
determined by the AP location (Fig. 244-4) and the degree of fusion 
between the excitation wavefronts from conduction over the AV node 
and conduction over the AP. Right-sided pathways preexcite the right 
ventricle, producing a left bundle branch block–like configuration in 
lead V1, and often create marked preexcitation because of relatively 
close proximity of the AP to the sinus node (Fig. 244-4). Left-sided 
pathways preexcite the left ventricle and may produce a right bundle 
branch–like configuration in lead V1 and a negative delta wave in 
aVL, indicating initial depolarization of the lateral portion of the left 
ventricle that can mimic q waves of lateral wall infarction (Fig. 244-4). 
Because of the relatively large distance between the sinus node and 
left free wall APs, preexcitation may be minimal or absent on 12-lead 
ECG. Preexcitation due to an AP at the diaphragmatic surface of the 
heart, typically in the paraseptal region, produces delta waves that are 
negative in leads III and aVF, mimicking the q waves of inferior wall 
infarction (Fig. 244-4). Preexcitation can be intermittent and disappear 
during exercise as conduction over the AV node accelerates and may 
take over ventricular activation completely.
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome is defined as a preexcited 
QRS during sinus rhythm and episodes of PSVT. There are a number of 
variations of APs, which may not cause preexcitation and/or arrhyth-
mias. Concealed APs allow only retrograde conduction, from ventricle 
to atrium, so no preexcitation is present during sinus rhythm, but SVT 
can occur. Other unusual forms of APs occur. Fasciculoventricular 
connections between the His bundle and ventricular septum produce 
preexcitation but do not cause arrhythmia, probably because the circuit 
is too short to promote reentry. Atriofascicular pathways, also known 
as Mahaim fibers, probably represent a duplicate AV node and His-
Purkinje system that connect the right atrium to fascicles of the right 
bundle branch and produce a wide complex tachycardia having a left 
bundle branch block configuration.
AV Reentry Tachycardia  The most common tachycardia caused 
by an AP is the PSVT designated orthodromic AV reentry. The circulating 
reentry wavefront propagates from the atrium anterogradely over the 
AV node and His-Purkinje system to the ventricles and then reenters 
the atria via retrograde conduction over the AP (Fig. 244-3B). The QRS 
is narrow or may have typical right or left bundle branch block, but 
without preexcitation during tachycardia. Because excitation through 
the AV node and AP are necessary, AV or VA block results in tachy-
cardia termination. During sinus rhythm, preexcitation is seen if the 
pathway also allows anterograde conduction (Fig. 244-3A). Most com-
monly, during tachycardia the R-P interval is shorter than the P-R inter-
val and can resemble AVNRT (see Fig. 242-1). Unlike typical AVNRT, 
P waves always follow the QRS and are never simultaneous with a 
narrow QRS complex because the ventricles must be activated before 
the reentry wavefront reaches the AP and conducts back to the atrium. 
The morphology of the P wave is determined by the pathway location, 
but can be difficult to assess because it is usually inscribed during the ST 
segment. The P wave in posteroseptal APs is negative in leads II, III, and 
aVF, similar to that of AV nodal reentry, but P-wave morphology differs 
from AV nodal reentry for pathways in other locations (Fig. 244-4). 
Figure 241-3 is an example of a pathway that has clear negative P 
waves in leads I and aVL that was due to an AP inserting in the lateral 
left atrium.
Occasionally, an AP conducts extremely slowly in the retrograde 
direction, resulting in tachycardia with a long R-P interval, similar to 
most ATs. These pathways are usually located in the septal region and 
have negative P waves in leads II, III, and aVF. Slow AP conduction 
facilitates reentry, often leading to nearly incessant tachycardia, known 
aVr
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
A
B
III
II
I
FIGURE 244-2  Comparison of 12-lead ECG tracings showing SVT (Panel A) and normal sinus rhythm (Panel B). The P wave is observed at the end of the T wave and 
morphology can be inferred from comparing to sinus rhythm. P waves are inverted in the inferior limb leads (II, III, and aVF), positive in V1, I, and aVL consistent with 
conduction retrogradely through the AV junction. In typical forms of AVNRT, the P wave is not visible or is seen at the end of the QRS complex.
CHAPTER 244 Paroxysmal Supraventricular Tachycardias
1741
Sinus rhythm—
antegrade
AP conduction
C
Orthodomic AV
reentry—retrograde
AP conduction
Antidromic AV
reentry—antegrade
AP conduction
p
p
Delta-wave
B
A
FIGURE 244-3  Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome. A. A 12-lead electro-
cardiogram in sinus rhythm (SR) of a patient with WPW demonstrating short P-R 
interval, delta waves, and widened QRS complex. This patient had an anteroseptal 
location of the AP. B. Orthodromic AV reentry in a patient with WPW syndrome using 
a posteroseptal AP. Note the P waves in the ST segment (arrows) seen in lead III and 
normal appearance of QRS complex. C. Three most common rhythms associated 
with WPW syndrome: sinus rhythm demonstrating antegrade conduction over the 
AP and AV node; orthodromic AVRT using retrograde conduction over the AP and 
antegrade conduction over the AV node; and antidromic AVRT using retrograde 
conduction over the AV node and antegrade conduction over the AP. AP, accessory 
pathway; AV, atrioventricular; AVRT, atrioventricular reentry tachycardia; WPW, 
Wolff-Parkinson-White.
Left lateral
Right free wall
aVL
V1
Postero-septal
PV
PV
AV
TV
MV
II
aVF
III
Coronary
sinus (CS)
FIGURE 244-4  Potential locations for accessory pathways in patients with 
Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome and typical QRS appearance of delta waves 
that can mimic underlying structural heart disease such as myocardial infraction 
of bundle branch block. AV, aortic valve; MV, mitral valve; PV, pulmonary valve; 
TV, tricuspid valve.
as permanent junctional reciprocating tachycardia (PJRT). Tachycardia- 
induced cardiomyopathy can occur. Without an invasive electrophysi-
ology study, it may be difficult to distinguish this form of orthodromic 
AV reentry from atypical AV nodal reentry or AT.
Preexcited Tachycardias  Preexcited tachycardia occurs when 
the ventricles are activated by antegrade conduction over the AP 
(Fig. 244-3C). The most common mechanism is antidromic AV reentry in 
which activation propagates from atrium to ventricle via the AP and 
then conducts retrogradely to the atria via the His-Purkinje system 
and the AV node (or rarely a second AP). The wide QRS complex is 
produced entirely via ventricular excitation over the AP because there 
is no contribution of ventricular activation over more rapidly conduct-
ing specialized His-Purkinje fibers. This tachycardia is often indistin-
guishable from monomorphic ventricular tachycardia. The presence of 
preexcitation in sinus rhythm suggests the diagnosis.
Preexcited tachycardia also occurs if an AP allows antegrade con-
duction to the ventricles during AT, atrial flutter, atrial fibrillation 
(AF) (Fig. 244-5), or AV nodal reentry, otherwise known as bystander 
AP conduction. AF and atrial flutter are potentially life threatening 
if the AP allows very rapid repetitive conduction. Approximately 
25% of APs causing preexcitation allow minimum R-to-R intervals of 
<250 ms during AF and are associated with a higher risk of inducing 
ventricular fibrillation and sudden death. Preexcited AF presents as a 
wide-complex, very irregular rhythm. During AF, the ventricular rate is 
determined by the conduction properties of the AP and AV node. The 
QRS complex can appear quite bizarre and change on a beat-to-beat 
basis due to the variability in the degree of fusion from activation over 
the AV node and AP, or all beats may be due to conduction over the 
AP (Fig. 244-5). Ventricular activation from the Purkinje system may 
depolarize the ventricular end of the AP and prevent atrial wavefront 
conduction over the AP. Slowing AV nodal conduction without slowing 
AP conduction can thereby facilitate AP conduction and dangerously 
accelerate the ventricular rate. Administration of AV nodal–blocking 
agents including oral or intravenous verapamil, diltiazem, beta block-
ers, intravenous adenosine, and intravenous amiodarone are contrain-
dicated during preexcited AF. Rapid preexcited tachycardia should be 
treated with electrical cardioversion or intravenous procainamide or 
ibutilide, which may terminate the arrhythmia or slow the ventricular 
rate.
Management of Patients with APs  Acute management of 
orthodromic AV reentry is discussed below for PSVT. Patients with 
WPW syndrome may have wide-complex tachycardia due to anti-
dromic AV reentry, orthodromic AV with bundle branch block, or a 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1742
FIGURE 244-5  Preexcited atrial fibrillation (AF) due to conduction over a left free wall accessory pathway (AP). The electrocardiogram shows rapid irregular QRS 
complexes that represent fusion between conduction over the atrioventricular node and left free wall AP. Shortest R-R intervals between preexcited QRS complexes of 
<250 ms, as in this case, indicate a risk of sudden death with this arrhythmia.
preexcited tachycardia, and treatment depends on the underlying 
rhythm.
Initial patient evaluation should include assessment for aggravating 
factors, including intercurrent illness and factors that increase sympa-
thetic tone. Examination should focus on excluding underlying heart 
disease. An echocardiogram is reasonable to exclude Ebstein’s anomaly 
and forms of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy that can be associated with 
APs.
Patients with preexcitation who have symptoms of arrhythmia are at 
risk for developing AF and sudden death if they have an AP that allows 
rapid antegrade conduction. The risk of cardiac arrest is in the range of 
2 per 1000 patients in adults but is likely greater in children. An invasive 
electrophysiology study is recommended to assess whether the pathway 
can support dangerously rapid heart rates if AF were to occur, and is 
usually combined with potentially curative catheter ablation. Catheter 
ablation is warranted for recurrent arrhythmias when drugs are ineffec-
tive, not tolerated, or not desired by the patient (Fig. 244-5). Efficacy is 
in the range of 95% depending on the location of the AP. Serious com-
plications occur in fewer than 3% of patients, but can include AV block, 
cardiac tamponade, thromboemboli, coronary artery injury, and vascular 
access complications. Procedure mortality is <1 in 1000 patients. Alter-
natively attempts to gain reassurance that the AP is not high risk with 
ambulatory monitoring or exercise testing; abrupt loss of conduction 
(preexcitation) at physiologic heart rates is consistent with a low risk 
pathway, but is not completely reliable. Gradual loss of AP conduction 
with increased sympathetic tone does not reliably indicate low risk 
since this can occur as AV nodal conduction time shortens.
For patients with concealed APs or known low-risk APs causing 
orthodromic AV reentry, chronic therapy is guided by symptoms and 
frequency of events. Vagal maneuvers may terminate episodes, as may 
a dose of beta blocker, verapamil, or diltiazem taken at the onset of an 
episode. Chronic therapy with these agents or flecainide can reduce the 
frequency of episodes in some patients.
Adults who have preexcitation but no arrhythmia symptoms have 
a risk of sudden death estimated to be 1 per 1000 patient-years. Elec-
trophysiology study is usually advised for people in occupations for 
which an arrhythmia occurrence would place them or others at risk, 
such as police, military, and pilots, or for individuals who desire 
evaluation for risk. Routine follow-up without therapy is reasonable 
in others. Children are at greater risk of sudden death, ~2 per 1000 
patient-years.
TREATMENT
Paroxysmal Supraventricular Tachycardia
Acute management of narrow QRS PSVT is guided by the clinical 
presentation. Continuous ECG monitoring should be implemented 
and a 12-lead ECG should always be obtained when possible, since 
this may be useful in determining the mechanism. In the presence 
of hypotension with unconsciousness or respiratory distress, QRS- 
synchronous direct current cardioversion is warranted, but this is 
rarely needed, because intravenous adenosine works promptly in 
most situations (see below). For stable individuals, initial therapy 
takes advantage of the fact that most PSVTs are dependent on AV 
nodal conduction (AV nodal reentry or orthodromic AV reentry) and 
therefore likely to respond to sympatholytic and vagotonic maneu-
vers and drugs (Fig. 244-6). As these are administered, the ECG 
should be continuously recorded, because the response can establish 
the diagnosis. AV block with only transient slowing of tachycardia 
may expose ongoing P waves, indicating AT or atrial flutter as the 
mechanism.
Carotid sinus massage is reasonable provided the risk of carotid 
vascular disease is low, as indicated by absence of carotid bruits and 
no prior history of stroke. A Valsalva maneuver should be attempted 
in cooperative individuals, and if effective, the patient can be taught 
to perform this maneuver as needed. If vagal maneuvers fail or 
cannot be performed, intravenous adenosine will terminate the vast 
majority of PSVT episodes by transiently blocking conduction in 
the AV node. Adenosine may produce transient chest pain, dysp-
nea, and anxiety. It is contraindicated in patients with prior cardiac 
transplantation due to potential hypersensitivity. It can theoretically 
CHAPTER 245 Common Atrial Flutter, Macroreentrant, and Multifocal Atrial Tachycardias
1743
Hemodynamically stable 
regular, Narrow QRS tachyca
Vagal maneuvers
i.v. adenosine
i.v. verapamil/diltiazem
Termination
No termination
i.v. Ibutilide + AV nodal blocking agent
i.v. procainamide + AV nodal blocking agent
cardioversion
Hemodynamically stable 
regular, narrow QRS tachycardia
Vagal maneuvers
IV adenosine
IV verapamil/diltiazem
Termination
No termination
IV ibutilide + AV nodal–blocking agent
IV procainamide + AV nodal–blocking agent
Cardioversion
FIGURE 244-6  Treatment algorithm for patients presenting with hemodynamically 
stable paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. AV, atrioventricular.
aggravate bronchospasm. Adenosine precipitates AF, which is usu-
ally brief, in up to 15% of patients, so it should be used cautiously 
in patients with WPW syndrome in whom AF may produce hemo-
dynamic instability. Intravenous beta blockers and calcium channel 
blockers (verapamil or diltiazem) are also effective but may cause 
hypotension before and after arrhythmia termination and have a 
longer duration of action. These agents can also be given orally and 
can be taken by the patient on an as-needed basis to slow ventricular 
rate and facilitate termination by Valsalva maneuver.
The differential diagnosis of wide-complex tachycardia includes 
ventricular tachycardia (Chap. 247), PSVT with bundle branch 
block aberrancy, and preexcited tachycardia (see above). In gen-
eral, these should be managed as ventricular tachycardia until 
proven otherwise. If the tachycardia is regular and the patient is 
stable, a trial of intravenous adenosine is reasonable. Very irregular 
wide-complex tachycardia is most likely preexcited AF or flutter 
(see above) and should be managed with cardioversion, intrave-
nous procainamide, or ibutilide. If the diagnosis of PSVT with 
aberrancy is unequivocal, as may be the case in patients with prior 
episodes, treatment for PSVT with vagal maneuvers and adenosine 
is reasonable. In all cases, continuous ECG monitoring should 
be implemented, and emergency cardioversion and defibrillation 
should be available.
■
■FURTHER READING
Al-Khatib SM et al: Risk stratification for arrhythmic events in patients 
with asymptomatic pre-excitation: A systematic review for the 2015 
ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline for the Management of Adult Patients 
with Supraventricular Tachycardia: A Report of the American College 
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation 
133:e575, 2016.
Appelboam A et al: Postural modification to the standard Valsalva 
manoeuvre for emergency treatment of supraventricular tachycardias 
(REVERT): A randomised controlled trial. Lancet 386:1747, 2015.
Gupta S, Figueredo VM: Tachycardia mediated cardiomyopathy: 
Pathophysiology, mechanisms, clinical features and management. Int 
J Cardiol 172:40, 2014.
Link MS: Clinical practice. Evaluation and initial treatment of supraven-
tricular tachycardia. N Engl J Med 367:1438, 2012.
Page RL et al: 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline for the Management 
of Adult Patients with Supraventricular Tachycardia: A Report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. 
Circulation 133:e506, 2016.
245 Common Atrial Flutter, 
Macroreentrant, and 
Multifocal Atrial Tachycardias
Gregory F. Michaud, William G. Stevenson 
Macroreentrant atrial tachycardia is due to a large reentry circuit, often 
associated with areas of scar in the atria. Common or typical right atrial 
flutter is due to a circuit that revolves around the tricuspid valve 
annulus, bounded anteriorly by the annulus and posteriorly by func-
tional conduction block in the crista terminalis. The wavefront passes 
between the inferior vena cava and the tricuspid valve annulus, known 
as the sub-Eustachian or cavotricuspid isthmus, where it is susceptible 
to interruption by catheter ablation. Thus, common atrial flutter is also 
known as cavotricuspid isthmus-dependent atrial flutter. This circuit most 
commonly revolves in a counterclockwise direction (as viewed look-
ing toward the tricuspid annulus from the ventricular apex), which 
produces the characteristic negative sawtooth flutter waves in leads 
II, III, and aVF and positive P waves in lead V1 (Fig. 245-1). When the 
direction is reversed, clockwise rotation produces the opposite P-wave 
vector in those leads. The atrial rate is typically 240–300 beats/min but 
may be slower in the presence of atrial disease or antiarrhythmic drugs. 
It often conducts to the ventricles with 2:1 AV block, creating a regular 
tachycardia at 150 beats/min, with P waves that may be difficult to 
discern. Maneuvers that increase AV nodal block will typically expose 
flutter waves, allowing diagnosis.
Common right atrial flutter usually occurs in association with atrial 
fibrillation and often with atrial scar from senescence or prior cardiac 
surgery. Some patients with atrial fibrillation treated with an antiar-
rhythmic drug, particularly flecainide, propafenone, or amiodarone, 
will present with atrial flutter rather than fibrillation, since these agents 
slow atrial conduction velocity and can promote reentry.
Macroreentrant ATs that are not dependent on conduction through 
the cavotricuspid isthmus are referred to as atypical atrial flutters. They 
can occur in either atrium and are almost universally associated with 
areas of atrial scar. Left atrial flutter and perimitral left atrial flutter are 
commonly seen after extensive left atrial ablation for atrial fibrillation 
or atrial surgery. The clinical presentation is similar to common atrial 
flutter, but with different P-wave morphologies (Fig 245-2). They can 
be difficult to distinguish from focal AT, and in most cases, the mecha-
nism can only be confirmed by an electrophysiology study.
TREATMENT
Atrial Flutter
Initial management of atrial flutter is similar to that for atrial 
fibrillation, discussed in more detail below. Electrical cardioversion 
is warranted for hemodynamic instability or severe symptoms. 
Otherwise, rate control can be achieved with administration of AV 
nodal–blocking agents, but this is often more difficult than for atrial 
fibrillation. The risk of thromboembolic events is felt to be similar to 
that associated with atrial fibrillation. Anticoagulation is warranted 
prior to conversion for episodes more than 48 h in duration and 
chronically for patients at increased risk of thromboembolic stroke 
based on the CHA2DS2-VASc scoring system (Table 245-1).
For a first episode of atrial flutter, conversion to sinus rhythm 
with no antiarrhythmic drug therapy is reasonable. For recur-
rent episodes, antiarrhythmic drug therapy with sotalol, dofetilide, 
disopyramide, and amiodarone may be considered, but >70% of 
patients experience recurrences. For recurrent episodes of common 
atrial flutter, catheter ablation of the cavotricuspid isthmus abolishes 
the arrhythmia in >90% of patients with a low risk of complica-
tions that are largely related to vascular access, and rarely heart 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1744
Counterclockwise flutter
Tricuspid
valve
VI
II
A
B
FIGURE 245-1  A. Common right atrial flutter, also known as cavotricuspid isthmus flutter, showing positive P waves in lead V1 and negative “sawtooth” pattern in 
lead II typical of counterclockwise rotation relative to the tricuspid valve annulus. (Adapted from F Marchlinski: The tachyarrhythmias in DL Longo et al [eds]: Harrison’s 
Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2012, pp 1878–1900.) B. A right atrial map of common counterclockwise flutter is shown. Colors indicate 
activation time, progressing from red to yellow to green, blue, and purple. The reentry path parallels the tricuspid annulus.
I
II
III
VI
V
V5
aVR
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
FIGURE 245-2  Atrial flutter in a 52-year-old man that occurred one year after extensive left atrial ablation for persistent atrial fibrillation. In contrast to common 
flutter the P waves in V1 and inferior limb leads (II, III, and aVF) have the same polarity (positive in this case). Also, lead aVL shows a predominant negative P wave 
consistent with a left atrial focus, however P-wave morphology used to diagnose arrhythmia mechanism and location is unreliable in the setting of advanced atrial 
fibrosis, such as after extensive catheter ablation.
CHAPTER 245 Common Atrial Flutter, Macroreentrant, and Multifocal Atrial Tachycardias
1745
TABLE 245-1  CHA2DS2-VASc Risk Assessment and Oral Anticoagulants
RISK FACTORS
POINTS
 
CHA2DS2-VASc SCORE
ESTIMATED ANNUAL STROKE RATEa
C—congestive heart failure
1
 
0
0
H—hypertension
1
 
1
1.3%
A—age ≥75 y
2
 
2
2.2%
D—diabetes mellitus
1
 
3
3.2%
S—stroke or TIA, embolus
2
 
4
4.0%
V—vascular disease
1
 
5
6.7%
A—age 65–75 y
1
 
6–9
>9%
Sex—female
1
 
 
 
ANTICOAGULANTS
MECHANISM
EXCRETION
DOSING CONSIDERATIONS
RISK/BENEFIT
Warfarin
Vitamin K 
antagonist
Liver
Adjusted to INR 2–3
Days to therapeutic effect
Multiple drug/food interactions (e.g., 
amiodarone)
Major hemorrhage: 1% per year
Intracranial hemorrhage: 0.1–0.6% per 
year
Risk of bleeding increases with INR >3.5
Inexpensive
Dabigatranb
Thrombin inhibitor
Kidney
 
 
 
 
CCr >30 mL/min
CCr 15–30 mL/min
150 mg bid
75 mg bid
P-glycoprotein substrate (inducers— 
rifampin, reduce concentration)
(inhibitors—amiodarone, verapamil, 
dronedarone, quinidine)
Proton pump inhibitors may reduce 
absorption
Onset of action within hours
No reversal agent for bleeding
Rivaroxaban
Xa inhibitor
Kidney
P-glycoprotein substrate
No reversal agent for bleeding
 
 
CCr ≥50 mL/min
20 mg daily
 
 
 
CCr 15–50 mL/min
15 mg daily
 
Apixaban
Xa inhibitor
Kidney and liver
P-glycoprotein substrate
No reversal agent for bleeding
 
 
Any 2 of:  
Cr >1.5 mg/dL, age 
>80 yrs,  
or wt <60 kg
5 mg bid
2.5 mg bid
 
aModified from GY Lip et al: Lancet 379:648, 2012. bU.S. Food and Drug Administration recommended dosing; other regimens are available outside the United States.
Abbreviations: CCr, creatinine clearance; Cr, creatinine; INR, international normalized ratio; TIA, transient ischemic attack; wt, weight.
FIGURE 245-3  Multifocal atrial tachycardia. Rhythm strip obtained from a patient with severe pulmonary disease during an acute illness. Arrows note three distinct 
P-wave morphologies.
block. Approximately 50% of patients presenting with atrial flutter 
develop atrial fibrillation within 5 years after diagnosis, which is 
an important consideration in patients with a high risk profile for 
thromboembolism.
■
■MULTIFOCAL ATRIAL TACHYCARDIA
Multifocal AT (MAT) is characterized by a rhythm with at least three 
distinct P-wave morphologies with rates typically between 100 and 
150 beats/min. Unlike atrial fibrillation, there are clear isoelectric 
intervals between P waves (Fig. 245-3) and the atrial rate is slower. The 
mechanism is likely triggered automaticity from multiple atrial foci. It 
is usually encountered in patients with chronic pulmonary disease and 
acute illness.
Therapy for MAT is directed at treating the underlying disease and 
correcting any metabolic abnormalities. Electrical cardioversion is 
ineffective. The calcium channel blockers verapamil or diltiazem may 
slow the atrial and ventricular rate. Patients with severe pulmonary 
disease often do not tolerate beta blocker therapy. MAT may respond to 
amiodarone, but long-term therapy with this agent is usually avoided 
due to its toxicities, particularly pulmonary fibrosis.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1746
failure and vice-versa—patients with heart failure have an increased 
risk of developing AF. AF increases the risk of stroke by fivefold and 
is estimated to be the cause of 25% of strokes. It also increases the risk 
of dementia and silent strokes detected by MRI. Since AF is a marker 
for other predictors of mortality and morbidity, such as the severity of 
heart disease, it is difficult to determine the extent to which AF itself 
contributes to associated increased mortality and morbidity.
AF is occasionally associated with an acute precipitating factor such 
as hyperthyroidism, acute alcohol intoxication, or an acute illness such 
as myocardial infarction or pulmonary embolism. AF occurs in up 
to 30% of patients recovering from cardiac surgery, associated with 
inflammatory pericarditis.
The clinical pattern of AF suggests the underlying pathophysiology 
(Fig. 246-1). Paroxysmal AF is defined by episodes that start spontane-
ously and stop within 7 days of onset. Paroxysmal AF is often initiated 
by small reentrant or rapidly firing foci in sleeves of atrial muscle that 
extend into the pulmonary veins (PV). Catheter ablation that isolates 
these foci usually abolishes paroxysmal AF, although some patients 
also have initiating foci in other locations. These non-PV triggers tend 
to occur in older patients and those with more severe underlying car-
diac disease. Persistent AF has a longer duration, exceeding 7 days, 
and, in many cases, will continue indefinitely unless cardioversion is 
performed. Cardioversion can be followed by prolonged periods of 
sinus rhythm. As for paroxysmal AF, episodes are often initiated by 
rapidly firing foci within PVs, but non-PV sites, including myocardial 
sleeves around the superior vena cava (SVC) or coronary sinus are 
encountered more often than when AF is paroxysmal. In addition, 
persistence of the AF is likely facilitated by structural and electrophys-
iologic atrial abnormalities, particularly fibrosis that uncouples atrial 
fibers, promoting reentry and focal automaticity. In patients with long-
standing persistent AF (>1 year), significant fibrosis is usually present 
and it is difficult to restore and maintain sinus rhythm. Some patients 
progress over years from paroxysmal to persistent AF. Although 
fibrosis that develops with aging and atrial hypertrophy in 
response to hypertension and other cardiac disease appears 
to be an important promoting factor, electrophysiologic 
remodeling that affects conduction and refractoriness occur 
as well in response to chronic tachycardia. Thus, AF tends to 
promote AF.
Clinical consequences of AF are related to rapid ventric-
ular rates, loss of atrial contribution to ventricular filling, 
and predisposition to thrombus formation in the left atrial 
appendage with potential embolization. Presentations vary 
with the ventricular rate and underlying heart disease and 
comorbidities. Rapid rates may cause hemodynamic collapse 
or heart failure exacerbation particularly in patients with 
impaired cardiac function, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and 
heart failure with preserved systolic function. Exercise intol-
erance and easy fatigability are common despite the absence 
of palpitations in many patients. Occasionally, dizziness or 
syncope occurs due to pauses when AF terminates to sinus 
rhythm (Fig. 246-2). Depressed ventricular function with car-
diomyopathy may develop in response to chronic tachycardia 
(rates persistently faster than 100–110 bpm) and is probably 
more common in patients who do not sense palpitations, 
since they may not seek medical care until heart failure symp-
toms develop. Tachycardia-related cardiomyopathy is usually 
reversible with control of ventricular rate.
Treatment for AF is primarily guided by patients’ symp-
toms, the hemodynamic effect of AF, the duration of AF, the 
risk of stroke and the underlying heart disease. New-onset 
AF that produces severe hypotension, pulmonary edema, or 
angina should be electrically cardioverted starting with a QRS 
synchronous shock of 200 J, ideally after sedation or anesthe-
sia is achieved. Greater shock energy and different electrode 
placements may be tried if the shock fails to terminate AF. 
Administration of intravenous ibutilide lowers the energy 
requirement for atrial defibrillation and may be useful if AF 
terminates and reinitiates, but should not be used in patients 
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is characterized by disorganized, rapid, and 
irregular atrial activation with loss of atrial contraction and with an 
irregular ventricular rate that is determined by AV nodal conduction 
(Fig. 246-1). In an untreated patient, the ventricular rate also tends to 
be rapid and variable, between 120 and 160 beats/min, but in some 
patients, it may exceed 200 beats/min. Patients with high vagal tone or 
AV nodal conduction disease may have slow ventricular rates.
AF is the most common sustained arrhythmia and is a major 
public health problem. Prevalence increases with age, and >95% of 
AF patients are >60 years of age. The prevalence by age 80 is ~10%. 
The lifetime risk of developing AF for men 40 years old is ~25%. AF 
is slightly more common in men than women and more common in 
whites than blacks. Risk factors for developing AF in addition to age 
and underlying cardiac disease include hypertension, diabetes melli-
tus, cardiac disease, obesity, and sleep apnea. AF is associated with a 
1.5- to 1.9-fold increased risk of mortality after controlling for underly-
ing heart disease. AF is also associated with a risk of developing heart 
Types of AF
Paroxysmal AF
Persistent AF
requires cardioversion
Long-standing persistent
or permanent AF
Ectopic foci
Triggers 
Electrophysiologic
remodeling fibrosis
Chronic substrate
fibrosis
FIGURE 246-1  A rhythm strip of atrial fibrillation (AF) showing absence of distinct P-waves 
and an irregularly irregular ventricular response. Diagram depicts atrial fibrillation types. 
Paroxysmal AF is initiated by premature beats, as shown in the rhythm strip (arrow) after two 
sinus beats. Triggering foci are often an important cause of this arrhythmia. Persistent AF is 
associated with atrial structural and electrophysiologic remodeling, as well as with triggering 
foci in many patients. Long-standing persistent AF is associated with greater structural 
remodeling with atrial fibrosis and electrophysiologic remodeling.
246 Atrial Fibrillation
Gregory F. Michaud, William G. Stevenson 
■
■FURTHER READING
Page RL et al: 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline for the Management 
of Adult Patients with Supraventricular Tachycardia: A Report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. 
Circulation 133:e506, 2016.
Rahman F et al: Atrial flutter: Clinical risk factors and adverse out-
comes in the Framingham Heart Study. Heart Rhythm 13:233, 2016.
CHAPTER 246 Atrial Fibrillation
1747
with a prolonged QT interval or severe LV dysfunction because of a 
significant risk of torsades de Pointes. If the patient is stable, immediate 
management involves rate control to alleviate or prevent symptoms, 
and consideration of whether anticoagulation is warranted to reduce 
stroke risk. Consideration is then given to whether therapy is war-
ranted to restore and maintain sinus rhythm, or whether the patient 
will be allowed to continue in AF, and managed with rate control and 
measures for stroke prevention. It is critical to consider the risk of 
stroke when attempting to restore sinus rhythm. If the duration of AF 
is unclear or is known to be >48 h, anticoagulation must be commenced 
before cardioversion. Anticoagulation strategies for new-onset AF are 
debated. In the absence of contraindications, it is usually appropriate to 
initiate systemic anticoagulation with heparin immediately or with an 
oral anticoagulant that has rapid onset of action, while evaluation and 
other therapies are implemented.
■
■CARDIOVERSION AND ANTICOAGULATION
The major source of thromboembolism and stroke in AF is formation of 
thrombus in the left atrial appendage where flow is relatively stagnant, 
although thrombus occasionally forms in other locations as well. Fol-
lowing conversion from prolonged AF to sinus rhythm, atrial mechan-
ical function can be delayed for weeks, such that thrombi can form 
even during sinus rhythm. When AF has been present for >48 h and in 
patients at high risk for thromboembolism, such as those with mitral 
stenosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, conversion to sinus rhythm 
is associated with an increased risk of thromboembolism. Thromboem-
bolism can occur soon, or several days after restoration of sinus rhythm 
if appropriate anticoagulation measures are not taken.
Cardioversion within 48 h of the onset of AF is common practice in 
patients who have not been anticoagulated, provided that they are not 
at high risk for stroke due to a prior history of embolic events, rheu-
matic mitral stenosis, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with marked 
left atrial enlargement. These low-risk patients with occasional epi-
sodes of AF can be instructed to notify their physician when AF occurs 
to arrange for cardioversion to be done within 48 h.
If the duration of AF exceeds 48 h or is unknown, there is greater 
concern for thromboembolism after cardioversion, even in patients 
considered low risk (CHA2DS2-VASc of 0 or 1 [see below]) for stroke. 
There are two approaches to mitigate the risk related to cardioversion. 
One option is to anticoagulate continuously for 3 weeks before and a 
minimum of 4 weeks after cardioversion. A second approach is to start 
anticoagulation and perform a transesophageal echocardiogram to 
determine if thrombus is present in the left atrial appendage. If throm-
bus is absent, cardioversion can be performed and anticoagulation 
continued for a minimum of 4 weeks to allow time for recovery of atrial 
mechanical function. In either case, cardioversion of AF is associated 
with a substantial risk of recurrence, which may not be symptomatic. 
Longer-term maintenance of anticoagulation is considered based on 
the patient’s individual risk for stroke, commonly assessed from the 
CHA2DS2-VASc score.
■
■RATE CONTROL
Acute rate control can be achieved with beta blockers and/or the 
calcium channel blockers verapamil and diltiazem administered either 
intravenously or orally, as warranted by the urgency of the clinical situa-
tion. Digoxin may be added, particularly in heart failure patients, if neg-
ative inotropic and other adverse effects of beta blockers and calcium 
channel blockers limit their use. Digoxin lacks negative inotropic effects, 
but is less effective in slowing the ventricular rate in AF, particularly 
when sympathetic tone is high. It is synergistic with the other AV nodal–
blocking agents. Its use has been associated with increased mortality in 
some studies. Typically, the goal of acute rate control is to reduce the 
ventricular rate to less than 100/min, but the goal must be guided by 
the clinical situation and the adverse effects of rate control medications.
■
■CHRONIC RATE CONTROL
For patients who remain in AF chronically, the goal of rate control 
is to alleviate and prevent deterioration of ventricular function from 
excessive rates. β-Adrenergic blockers and calcium channel blockers 
are often used in combination. Digoxin is added selectively when these 
are not sufficient. Exertion-related symptoms are often an indication 
of inadequate rate control. Rate should be assessed with exertion and 
medications adjusted accordingly. The initial goal is a resting heart rate 
of <80 beats/min that increases to <100 beats/min with light exertion, 
such as walking. If it is difficult to slow the ventricular rate to that 
degree, allowing a resting rate of up to 110 beats/min is acceptable 
Recorded: 02/24/2013 @ 12:44 AM (CT)          25 mm/sec, 32 mm/mV          Continues->
Recorded: 02/24/2013 @ 12:44 AM (CT)          25 mm/sec, 32 mm/mV          Continues->
Recorded: 02/24/2013 @ 12:44 AM (CT)          25 mm/sec, 32 mm/mV          Continues->
Post trigger
7.2 seconds
FIGURE 246-2  A continuous rhythm strip is shown from a patient with tachy-brady syndrome. Atrial fibrillation is present at the top and abruptly terminates in the 
second tracing, with atrial and ventricular standstill for 7.2 s until resumption of sinus rhythm. The patient experienced syncope.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1748 provided it does not cause symptoms and ventricular functioniss 
normal, but periodic assessment of ventricular function is warranted 
because some patients develop tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.
If adequate rate control in AF is difficult to achieve, further consid-
eration should be given to restoring sinus rhythm (see below). Catheter 
ablation of the AV junction to create heart block and implantation of a 
permanent pacemaker reliably achieves rate control without the need 
for AV nodal blocking agents, but mandates lifelong permanent pacing. 
Right ventricular apical pacing induces dyssynchronous ventricular 
activation that can depress ventricular function in some patients. 
Biventricular pacing or direct pacing of the His bundle may be used to 
minimize the degree of ventricular dyssynchrony.
■
■STROKE PREVENTION IN ATRIAL FIBRILLATION
The majority of patients warrant chronic anticoagulation, but selection of 
therapy should be individualized based on patient profile and risks and 
benefits of individual agents. Anticoagulation is warranted for patients 
with mitral stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and those with a 
prior history of stroke. Patients without mitral stenosis are often referred 
to as having nonvalvular AF. The CHA2DS2-VASc score (Table 246-1) can 
be used to estimate stroke risk in these patients. Anticoagulation is rec-
ommended for a score of ≥2 and may be considered for a score of 1. The 
approach to patients with paroxysmal AF is the same as for persistent 
AF. It is recognized that many patients who appear to have infrequent 
AF episodes based on office visits often have asymptomatic episodes 
that put them at risk. Absence of AF during periodic monitoring is not 
sufficient to indicate low risk. The role of continuous monitoring with 
implanted recorders or pacemakers is not yet clear as a guide for antico-
agulation in patients with a borderline risk profile.
The major options for anticoagulation are the antithrombin inhibitor 
dabigitran, factor Xa inhibitors rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban, 
the vitamin K antagonist warfarin. Antiplatelet agents alone are gener-
ally not sufficient. In non-valvular AF, warfarin reduces the annual risk 
of stroke by 64% compared to placebo and by 37% compared to anti-
platelet therapy. Patients with AF with an increased risk of stroke also 
have an increased risk of venous thromboembolism, which appears to 
be lower with oral anticoagulation. The direct acting anticoagulants, 
dabigatran, rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban were noninferior 
to warfarin in individual trials, and analysis of pooled data suggests 
superiority to warfarin by small absolute margins of 0.4–0.7% in 
reduction of mortality, stroke, major bleeding, and intracranial hem-
orrhage. Warfarin is the agent required for patients with rheumatic 
mitral stenosis or mechanical heart valves. The newer, direct acting 
anticoagulants have not been tested in rheumatic heart disease and a 
direct thrombin inhibitor did not prevent thromboemboli in patients 
with mechanical heart valves. Warfarin is an inconvenient agent that 
requires several days to achieve a therapeutic effect (prothrombin time 
[PT]/international normalized ratio [INR] >2), requires monitoring of 
PT/INR to adjust dose, and has many drug and food interactions, that 
can hinder patient compliance. The direct acting agents are easier to 
use and achieve reliable anticoagulation promptly without requiring 
dosage adjustment based on blood tests. Dabigatran, rivaroxaban, 
and apixaban have renal excretion, cannot be used with severe renal 
insufficiency (CrCl <15 mL/min), and require dose adjustment for 
TABLE 246-1  CHA2DS2-VASc Risk Assessment and Oral Anticoagulants
RISK FACTORS
POINTS
 
CHA2DS2-VASc SCORE
ESTIMATED ANNUAL STROKE RATEa
C—congestive heart failure
1
 
0
0
H—hypertension
1
 
1
1.3%
A—age ≥75 y
2
 
2
2.2%
D—diabetes mellitus
1
 
3
3.2%
S—stroke or TIA, embolus
2
 
4
4.0%
V—vascular disease
1
 
5
6.7%
A—age 65–75 y
1
 
6–9
>9%
Sex—female
1
 
 
 
ANTICOAGULANTS
MECHANISM
EXCRETION
DOSING CONSIDERATIONS
RISK/BENEFIT
Warfarin
Vitamin K antagonist
Liver
Adjusted to INR 2–3
Days to therapeutic effect
Multiple drug/food interactions 
(e.g., amiodarone)
Major hemorrhage: 1% per year
Intracranial hemorrhage: 0.1–0.6% per 
year
Risk of bleeding increases with INR >3.5
Inexpensive
Dabigatranb
Thrombin inhibitor
Kidney
 
 
 
 
CCr >30 mL/min
CCr 15–30 mL/min
150 mg bid
75 mg bid
P-glycoprotein substrate 
(inducers—rifampin, reduce 
concentration)
(inhibitors—amiodarone, verapamil, 
dronedarone, quinidine),
Proton pump inhibitors may reduce 
absorption
Onset of action within hours
Reversal agent available
Rivaroxaban
Xa inhibitor
Kidney
P-glycoprotein substrate
Reversal agent for bleeding in 
development
 
 
CCr ≥50 mL/min
20 mg daily
 
 
 
CCr 15–50 mL/min
15 mg daily
 
Apixaban
Xa inhibitor
Kidney and liver
Any 2 of Cr>1.5 mg/dl, 
age > 80 yrs or  
wt < 60 kg.
P-glycoprotein substrate
5 mg bid
2.5 mg bid
Reversal agent for bleeding in 
development
Edoxaban
Xa inhibitor
Kidney and Liver
CCr> 60 <95 mL/min
CCr 15–60 mL/min
P-glycoprotein substrate
60 mg
30 mg
 
aModified from GY Lip et al: Lancet 379:648, 2012. bU.S. Food and Drug Administration recommended dosing; other regimens are available outside the United States.
Abbreviations: CCr, creatinine clearance; Cr, creatinine; INR, international normalized ratio; TIA, transient ischemic attack.
CHAPTER 246 Atrial Fibrillation
1749
modest renal impairment, which is of particular concern in the elderly, 
who are at increased bleeding risk. Excretion can also be influenced by 
P-glycoprotein inducers and inhibitors. Warfarin anticoagulation can 
be reversed by administration of fresh frozen plasma and vitamin K. A 
reversal agent (idarucizumab) is available for dabigatran and reversal 
agents for the Xa inhibitors are being evaluated (andexanet alfa and 
ciraparantag). For now, bleeding that occurs during Xa inhibitor use 
must be managed with supportive care, with the expectation that clot-
ting will improve over 12 h as the anticoagulant is excreted, although 
reversal agents are anticipated.
The antiplatelet agents aspirin and clopidogrel are inferior to war-
farin for stroke prevention in AF and do not have less risk of bleeding. 
Clopidogrel combined with aspirin is better than aspirin alone for 
stroke prevention, but is inferior to warfarin and has a greater bleeding 
risk than aspirin alone.
Bleeding is the major risk of anticoagulation. Major bleeding requir-
ing transfusion or intracranial bleeding occurs in ~1% of patients per 
year with warfarin. Direct acting anticoagulants appear to have a lower 
risk of intracranial bleeding relative to warfarin without sacrificing 
protective effects against thromboembolism. Risk factors for bleeding 
include age >65–75 years, heart failure, renal insufficiency, prior bleed-
ing, and excessive alcohol or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use. 
In patients who require dual antiplatelet therapy (e.g., aspirin and 
clopidogril) after coronary or peripheral arterial stenting, there is a sub-
stantially increased bleeding risk when standard oral anticoagulation 
with warfarin or a direct acting anticoagulant is added. The optimal 
combination of agents for patients with AF who also require antiplate-
let therapy is unclear.
Chronic anticoagulation is contraindicated in some patients due 
to bleeding risks. Because most atrial thrombi likely originate in the 
left atrial appendage, surgical removal of the appendage, combined 
with atrial maze surgery, may be considered for patients undergoing 
surgery, although removal of the appendage has not been unequivo-
cally shown to reduce the risk of thromboembolism. Percutaneously 
deployed devices that occlude or ligate the left atrial appendage are 
also available, appear to be non-inferior to warfarin in reducing stroke 
risk and are considered in patients who have a high risk of thrombo-
embolism, but serious bleeding risk from chronic oral anticoagulation.
■
■RHYTHM CONTROL
AF is associated with obesity, hypertension, excessive alcohol use and 
sleep apnea. Aggressive treatment of these risk factors can substantially 
reduce AF episodes in some patients and is warranted in all patients.
The decision to administer antiarrhythmic drugs or perform cath-
eter ablation to attempt maintenance of sinus rhythm (commonly 
referred to as the “rhythm control strategy”) is mainly guided by 
patient symptoms and preferences regarding the benefits and risks 
of therapies. In general, patients who maintain sinus rhythm have 
better survival than those who continue to have AF. This may be 
because continued AF is a marker of disease severity. In randomized 
trials, administration of antiarrhythmic medications to maintain sinus 
rhythm did not improve survival or symptoms compared to a rate con-
trol strategy, and the drug therapy group had more hospitalizations. 
Disappointing efficacy and toxicities of available antiarrhythmic drugs 
and patient selection bias may be factors that influenced the results of 
these trials. The impact of catheter ablation on mortality is not known 
but the subject of ongoing randomized, controlled trials. A rhythm 
control strategy is usually selected for patients with symptomatic par-
oxysmal AF, recurrent episodes of symptomatic persistent AF, AF with 
difficult rate control, and AF that has resulted in depressed ventricular 
function or that aggravates heart failure. A rhythm control strategy 
is more likely to be favored in younger patients than in sedentary or 
elderly patients in whom rate control is more easily achieved. Even 
if sinus rhythm is apparently maintained, anticoagulation is recom-
mended according to the CHA2DS2-VASc stroke risk profile because 
asymptomatic episodes of AF are common. Following a first episode 
of persistent AF, a strategy using AV nodal–blocking agents, cardio-
version, and anticoagulation is reasonable, in addition to addressing 
possible aggravating factors. If recurrences are infrequent, periodic 
cardioversion is reasonable.
Pharmacologic Therapy for Maintaining Sinus Rhythm  
The goal of pharmacologic therapy is to maintain sinus rhythm or 
reduce episodes of AF. Risks and side effects of antiarrhythmic drugs 
are a major consideration in selecting therapy. Drug therapy can be 
instituted once sinus rhythm has been established or in anticipation 
of cardioversion. β-Adrenergic blockers and calcium channel block-
ers help control ventricular rate, improve symptoms, and possess a 
low-risk profile, but have low efficacy for preventing AF episodes. 
Class I sodium channel–blocking agents (e.g., flecainide, propafenone, 
disopyramide) are options for subjects without significant structural 
heart disease, but negative inotropic and proarrhythmic effects warrant 
avoidance in patients with coronary artery disease or heart failure. The 
class III agents sotalol and dofetilide can be administered to patients 
with coronary artery disease or structural heart disease but have ~3% 
risk of inducing excessive QT prolongation and torsades des pointes. 
Dofetilide should be initiated only in a hospital with ECG monitoring, 
and many physicians take this approach with sotalol as well. Dronedar-
one increases mortality in patients with heart failure. All of these 
agents have modest efficacy in patients with paroxysmal AF, of whom 
~30–50% will benefit. Amiodarone is more effective, maintaining sinus 
rhythm in approximately two-thirds of patients. It can be administered 
to patients with heart failure and coronary artery disease. Over 40% 
of patients experience amiodarone-related toxicities during long-term 
therapy.
■
■CATHETER AND SURGICAL ABLATION FOR ATRIAL 
FIBRILLATION
Successful catheter ablation avoids antiarrhythmic drug toxicities 
but procedural risks and efficacy depend on operator experience. For 
patients with previously untreated but recurrent paroxysmal AF, cathe-
ter ablation has mildly better efficacy compared to antiarrhythmic drug 
therapy and is clearly superior to antiarrhythmic drugs for patients 
who have recurrent AF despite drug treatment. Long-term control of 
AF is more difficult to achieve in patients with persistent AF, likely 
because of more extensive atrial abnormality and associated greater 
co-morbidities in these patients.
Catheter ablation involves cardiac catheterization, trans(atrial) septal 
puncture, and radiofrequency ablation or cryoablation to electrically 
isolate the left atrial regions around the PV, abolishing the ability of 
triggering foci in these regions to initiate AF, and also likely impacting 
the substrate for reentry in the left atrium. Extensive areas of ablation 
are required, and gaps in healed ablation areas or emergence of new 
trigger sites outside the PV necessitate a repeat procedure in 20–50% 
of patients.
In patients with paroxysmal AF, sinus rhythm is maintained for 
>1 year after one ablation procedure in ~60% of patients; and is 
achieved in 70–80% of patients after multiple procedures. Many 
patients become more responsive to antiarrhythmic drugs after a PV 
isolation procedure. Ablation is less effective in patients with persistent 
AF, and particularly long-standing persistent AF, particularly when 
associated with more extensive cardiac disease and co-morbidities. 
More extensive ablation is often required, targeting areas that likely 
support reentry in regions outside but adjacent to the pulmonary 
venous antra. There is no proven strategy for selecting ablation targets 
outside the PV antral regions and a variety of approaches have been 
pursued. Ablation of areas of rapid activity during AF or creation of 
ablation lines to block conduction across regions of the atria did not 
improve outcomes in some studies. Other ablation targets include foci 
that fire in response to isoproterenol, areas of atrial fibrosis, and regions 
with activation consistent with reentrant rotors during AF. More than 
one ablation procedure is often required to maintain sinus rhythm in 
patients with persistent and long-standing persistent AF.
Catheter ablation has a 2–7% risk of major procedure-related com-
plications, including stroke (0.5–1%), cardiac tamponade (1%), phrenic 
nerve paralysis, bleeding from femoral access sites, and fluid overload 
with heart failure, that can emerge 1–3 days after the procedure. It is 
important to recognize the potential for delayed presentation of some 
complications. Ablation within the PV can lead to PV stenosis, present-
ing weeks to months after the procedure with dyspnea or hemoptysis. 
The esophagus abuts the posterior wall of the left atrium where it is 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1750 subject to injury, and esophageal ulcers can form immediately after the 
procedure and may rarely lead to a fistula between the left atrium and 
esophagus (estimated incidence of < 0.1%) that presents as endocarditis 
and stroke 10 days to 3 weeks after the procedure. Early diagnosis of 
atrioesophageal fistula is important because delayed diagnosis leads to 
death. Diagnosis is made by chest CT scan with water soluble oral and 
IV contrast. Endoscopy should be avoided in patients with a suspected 
fistula because of the risk of air/esophageal fluid embolus. Definitive 
repair of the atrioesophageal fistula by emergent cardiothoracic sur-
gery is required.
Surgical ablation of AF is most frequently performed concomitant 
with cardiac valve or coronary artery surgery and less commonly as a 
stand-alone procedure. However, for patients with persistent AF, sur-
gical or hybrid procedures appear to have higher single-procedure effi-
cacy than catheter ablation. Risks include sinus node injury requiring 
pacemaker implantation. Surgical removal of the left atrial appendage 
may reduce stroke risk, although thrombus can form in the remnant of 
the appendage or if the appendage is not completely ligated.
■
■FURTHER READING
Calkins H et al: 2012 HRS/EHRA/ECAS expert consensus statement 
on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation: Recommenda-
tions for patient selection, procedural techniques, patient manage-
ment and follow-up, definitions, endpoints, and research trial design. 
Heart Rhythm 9:632.e21, 2012.
Cox JL: Effective practical management of patients with atrial fibril-
lation when using new oral anticoagulants. Ann Med 47:278, 2015.
Douketis JD et al: Perioperative bridging anticoagulation in patients 
with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med 373:823, 2015.
Freedman B et al: Stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation. Lancet 
388:806, 2016.
January CT et al: 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the manage-
ment of patients with atrial fibrillation: Executive summary: A report 
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on practice guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Cir-
culation 130:2071, 2014.
Kirchhof P et al: 2016 ESC Guidelines for the management of atrial 
fibrillation developed in collaboration with EACTS. Eur Heart J 
37:2893, 2016.
Masoudi FA et al: 2015 ACC/HRS/SCAI left atrial appendage occlu-
sion device societal overview. Heart Rhythm 12:e122, 2015.
Nair KK et al: Atrioesophageal fistula: A review. J Atr Fibrillation 
8:1331, 2015.
Nyong J et al: Efficacy and safety of ablation for people with non- 
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
11:CD012088, 2016.
Voskoboinik A et al: Alcohol and atrial fibrillation: A sobering review. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 68:2567, 2016.
247 Approach to Ventricular 
Arrhythmias
Roy M. John, William G. Stevenson   
■
■TYPES OF VENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS
Ventricular arrhythmias originate from a focus of myocardial or 
Purkinje cells capable of automaticity, or triggered automaticity, or 
from reentry through areas of scar or a diseased Purkinje system. 
They are characterized by their electrocardiographic appearance and 
duration. Conduction away from the ventricular focus through the 
ventricular myocardium is slower than activation of the ventricles 
over the Purkinje system. Hence, the QRS complex during ventricular 
arrhythmias will be wide, typically >0.12 s.
Premature ventricular beats (also referred to as a premature ventricu-
lar contraction or PVC) are single ventricular beats that fall earlier than 
the next anticipated supraventricular beat (Fig. 247-1). PVCs that origi-
nate from the same focus will have the same QRS morphology and are 
referred to as unifocal (Fig. 247-1A). PVCs that originate from different 
ventricular sites have different QRS morphologies and are referred 
to as multifocal (Fig. 247-1B). Two consecutive ventricular beats are 
ventricular couplets.
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is three or more consecutive beats at 
a rate faster than 100 beats/min. Three or more consecutive beats at 
slower rates are designated an idioventricular rhythm (Fig. 247-1C). VT 
that terminates spontaneously within 30 s is designated non-sustained 
(Fig. 247-2) whereas sustained VT persists >30 s or is terminated by an 
active intervention, such as administration of an intravenous medica-
tion, external cardioversion, or pacing or a shock from an implanted 
cardioverter defibrillator.
Monomorphic VT has the same QRS complex from beat to beat, indi-
cating that the activation sequence is the same from beat to beat, and 
that each beat likely originates from the same source (Fig. 247-3A). The 
initial site of ventricular activation largely determines the sequence of 
ventricular activation. Therefore, the QRS morphology of PVCs and 
monomorphic VT provides an indication of the site of origin within 
the ventricles (Fig. 247-4). The likely origin often suggests whether an 
arrhythmia is idiopathic or associated with structural disease. Arrhyth-
mias that originate from the right ventricle or septum result in late 
activation of much of the left ventricle, thereby producing a prominent 
S-wave in V1 referred to as a left bundle branch block–like configura-
tion. Arrhythmias that originate from the free wall of the left ventricle 
have a prominent positive deflection in V1, thereby producing a right 
bundle branch block–like morphology in V1. The frontal plane axis of 
the QRS is also useful. An axis that is directed inferiorly, as indicated 
by dominant R waves in lead II, III, and AVF, suggests initial activation 
of the cranial portion of the ventricle, whereas a frontal plane axis that 
is directed superiorly (dominant S waves in II, III, and AVF) suggests 
initial activation at the inferior wall.
Very rapid monomorphic VT has a sinusoidal appearance, also 
called ventricular flutter, because it is not possible to distinguish the 
QRS complex from the T wave (Fig. 247-3B). Relatively slow sinusoidal 
VTs have a wide QRS indicative of slowed ventricular conduction 
(Fig. 247-3C). Hyperkalemia, toxicity from excessive effects of drugs 
that block sodium channels (e.g., flecainide, propafenone, or tricyclic 
antidepressants) and severe global myocardial ischemia are causes.
Polymorphic VT has a continually changing QRS morphology indi-
cating a changing ventricular activation sequence. Polymorphic VT 
that occurs in the context of congenital or acquired prolongation of the 
QT interval often has a waxing and waning QRS amplitude creating 
a “twisting about the points” appearance referred to as Torsade de 
Pointes (Fig. 247-3D).
Ventricular fibrillation (VF) has continuous irregular activation with 
no discrete QRS complexes (Fig. 247-3E). Monomorphic or polymor-
phic VT may transition to VF in susceptible patients.
The term idiopathic ventricular arrhythmias generally refers to PVCs or 
VT that occurs in patients without structural heart disease and which is 
not associated with a genetic syndrome or risk of sudden death.
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Common symptoms of ventricular arrhythmias include palpitations, 
dizziness, exercise intolerance, episodes of lightheadedness, syncope or 
sudden cardiac arrest leading to sudden death. Ventricular arrhythmias 
can also be asymptomatic and encountered unexpectedly as an irregu-
lar pulse or heart sounds on examination, or seen on a routine ECG, 
exercise test or cardiac ECG monitoring.
Syncope is a concerning symptom, that can be due to an episode 
of VT that produces severe hypotension, which often indicates that 
there is a risk for cardiac arrest and sudden death with arrhythmia 
recurrence. Although benign processes, such as reflex mediated neuro-
cardiogenic (vasovagal) syncope and orthostatic hypotension, are 
the most common causes, it is important to consider the possibility 
of heart disease or a genetic syndrome causing VT. When these are 
CHAPTER 247 Approach to Ventricular Arrhythmias
1751
I
II
aVR
V1
V4
V5
V2
V3
V6
aVL
aVF
II
III
V1
FIGURE 247-2  Repetitive monomorphic non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) of right ventricular outflow tract origin. The VT has a left bundle branch block 
pattern with inferior axis with tall QRS complexes in the inferior leads.
B
A 
C
Art. Pr.
1000 ms
I
FIGURE 247-1  A. Unifocal premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) at bigeminal frequency. Trace shows ECG lead 1 and arterial pressure (Art. Pr.). Sinus rhythm 
beats are followed by normal arterial waveform. The arterial pressure following premature beats is attenuated (arrows) and imperceptible to palpation. The pulse in 
this patient is registered at half the heart rate. B. Multifocal PVCs. The two PVCs shown have different morphologies. C. Example of accelerated idio-ventricular rhythm 
(see text for details).
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1752
suspected, hospitalization for further evaluation and monitoring is 
often appropriate.
Sustained VT may present as a wide QRS complex tachycardia that 
must be distinguished from supraventricular tachycardia with aber-
rancy (see Chap. 241) causing symptoms that range from mild to severe 
impairment with hypotension with syncope and imminent cardiac 
arrest. Sustained VT may degenerate to VF, particularly if it is rapid 
and polymorphic. Many patients who are at risk for VT have known 
heart disease and many have an implantable cardioverter defibrillator 
(ICD). In patients with an ICD, VT episodes may cause transient light-
headedness, palpitations or syncope that may be followed by a shock 
from the ICD (see below).
■
■EVALUATION OF PATIENTS WITH DOCUMENTED OR 
SUSPECTED VENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS
There are several important considerations that guide evaluation of 
patients with documented or suspected cardiac arrhythmias. First, 
establish whether a ventricular arrhythmia is the cause of the symp-
toms or clinical presentation. Second, determine whether the arrhyth-
mia is associated with a cardiac disease and establish the prognostic 
significance of that disease, and in particular whether it is associated 
with a risk of sudden cardiac death. Finally, define the likelihood of 
arrhythmia recurrence and the symptoms and risk imposed by the 
recurrence. The risk of cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac death are 
largely determined by the cause of the arrhythmia and the associated 
underlying heart disease.
The diagnosis of ventricular arrhythmias is established by recording 
of the arrhythmia on an ECG, by an implanted rhythm management 
device such as a pacemaker or ICD, or in some cases, initiation of the 
arrhythmia during an electrophysiologic study (Table 247-1). A 12 lead 
ECG of the arrhythmia should be obtained when possible and often 
provides clues to the potential site of origin and possible presence of 
underlying heart disease (see above). For patients with sustained wide 
complex tachycardia initial management is guided by the patient’s 
hemodynamic stability. The approach to sustained wide complex 
tachycardia is discussed in Chap. 249. The management of VT that 
causes cardiac arrest is discussed in Chap. 299. Once hemodynamic 
stability is restored further management is guided by the possibility of 
a recurrence and the risk imposed by a recurrence.
Evaluation of the Patient with Arrhythmia Symptoms  
When symptoms are intermittent, initial evaluation aims to establish 
symptom severity, provocative factors and presence of underlying 
heart disease. Syncope or near syncope raises concern that an arrhyth-
mia is causing episodes of hypotension and that there may be a risk 
of cardiac arrest if that persists. Symptoms that occur with exertion 
suggest arrhythmias that are provoked by sympathetic stimulation, 
but can also be related to exertional ischemia in patients with coronary 
artery disease, although non-arrhythmia causes must also be consid-
ered. A past history of any cardiac disease is important. A review of 
all medications is relevant. Medications that prolong the QT interval 
predispose to polymorphic VT (see Chap. 250). Adrenergic stimulants 
can provoke premature ventricular contractions.
Family history should determine the presence of premature coro-
nary artery disease, cardiomyopathy, or cardiac arrhythmias, particu-
larly a history of sudden death. Family history may also suggest that a 
possibility of a genetic cause of an arrhythmia warrants careful consid-
eration. Details of premature deaths are relevant. Sudden death victims 
are often said to have died of a “massive heart attack” despite absence 
of definite confirmation of thrombotic myocardial infarction and when 
other causes such as arrhythmia may have been possible.
The physical examination focuses on evidence of structural heart 
disease with assessment of pulse, jugular venous pressure lung fields 
and cardiac auscultation. Stigmata of neuromuscular disease or dys-
morphic features may suggest a genetic arrhythmia syndrome.
A 12-lead ECG should be obtained even if the patient is not having 
symptoms at the time of evaluation. Occasionally premature ventricu-
lar beats will be detected. Patients with benign idiopathic arrhythmias 
usually have a completely normal ECG during sinus rhythm. Any 
ECG abnormality warrants further evaluation. Particularly relevant 
findings include Q-waves that indicate prior myocardial infarction, 
which may have been silent, and ventricular hypertrophy, which may 
indicate hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or other ventricular disease. An 
ECG finding is the major diagnostic manifestation of several genetic 
arrhythmia syndromes in patients without structural heart disease, 
including the long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, and short QT 
syndrome (see Chap. 250).
If there is suspicion for structural heart disease, cardiac imaging is 
warranted to assess ventricular function and structure. Transthoracic 
echocardiography is most frequently employed for initial evaluation. 
Depressed ventricular function increases concern for a risk of sudden 
death and warrants further evaluation to establish the cause, which 
may be cardiomyopathy, coronary artery disease, or valvular heart 
disease. Ventricular thickening may indicate hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy or infiltrative diseases such as amyloidosis. Cardiac MRI with 
gadolinium contrast imaging provides similar assessment, but also can 
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 247-3  A. Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) with dissociated P 
waves (short arrows). B. Ventricular flutter. C. Sinusoidal VT due to electrolyte 
disturbance or drug effects. D. Polymorphic VT resulting from prolongation of QT 
interval (torsade de Pointes VT). E. Ventricular fibrillation (see text for details).
CHAPTER 247 Approach to Ventricular Arrhythmias
1753
detect areas of ventricular scar, evident as regions of 
delayed hyperenhancement, which are usually pres-
ent in patients who have sustained monomorphic VT 
(Fig. 247-5). The nature and location of abnormalities 
is helpful in assessing the type of heart disease. Eval-
uation to exclude atherosclerotic coronary artery dis-
ease should be performed in patients at risk, guided 
by age and other risk factors.
■
■TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR 
VENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS
Treatment of ventricular arrhythmias is guided by 
the severity and frequency of symptoms. For some, 
reassurance and removal of aggravating factors (e.g., 
caffeine) is all that is needed. For arrhythmias asso-
ciated with a sudden death risk, ICD implantation is 
usually indicated and will provide a “safety-net” to 
terminate life-threatening VT or VF, preventing sud-
den death, but without preventing the arrhythmia. 
When suppression of the arrhythmia is required, 
antiarrhythmic drug therapy or catheter ablation are 
major considerations.
Antiarrhythmic Drugs  Use of antiarrhythmic 
drugs is based on consideration of the risks and 
potential benefit for the individual patient. Efficacy 
and side effects for the individual patient is not pre-
dictable and is assessed by individual therapeutic 
trial. Adverse effects are mostly non-cardiac and 
minor, but can sometimes be severe enough to limit 
their use. Cardiac side effects, however, include the 
potential for “pro-arrhythmia” whereby a drug can 
increase the frequency of arrhythmia or cause a new 
arrhythmia. Aggravation of bradyarrhythmias is also 
a common concern. Although anti-arrhythmic drugs 
are classified based on their actions on receptors or ion channels, most 
have multiple effects, affecting more than one channel.
Beta-adrenergic Blockers  Many ventricular arrhythmias are 
sensitive to sympathetic stimulation, and beta-adrenergic stimulation 
also diminishes the electrophysiologic effects of many membrane 
active anti-arrhythmic drugs. The safety of beta-blocking agents makes 
them the first choice of therapy for most ventricular arrhythmias. They 
are particularly useful for exercise-induced arrhythmias and idiopathic 
arrhythmias, but have limited efficacy for most arrhythmias associated 
with heart disease. Bradyarrhythmias and negative inotrophic effects 
are the major cardiac adverse effects.
Calcium Channel Blockers 
The non-dihydropyridine cal-
cium channel blockers diltiazem and verapamil can be effective for 
some idiopathic VTs. The risk of pro-arrhythmia is low, but they 
have negative inotropic and vasodilatory effects that can aggravate 
hypotension.
Sodium Channel Blocking Agents  Drugs whose major effect 
is mediated through sodium channel blockade include mexiletine, qui-
nidine, disopyramide, flecainide, and propafenone, which are available 
for chronic oral therapy. Blockade of the fast inward sodium current 
has been referred to as a Class I antiarrhythmic drug effect. Antiar-
rhythmic actions are the result of depressing of cardiac conduction 
and membrane excitability. Conduction slowing can be manifest as a 
prolongation of QRS duration. Lidocaine, quinidine, and procainamide 
are available as intravenous formulations. Quinidine, disopyramide, 
and procainamide also have potassium channel blocking effects that 
prolong the QT interval (Class III antiarrhythmic drug action) that 
contributes to its antiarrhythmic effect. These agents have potential 
pro-arrhythmic effects and, with the possible exception of quinidine, 
also have negative inotropic effects that may contribute to increased 
mortality observed when some were administered chronically to 
II
III
III
II
LV
RV
V1 = LBBB
Septal or RV origin
V1 = RBBB
LV origin
V1
II, III AVF = Inferior axis
superior origin
II, III AVF = Superior axis
inferior origin
FIGURE 247-4  Site of ventricular tachycardia (VT) origin based on QRS morphology (see text for 
details).
TABLE 247-1  Diagnostic Tests for Ventricular Arrhythmias
12-Lead ECG
Event recorder
  Non-looping, patient activated recorder
•  Records only when the patient puts the device in contact with the chest 
wall and activates it
•  Useful for episodes that are infrequent but last for more than several 
minutes
  Looping event recorders
•  Continuously recording, storing only segments triggered by the patient or 
with a heart rate outside set parameters
•  Useful for intermittent, infrequent symptomatic and asymptomatic 
arrhythmias
Continuous ambulatory recording
  Holter monitor—typically used for 24–48 h
•  Records all arrhythmias during the recording period
•  Useful for very frequent arrhythmias (daily) or when quantitation of an 
arrhythmia is needed (e.g., quantitation of premature ventricular contraction 
[PVCs] potentially contributing to depressed ventricular function)
  Implanted loop recorders
•  Allow continuous recording for >1 year
•  Useful for capturing rare events such as rare syncopal episodes
Exercise Testing
•  Useful for evaluation of exercise induced symptoms; arrhythmias usually 
emerge during the early recovery phase after exercise
•  QT interval response to exercise may be abnormal in long QT syndrome
Electrophysiologic study
•  Invasive test that attempts to initiate ventricular arrhythmias in a 
controlled setting
•  Useful for assessing arrhythmia risk when there is concern for a risk of sudden 
death, but a sufficient diagnosis to guide therapy has not been achieved
•  Useful for distinguishing between wide complex tachycardia due to ventricular 
tachycardia (VT) versus supraventricular tachycardia with aberrancy
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1754
patients with prior myocardial infarction. Long-term therapy is gener-
ally avoided in patients with structural heart disease, but may be used 
to reduce symptomatic arrhythmias in patients with ICDs.
Potassium Channel Blocking Agents  Sotalol and dofetilide 
block the delayed rectifier potassium channel IKr, thereby prolong-
ing action potential duration (QT interval) and the cardiac refractory 
period, known as the Class III antiarrhythmic drug effect. Sotalol also 
has non-selective beta-adrenergic blocking activity. It has been shown 
to have a modest effect on reducing ICD shocks due to ventricular and 
atrial arrhythmias. Proarrhythmia due to the polymorphic VT torsade 
de pointes that is associated with QT prolongation occurs in 3–5% of 
patients. Both sotalol and dofetilide are excreted via the kidneys, neces-
sitating dose adjustment or avoidance in renal insufficiency. These 
drugs must be avoided in patients with other risk factors for torsade 
de pointes, including QT prolongation, hypokalemia and significant 
bradycardia.
Amiodarone and Dronedarone  Amiodarone blocks multiple 
cardiac ionic currents and has sympatholytic activity. It is the most 
effective antiarrhythmic drug for suppressing ventricular arrhythmias. 
It is administered intravenously for life-threatening arrhythmias. 
During chronic oral therapy, electrophysiologic effects develop over 
several days. It is more effective than sotalol in reducing ICD shocks 
and is the preferred drug for ventricular arrhythmias in patients with 
heart disease who are not candidates for an ICD. Bradyarrhythmias 
are the major cardiac adverse effect. Ventricular pro-arrhythmia can 
occur, but torsade de pointes VT is rare. Non-cardiac toxicities are a major 
problem and contribute to drug discontinuation in approximately a 
third of patients during long-term therapy. Hyper or hypothyroidism 
are related to the iodine content of the drug. Pneumonitis or pulmo-
nary fibrosis occurs in ~1% of patients. Photosensitivity is common, 
and neuropathy and ocular toxicity can occur. Systematic monitoring 
is recommended during chronic therapy including assessment for 
thyroid, liver, and pulmonary toxicity. Intravenous administration of 
amiodarone via a peripheral vein for >24 h can cause severe peripheral 
thrombophlebitis. Dronaedarone has structural similarities to amiodar-
one but without the iodine moiety. Efficacy for ventricular arrhythmias 
is poor and it increases mortality in patients with heart failure.
Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillators (ICD)  ICDs detect 
sustained VT, largely based on heart rate, and then terminate the 
arrhythmia. VF is terminated by a shock applied between a lead in 
the RV and the ICD pulse generator. Monomorphic VT can often be 
terminated by a burst of rapid pacing faster than the VT, known as 
anti-tachycardia pacing (ATP) (Fig. 247-6A). If ATP fails or is not a 
programmed treatment, as is often the case for rapid VT or VF, a shock 
is delivered (Fig. 247-6B). Shocks are painful if the patient is conscious. 
ICDs are highly effective for termination of VT and VF and also pro-
vide bradycardia pacing. The most common ICD complication is the 
delivery of unnecessary therapy (either ATP or shocks) in response to 
a rapid supraventricular tachycardia or electrical noise as a result of an 
ICD lead fracture. ICDs record and store electrograms from arrhythmia 
episodes which can be retrieved by interrogation of the ICD, which 
can be performed remotely and communicated via internet. This 
assessment is critical after an ICD shock to determine the arrhythmia 
diagnosis and exclude an unnecessary therapy. Device infection occurs 
in ~1% of patients.
ICDs decrease mortality in patients at risk for sudden death due to 
structural heart diseases. In all cases ICDs are recommended only if 
there is also expectation for survival of at least a year with acceptable 
functional capacity. The exception is in cases of patients with end-stage 
heart disease who are awaiting cardiac transplantation outside the hos-
pital, or who have left bundle branch block QRS prolongation such that 
they are likely to have improvement in ventricular function with car-
diac resynchronization therapy from a biventricular ICD (Fig. 247-6C).
Despite prompt termination of VT or VF by an ICD, the occurrence 
of these arrhythmias predicts subsequent increased mortality and 
risk of heart failure. Occurrence of VT or VF should therefore prompt 
assessment for potential causes including worsening heart failure, 
electrolyte abnormalities, and ischemia. Repeated shocks, even if 
appropriate, often induce posttraumatic stress disorder. Antiarrhyth-
mic drug therapy, most commonly amiodarone, or catheter ablation is 
often required for suppression of recurrent arrhythmias. Antiarrhyth-
mic drug therapy can alter the VT rate and the energy required for 
defibrillation, thereby necessitating programming changes in the ICD’s 
algorithms for detection and therapy.
The commonly used ICD system consists of endocardial leads to 
the right heart chambers with a pulse generator implanted in the 
pre-pectoral area (Fig. 247-6C). This transvenous form of ICD has the 
disadvantage of vascular occlusion, endocarditis in the event of infec-
tion, and difficulty with removal. A totally subcutaneous ICD system 
is now available. While it has the advantage of avoiding endovascular 
complications, the present iteration lacks the ability to pace the heart 
for tachycardia termination or for long-term pacing. A wearable ICD 
system with electrodes incorporated into a vest and an external battery 
pack is also available for short-term use in patients pending decision 
regarding a permanent implanted system.
Catheter Ablation for VT  Catheter ablation is usually performed 
by applying radiofrequency (RF) current to cause thermal injury by 
resistive heating of cardiac tissue responsible for the arrhythmia. An 
electrode catheter is used to map local electrical activity to identify the 
ventricular myocardium that is causing the arrhythmia, referred to as the 
arrhythmia substrate. The size and location of the arrhythmia substrate 
determines the ease and likely effectiveness of the procedure, as well 
as the potential complications. When the arrhythmia originates from 
the endocardium, as is most commonly the case, it can be reached from 
an endovascular approach via a femoral vein or artery. Less commonly 
FIGURE 247-5  Imaging studies of the left ventricle (LV) used to assist ablation for VT. Left panel is an MRI image of a longitudinal section demonstrating thinning of 
the anterior wall and late gadolinium enhancement in a sub-endocardial scar (white arrows). The middle panel shows a 2-D image of the LV in long axis corresponding 
to the sector through the mid LV (arrow in figure on right panel) obtained by an intra-cardiac echo probe positioned in the RV. An electro-anatomic 3-D map of the LV 
in the left anterior oblique projection is displayed in the right panel. The purple areas depict areas of normal voltage (>1.5 mV). Blue, green, and yellow represent 
progressively lower voltages with the red areas indicating scar (<0.5 mV). Channel of viable myocardium with slow conduction within the scar are identified with the 
light blue dots. Areas of ablation delivered to regions involved in re-entrant VT are indicated by maroon dots.
CHAPTER 248 Premature Ventricular Beats, Non-Sustained Ventricular Tachycardia, and Idioventricular Rhythm 
1755
ICD Shock
LV
lead
RV
lead
Atrial
lead
ICD
B
C
Antitachycardia Pacing
A
FIGURE 247-6  Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) and therapies for ventricular arrhythmias. A. A monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) is terminated by 
a burst of pacing impulses at a rate faster than VT (anti-tachycardia pacing). B. A rapid VT is converted with a high voltage shock (arrow). The chest x-ray in Panel C 
shows the components of an ICD capable of biventricular pacing. ICD generator in the subcutaneous tissue of the left upper chest, pacing leads in the right atrium 
and the LV branch of the coronary sinus (LV lead) and a pacing/defibrillating lead in the right ventricle (RV lead) are shown.
arrhythmias originate from the subepicardium, and percutaneous peri-
cardial puncture, similar to pericardiocentesis, is required to insert a 
catheter into the pericardial space for mapping and ablation. In patients 
with scar-related VT due to prior infarction or cardiomyopathy, ablation 
targets abnormal regions in the scar. Because these scars often contain 
multiple reentry circuits over relatively large regions, extensive areas 
of ablation are required and these areas are often identified as regions 
of low voltage displayed on anatomic reconstructions of the ventricle 
(Fig. 247-5).
Catheter ablation is often performed in patients with recurrent 
ventricular arrhythmias associated with poor cardiac function, and 
the procedure-related mortality in this situation is 0.5–3%. Outcomes 
are better for patients with prior infarction and VT than for patients 
with nonischemic cardiomyopathies in which the scar locations are 
more variable and often intramural or sub-epicardial. Ablation can be 
lifesaving for patients with very frequent or incessant VT.
Idiopathic VTs and PVCs that occur in the absence of structural 
heart disease usually originate from a small focus, for which catheter 
ablation has a higher success rate for preventing recurrent arrhythmia 
(see Chaps. 248 and 249).
■
■ARRHYTHMIA SURGERY
When antiarrhythmic drug therapy and catheter ablation fails, or is 
not an option, surgical cryoablation, often combined with aneurysmec-
tomy, can be effective therapy for recurrent VT due to prior myocardial 
infarction and has also been used successfully in a few patients with 
nonischemic heart disease. Few centers now maintain the expertise for 
this therapy.
■
■FURTHER READING
Pedersen CT et al: EHRA/HRS/APHRS expert consensus on ventric-
ular arrhythmias. Europace 16:1257, 2014.
Priori SG et al: 2015 ESC Guidelines for the management of patients 
with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden car-
diac death: The Task Force for the Management of Patients with 
Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac 
Death of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Endorsed by: 
Association for European Paediatric and Congenital Cardiology 
(AEPC). Eur Heart J 36:2793, 2015.
Premature Ventricular  
Beats, Non-Sustained 
Ventricular Tachycardia, and 
Idioventricular Rhythm
Roy M. John, William G. Stevenson   
248
■
■PREMATURE VENTRICULAR CONTRACTIONS AND 
NON-SUSTAINED VT
Premature ventricular contractions (see Fig. 247-1A) can be due to 
automaticity or reentry (see Chap. A9). They are often sensitive to sym-
pathetic stimulation and can be a sign of increased sympathetic tone, 
myocardial ischemia, hypoxia, electrolyte abnormalities, particularly 
hypokalemia, or underlying heart disease. During myocardial ischemia 
or in association with other heart disease, PVCs can be a harbinger of 
sustained VT or VF.
The ECG characteristics of the arrhythmia are often suggestive of 
whether structural heart disease is present. PVCs with smooth unin-
terrupted contours and sharp QRS deflections suggest an ectopic focus 
in relatively normal myocardium whereas broad notching and slurred 
QRS deflections suggest a diseased myocardial substrate. The QRS 
morphology also suggests the likely site of origin within the ventricle 
(see Fig. 247-4). PVCs that have a dominant S-wave in V1, referred to 
as left bundle branch block–like configuration originate from the right 
ventricle or interventricular septum. Those with a dominant R-wave in 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1756
abnormalities are seen in a number of genetically determined syn-
dromes associated with sudden death, including the long QT syn-
drome, Brugada syndrome, ARVC, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
(Fig. 248-1). An echocardiogram is often necessary to assess ventric-
ular function, wall motion abnormalities, and valvular heart disease. 
Contrast enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging is also useful 
for this purpose and for the detection of ventricular scarring that is 
the substrate for sustained VT (see Fig. 247-5). Exercise stress testing 
should be performed in patients with effort-related symptoms and for 
those at risk for coronary artery disease.
■
■TREATMENT OF IDIOPATHIC ARRHYTHMIAS
For PVC and non-sustained VT in the absence of structural heart 
disease, or a genetic sudden death syndrome, no specific therapy is 
needed unless the patient has significant symptoms or evidence that 
frequent PVCs are depressing ventricular function (see below). Reas-
surance that the arrhythmia is benign is often sufficient to allow the 
patient to cope with the symptoms, which will often wax and wane 
in frequency over years. Avoiding stimulants, such as caffeine and 
alcohol, is helpful in some patients. If symptoms require treatment, 
beta-adrenergic blockers and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel 
blockers (verapamil and diltiazem) are sometimes helpful. If these fail 
more membrane active antiarrhythmic drugs or catheter ablation are 
options. Antiarrhythmic agents flecainide, propafenone, mexiletine, 
and amiodarone can be effective but the potential for side effects, war-
rants careful consideration. Catheter ablation is effective at suppressing 
this arrhythmia in about 80% of patients. Failure of ablation is usually 
due to inability to provoke the arrhythmia for mapping in the electro-
physiology laboratory, or an origin that is not accessible, such as deep 
within the myocardium.
■
■PVCs AND NON-SUSTAINED VT ASSOCIATED WITH 
ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES
During and soon after acute myocardial infarction (MI), PVCs and 
non-sustained VT are common and can be an early manifestation 
of ischemia and a harbinger of subsequent VF. Treatment with beta- 
adrenergic blockers and correction of hypokalemia and hypomagne-
semia reduce the risk of VF. Routine administration of antiarrhythmic 
drugs such as lidocaine does not reduce mortality and is not indicated 
for suppression of PVCs or asymptomatic non-sustained VT, but may 
be implemented transiently if an episode of sustained VT or VF occurs, 
with the goal of reducing the likelihood of a subsequent episode.
Following recovery from acute MI, frequent 
PVCs (typically >10 PVCs/h), repetitive PVCs 
with couplets, and non-sustained VT are markers 
for depressed ventricular function and increased 
mortality, but routine antiarrhythmic drug therapy 
to suppress these arrhythmias does not improve 
mortality and treatment with the sodium channel 
blocker flecainide increases mortality. Amiodar-
one therapy reduces sudden death, but does not 
improve total mortality. Therefore, amiodarone is 
an option for treatment of symptomatic arrhyth-
mias in this population when the potential benefit 
outweighs its potential toxicities. Beta-adrenergic 
blockers reduce sudden death, but have limited 
effect on spontaneous arrhythmias.
For survivors of an acute MI, an implantable 
cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) reduces mortality 
in certain high-risk groups: patients who have 
survived >40 days after the acute MI and have a 
left ventricular ejection fraction of ≤0.30, or who 
have an ejection fraction <0.35 and have symp-
tomatic heart failure (functional Class II or III); 
and patients >5 days after MI who have a reduced 
left ventricular ejection fraction, nonsustained VT, 
and inducible sustained VT or VF on electrophys-
iological testing. ICDs do not reduce mortality 
when routinely implanted soon after MI, and 
B
V3
V2
V1
A
V3
V2
V1
FIGURE 248-1  Precordial chest leads V1–V3 showing typical abnormalities of arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) (A) and Brugada syndrome (B). In ARVC, there is T inversion and 
delayed ventricular activation manifest as Epsilon waves (arrows). Panel B shows ST elevation in V1 and 
V2 typical of the Brugada syndrome.
V1 originate from the left ventricle. A superior frontal plane axis (neg-
ative in II, III, AVF) indicates initial depolarization of the inferior wall 
(diaphraghmatic aspect of the heart), while an inferior frontal plane 
axis (positive in II, III, AVF) indicates an origin in the cranial aspect of 
the heart. The location of arrhythmia origin often suggests the nature 
of underlying heart disease. Most ventricular arrhythmias that are 
not associated with structural heart disease have a left bundle branch 
block–like configuration. PVCs with RBBB configuration are more 
likely to be associated with structural heart disease. Multiple mor-
phologies of PVCs (multifocal PVCs) are also more likely to indicate 
structural heart disease (see Fig. 247-1B). In patients with heart disease, 
a greater frequency and complexity (couplets and non-sustained VT) of 
these arrhythmias are associated with more severe disease.
■
■PVCs AND NON-SUSTAINED VT DURING ACUTE 
ILLNESS
These arrhythmias are often encountered in patients who are being 
evaluated in the emergency room, or who have been hospitalized and 
are on a cardiac monitor. When encountered during acute illness or 
as a new finding, evaluation should focus on detection and correction 
of potential aggravating factors and causes, specifically myocardial 
ischemia, ventricular dysfunction and electrolyte abnormalities, most 
commonly hypokalemia. Underlying heart disease should be defined.
■
■PVCs AND NON-SUSTAINED VT IN PATIENTS 
WITHOUT HEART DISEASE
The most frequent site of origin for idiopathic ventricular arrhythmias 
is the right ventricular outflow tract, giving rise to PVCs or VT that 
have a left bundle branch block–like configuration, with an inferi-
orly directed frontal plane axis as discussed below (see Fig. 247-2). 
However, QRS morphology alone is not reliable as an indicator of 
disease or subsequent risk. Non-sustained VT is usually monomor-
phic with rates <200 beats/min and typically lasting <8 beats (see 
Fig. 247-2). Non-sustained VT that is very rapid, polymorphic, or 
with a first beat that occurs prior to the peak of the T-wave (“short- 
coupled”) is uncommon and should prompt careful evaluation for 
underlying disease or genetic syndromes associated with sudden death.
A family history of sudden death should prompt evaluation for 
genetic syndromes associated with sudden death, including cardio-
myopathy, long QT syndrome and arrhythmogenic right ventricu-
lar cardiomyopathy (ARVC) (see below). Any abnormality on the 
12-lead ECG warrants further evaluation (Fig. 248-1). Repolarization 
CHAPTER 249 Sustained Ventricular Tachycardia
1757
have not been demonstrated to improve mortality when implanted 
soon after coronary artery revascularization.
■
■PVCs AND NON-SUSTAINED VT ASSOCIATED WITH 
DEPRESSED VENTRICULAR FUNCTION AND HEART 
FAILURE
Premature ventricular beats and non-sustained VT are common in 
patients with depressed ventricular function and heart failure, and are 
markers for disease severity and increased mortality, but antiarrhyth-
mic drug therapy to suppress these arrhythmias has not been shown to 
improve survival. The use of anti-arrhythmic drugs whose major action 
is blockade of the cardiac sodium channel (flecainide, propafenone, 
mexiletine, quinidine, and disopyramide) is avoided in patients with 
structural heart disease because of a risk of pro-arrhythmia, negative 
inotropic effects and increased mortality. Therapy with the potassium 
channel blocker dofetilide, does not reduce mortality. Amiodarone 
suppresses ventricular ectopy and reduces sudden death but does not 
improve overall survival. ICDs are the major therapy to protect against 
sudden death in patients at high risk and are recommended for those 
with LV ejection fraction <0.35 and NYHA class II and III heart failure, 
in whom they reduce mortality from 36 to 29%, over 5 years.
■
■PVC AND NON-SUSTAINED VT ASSOCIATED WITH 
OTHER CARDIAC DISEASES
Ventricular ectopy is associated with increased mortality in patients 
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Chap. 254) or with congenital heart 
disease associated with right or left ventricular dysfunction. In these 
patients, management is similar to that for patients with ventricular 
dysfunction. Pharmacologic suppression of the arrhythmia has not 
been shown to improve mortality. ICDs are indicated for patients con-
sidered at high risk for sudden cardiac death.
■
■PVC-INDUCED VENTRICULAR DYSFUNCTION
Very frequent ventricular ectopy and repetitive non-sustained VT (see 
Fig. 247-2) can depress ventricular function, possibly through an effect 
similar to chronic tachycardia or by inducing ventricular dysynchrony. 
Depression of ventricular function rarely occurs unless PVCs account 
for >15 to 20% of total beats over a 24-h period. Often the PVCs are 
idiopathic and unifocal, most commonly originating from the left ven-
tricular papillary muscles or outflow tract regions where they can be 
targeted for ablation. The distinction between PVC- induced ventric-
ular dysfunction as compared to a primary cardiomyopathic process 
causing ventricular dysfunction and arrhythmia is difficult and in some 
cases can be made only retrospectively by observing an improvement 
in ventricular function after the arrhythmia is suppressed with an anti-
arrhythmic drug, such as amiodarone, or by catheter ablation.
■
■IDIOVENTRICULAR RHYTHMS
Three or more ventricular beats at a rate slower than 100 beats/min 
are termed an idioventricular rhythm (see Fig. 247-1C). Automaticity 
is the likely mechanism. Idioventricular rhythms are common during 
acute MI and may emerge during sinus bradycardia. Often, they are 
not symptomatic, but hemodynamic compromise may occur with the 
loss of ventricular synchrony in susceptible patients. Atropine may be 
administered to increase the sinus rates if this is a concern. This rhythm 
is also common in patients with cardiomyopathies or sleep apnea. It 
can also be idiopathic, often emerging when the sinus rate slows dur-
ing sleep. Therapy should target any underlying cause and correction 
of bradycardia. Specific antiarrhythmic therapy for asymptomatic idio-
ventricular rhythm is not necessary.
■
■FURTHER READING
Katritsis DG et al: Non-sustained ventricular tachycardia. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 60:1993, 2012.
Pedersen CT et al: EHRA/HRS/APHRS expert consensus on ventric-
ular arrhythmias. Europace 16:1257, 2014.
Sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) presents as a 
wide QRS tachycardia that has the same QRS configuration from beat 
to beat indicating an identical sequence of ventricular depolarization 
for each beat (see Fig. 247-3A). VT originates from a stable focus or 
reentry circuit. In structural heart disease, the substrate is often an area 
of patchy replacement fibrosis due to infarction, inflammation or prior 
cardiac surgery that creates anatomical or functional reentry pathways 
(see Fig. 247-5). Less commonly, VT is related to reentry or automaticity 
in a diseased Purkinje system. Idiopathic VT occurs in the absence of 
structural heart disease and is due to a focal region of automaticity or 
reentry involving a portion of the Purkinje system.
The clinical presentation varies depending on the rate of the 
arrhythmia, underlying cardiac function, and autonomic adaptation in 
response to the arrhythmia. While rapid VT, >200 beats/min, usually 
causes hypotension that may present as syncope, patients with normal 
cardiac function might tolerate rapid VT, and those with severe left 
venricular (LV) dysfunction may experience symptoms of hypotension, 
even if VT is slower than 150 beats/min. Monomorphic VT that is rapid 
or associated with structural heart disease may deteriorate to ventricu-
lar fibrillation (VF), which may be the initial cardiac rhythm recorded 
at the time of resuscitation of a cardiac arrest.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
Sustained monomorphic VT has to be distinguished from other causes 
of uniform wide QRS tachycardia. These include supraventricular 
tachycardia with left or right bundle branch block aberrant conduc-
tion, supraventricular tachycardias conducted to the ventricles over an 
accessory pathway (Chap. 241), and rapid cardiac pacing in a patient 
with a pacemaker or defibrillator. In the presence of known heart 
disease VT is the most likely diagnosis of a wide QRS tachycardia. 
Hemodynamic stability during the arrhythmia does not exclude VT. A 
number of ECG criteria have been evaluated to distinguish supraven-
tricular tachycardia with aberrancy from VT. The presence of AV disso-
ciation is usually a reliable marker for VT (Fig. 249-1), but P-waves can 
be difficult to define. A P-wave following each QRS does not exclude 
VT because 1:1 conduction from ventricle to atrium can occur. A mono-
phasic R wave or Rs complex in AVR or concordance from V1 to V6 of 
249 Sustained Ventricular 
Tachycardia
Roy M. John, William G. Stevenson 
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
VT versus Supraventricular Tachycardia
with Aberrancy
Possible SVT with aberrancy
VT still possible
No rS or Rs in
any of V1 to V6
AVR = R or Rs
AV dissociation
VT
VT
VT
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V1
V2
V3
AVR AVR
V4
V5
V6
FIGURE 249-1  Algorithm for differentiation of ventricular tachycardia from 
supraventricular tachycardia with aberration.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1758
Nonischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy 
Sustained mono-
morphic VT associated with nonischemic cardiomyopathy is usually 
due to scar-related reentry. The etiology of scar is often unclear, but pro-
gressive replacement fibrosis is the likely cause. On cardiac MR imag-
ing, scars are detectable as areas of delayed gadolinium enhancement 
and are more often intramural or sub-epicardial in location as compared 
with patients with prior MI. Scars that cause VT are often located 
adjacent to a valve annulus and can occur in either ventricle. Any car-
diomyopathic process can cause scars and VT, but cardiac sarcoidosis, 
Chagas disease, and cardiomyopathy due to Lamin A/C mutations are 
particularly associated with monomorphic VT (Table 249-1). An ICD is 
usually indicated with additional drugs or catheter ablation for control 
of recurrent VT.
■
■MONOMORPHIC VT IN ARRHYTHMOGENIC RIGHT 
VENTRICULAR (RV) CARDIOMYOPATHY (ARVC)
ARVC (Chap. 254) is a rare genetic disorder most commonly due to 
mutations in genes encoding for cardiac desmosomal proteins. Approx-
imately 50% have a familial transmission with autosomal dominant 
inheritance. A less common, autosomal recessive form is associated 
with cardio-cutaneous syndromes that include Naxos disease and 
Carvajal syndrome. Patients typically present between the second 
and fifth decade with palpitations, syncope or cardiac arrest owing to 
sustained monomorphic VT, although polymorphic VT can also occur. 
Fibrosis and fibro-fatty replacement most commonly involves the right 
monophasic R or S waves are also relatively specific for VT (Fig. 249-1). 
A number of other QRS morphology criteria have also been described, 
but all have limitations, and are not very reliable in patients with severe 
heart disease. In patients with known bundle branch block, the same 
QRS morphology during tachycardia as during sinus rhythm suggests 
supraventricular tachycardia rather than VT, but is not absolutely reli-
able. An electrophysiological study is sometimes required for definitive 
diagnosis. Occasionally, noise and movement artifacts on telemetry 
recordings can simulate VT; prompt recognition can avoid unnecessary 
tests and interventions.
When LV function is depressed or there is evidence of structural 
myocardial disease, scar-related reentry is the most likely cause of sus-
tained monomorphic VT. Scars are suggested by pathologic Q-waves 
on the ECG, segmental left or right ventricular wall motion abnor-
malities on echocardiogram or nuclear imaging, and areas of delayed 
gadolinium enhancement during MR imaging (see Fig. 247-5).
■
■TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS
Initial management follows Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) 
guidelines (Chap. 299). If hypotension, impaired consciousness, or pul-
monary edema are present, QRS synchronous electrical cardioversion 
should be performed, ideally after sedation if the patient is conscious. 
For stable tachycardia a trial of adenosine is reasonable, as this may 
clarify a supraventricular tachycardia with aberrancy (Chap. 241). 
Intravenous amiodarone is the drug of choice if heart disease is present. 
Following restoration of sinus rhythm, hospitalization and evaluation 
to define underlying heart disease is required. Assessment of cardiac 
biomarkers for evidence of myocardial infarction (MI) is appropriate, 
but acute MI is rarely a cause of sustained monomorphic VT, and 
elevations in troponin or CK-MB are more likely to indicate myocar-
dial damage that is secondary to hypotension and ischemia from the 
VT. Subsequent management is determined by the underlying heart 
disease and frequency of VT. If VT recurs frequently or is incessant, 
administration of antiarrhythmic medications, or catheter ablation may 
be required to restore stability. More commonly sustained monomor-
phic VT occurs as an isolated episode, but with a risk of recurrence. 
Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) are usually warranted 
for sustained VT associated with structural heart disease.
■
■SUSTAINED MONOMORPHIC VT IN SPECIFIC 
DISEASES
Coronary Artery Disease  Patients who present with sustained 
monomorphic VT associated with coronary artery disease typically 
have a history of prior large MI and present years after the acute infarct 
with a remodeled ventricle and markedly depressed left ventricular 
function. Even when there is biomarker evidence of acute MI, a preex-
isting scar from previous MI should be suspected as the cause of the 
VT. Infarct scars provide a durable substrate for sustained VT and up 
to 70% of patients have a recurrence of the arrhythmia within 2 years. 
Scar-related reentry is not dependent on recurrent acute myocardial 
ischemia, so coronary revascularization cannot be anticipated to pre-
vent recurrent VT, even when it may be appropriate for treatment of 
angina or other indications. Depressed ventricular function, which is 
a risk factor for sudden death, is usually present. Implantation of an 
ICD is indicated for most patients provided that there is a reasonable 
expectation of survival with acceptable functional status for the next 
year after recovery from the VT episode. Compared with antiarrhyth-
mic drug therapy ICDs reduce annual mortality from 12.3 to 8.8% and 
lower arrhythmic deaths by 50% in patients with hemodynamically 
significant sustained VT or a history of cardiac arrest. Chronic amiodar-
one therapy may be considered for patients who are not candidates for, 
or who decline ICD placement.
Following ICD implantation, patients remain at risk for heart failure, 
recurrent ischemic events, and recurrent VT, with a 5-year mortality 
that exceeds 30%. Attention to therapies that benefit patients with 
depressed ventricular function, including beta-adrenergic blocking 
agents, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, and statins is impor-
tant. Patients with frequent symptomatic recurrences of VT require 
antiarrhythmic drug therapy or catheter ablation.
TABLE 249-1 Ventricular Arrhythmias Associated with Different 
Forms of Heart Disease
1.  Idiopathic ventricular tachycardia (VT) without structural heart disease
A.  Outflow tract origin
a.  Right ventricular (RV) outflow tract: left bundle branch block pattern 
with inferior axis (tall QRS in inferior leads) and late transition in the 
precordial leads
b.  Left ventricular (LV) outflow tract: prominent “r” in V1
B.  Left posterior fascicular VT
Right bundle branch block pattern with left axis deviation (most 
common)
2.  Ischemic cardiomyopathy
•  Monomorphic VT is common with prior large myocardial infarction
•  Polymorphic VT and ventricular fibrillation (VF) should prompt ischemia 
evaluation
3.  Nonischemic cardiomyopathy
•  Polymorphic VT and VF more common but fibrotic scars can cause 
monomorphic VT especially with sarcoidosis, Chagas disease, Lamin 
A/C genetic cardiomyopathy
4.  Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy
•  Monomorphic VT usually of right ventricular origin (left bundle branch 
morphology)
•  Polymorphic VT and VF can occur independently or through degeneration 
of monomorphic VT
5.  Repaired Tetralogy of Fallot
•  Monomorphic VT of right ventricular origin (usually left bundle branch 
morphology)
6.  Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
•  Polymorphic VT or ventricular fibrillation
•  Less commonly, monomorphic VT associated with myocardial scars
7.  Genetic Arrhythmia Syndromes:
A.  Long QT syndrome
•  Torsade de Pointes VT
B.  Brugada syndrome
•  Ventricular fibrillation
C.  Catecholaminergic polymorphic VT
•  Polymorphic VT or bidirectional VT
D.  Short QT syndrome
•  Ventricular fibrillation
E.  Early repolarization syndrome
8.  Polymorphic VT or VF
CHAPTER 250 Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia and Ventricular Fibrillation
1759
ventricular myocardium, and provide the substrate for reentrant VT 
that usually has a left bundle branch block–like configuration, consis-
tent with the right ventricular origin and can resemble idiopathic VT. 
The sinus rhythm ECG suggests the disease in >85% of patients, most 
often showing T-wave inversions in V1-V3 (see Fig. 248-1). Delayed 
activation of the right ventricle may cause a widened QRS (>110 ms) 
in the right precordial leads and a prolonged S-wave upstroke in those 
leads, and occasionally a deflection at the end of the QRS known as 
an “Epsilon” wave (see Fig. 248-1). Cardiac imaging may show right 
ventricular enlargement or areas of abnormal motion, or reveal areas of 
scar on contrast enhanced MRI.
Left ventricular involvement can occur and occasionally precede 
manifest right ventricular disease. Heart failure is rare except in late 
stages, and survival to advanced age can be anticipated provided that 
VT can be controlled. An ICD is recommended. When VT is exercise- 
induced, it may respond to beta-adrenergic blockers and limiting exer-
cise. Sotalol and amiodarone have been used to reduce recurrences. 
Catheter ablation prevents or reduces VT episodes in 70% of patients, 
but epicardial mapping and ablation is often required.
Tetralogy of Fallot  Ventricular tachycardia occurs in 3–14% of 
patients late after repair of tetralogy of Fallot, and contributes to a 2% 
per decade risk of sudden death. Monomorphic VT is due to reentry 
around areas of surgically created scar in the RV (Table 249-1). Factors 
associated with VT risk include age >5 years at the time of repair, 
high-grade ventricular ectopy, inducible VT on an electrophysiologic 
study, abnormal RV hemodynamics, and sinus rhythm QRS duration 
>180 ms. An ICD is usually warranted for patients who have a spon-
taneous episode of VT, but criteria for a prophylactic ICD in other 
patients have not been established. Catheter ablation or anti-arrhyth-
mic drug therapy is used to control recurrent episodes.
■
■BUNDLE BRANCH REENTRY VT
Reentry through the Purkinje system occurs in ~5% of patients with 
monomorphic VT in the presence of structural heart disease. The 
reentry circuit typically revolves retrograde via the left bundle and 
anterograde down the right bundle, thereby producing VT that has a 
left bundle branch block configuration. Catheter ablation of the right 
bundle branch abolishes this VT. Bundle branch reentry is usually 
associated with severe underlying heart disease. Other scar-related 
VTs are often present and often require additional therapy or ICD 
implantation.
■
■IDIOPATHIC MONOMORPHIC VT
Idiopathic VT in patients without structural heart disease usually 
presents with palpitations, lightheadedness, and occasionally syn-
cope, often provoked by sympathetic stimulation during exercise or 
emotional upset. The QRS morphology of the arrhythmia suggests the 
diagnosis (see below). The sinus rhythm ECG is normal. Cardiac imag-
ing shows normal ventricular function and no evidence of ventricular 
scar. Occasionally a patient with structural heart disease is found to 
have concomitant idiopathic VT, unrelated to the structural disease. 
Sudden death is rare.
Outflow Tract VTs originate from a focus, usually with features con-
sistent with triggered automaticity. The arrhythmia may present with 
sustained VT, non-sustained VT or PVCs often provoked by exercise or 
emotional upset. Repeated bursts of non-sustained VT, which may occur 
incessantly, are known as repetitive monomorphic VT and can cause 
tachycardia—induced cardiomyopathy with depressed ventricular func-
tion that recovers after suppression of the arrhythmia. Most originate 
in the right ventricular outflow tract, which gives rise to VT that has a 
left bundle branch block configuration in V1 and an axis that is directed 
inferiorly, with tall R-waves in II, III, and AVF (see Fig. 247-2). Idiopathic 
VT can also arise in the left ventricular outflow tract or in sleeves of 
myocardium that extend along the aortic root. LV origin is suspected 
when leads V1 or V2 have prominent R-waves (Table 249-1). Although 
this typical outflow tract QRS morphology favors idiopathic VT, some 
cardiomyopathies, notably ARVC, can cause PVCs or VT from this 
region. Excluding these diseases is an initial focus of evaluation.
Left ventricular intrafascicular VT presents with sustained VT that 
has a right bundle branch block–like configuration. It is often exercise 
induced and occurs more often in men than women. The mechanism 
is reentry in or near the septal ramifications of the left ventricular 
Purkinje system.
■
■MANAGEMENT OF IDIOPATHIC VT
Treatment is required for symptoms or when frequent or incessant 
arrhythmias depress ventricular function. Beta-adrenergic blockers 
are first-line therapy. Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers 
(diltiazem and verapamil) are sometimes effective. Catheter ablation 
is warranted for severe symptoms or when beta-blockers or calcium 
channel blockers are not effective or not desired. Efficacy and risks of 
catheter ablation vary with the specific site of origin of the VT, being 
most favorable for arrhythmias originating in the right ventricular 
outflow tract. Failure of ablation is often due to inability to initiate the 
arrhythmia for mapping in the electrophysiology laboratory.
Left ventricular interfascicular VT can be terminated by intravenous 
administration of verapamil, although chronic therapy with oral ver-
apamil is not always effective. Catheter ablation is recommended if 
beta-adrenergic blockers or calcium channel blockers are ineffective or 
not desired.
■
■FURTHER READING
Alzand BS, Crijns HJ: Diagnostic criteria for broad QRS complex 
tachycardia: Decades of evolution. Europace 13:465, 2011.
John RM, Stevenson WG: Outflow tract premature ventricular con-
tractions and ventricular tachycardia: The typical and the challeng-
ing. Card Electrophysiol Clin 8:545, 2016.
Pedersen CT et al: EHRA/HRS/APHRS Expert consensus on ventric-
ular arrhythmias. Europace 16:1257, 2014.
250 Polymorphic Ventricular 
Tachycardia and Ventricular 
Fibrillation
Roy M. John, William G. Stevenson  
■
■POLYMORPHIC VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA (VT)
Sustained polymorphic VT can be seen with any form of structural 
heart disease. However, unlike sustained monomorphic VT, polymor-
phic VT does not always indicate a structural abnormality or focus 
of automaticity. Reentry with continually changing reentrant paths, 
spiral wave reentry and multiple automatic foci are potential mecha-
nisms (Chap. A9). Sustained polymorphic VT usually degenerates into 
ventricular fibrillation (VF). Polymorphic VT is typically seen in asso-
ciation with acute myocardial infarction or ischemia (MI), ventricular 
hypertrophy, and a number of genetic mutations that affect cardiac ion 
channels (see Table 249-1).
Polymorphic VT Associated with Acute Myocardial 
Infarction/Ischemia  Acute MI or ischemia is a common cause 
of polymorphic VT and should be the initial consideration in manage-
ment. Approximately 10% of patients with acute MI develop VT that 
degenerates to VF, likely related to reentry through the infarct border 
zone. The risk is greatest in the first hour of acute MI. Following defi-
brillation as per the Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) guidelines, 
management is as for acute MI (Chap. 269). Beta-adrenergic blockers, 
correction of electrolyte abnormalities, and prompt myocardial reper-
fusion are required. Repeated episodes of polymorphic VT suggest 
ongoing MI and warrant assessment of adequacy of myocardial reper-
fusion. Polymorphic VT and VF that occur within the first 48 h of acute 
MI are associated with greater in-hospital mortality, but those that 
survive past hospital discharge are not at increased risk for arrhythmic 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1760 sudden death. Long-term therapy for post-infarct ventricular arrhyth-
mia is determined by residual left ventricular (LV) function with an 
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) being indicated for persis-
tent severe left ventricular (LV) dysfunction (LV ejection fraction <0.35).
Repolarization Abnormalities and Genetic Arrhythmia 
Syndromes  • 
ACQUIRED LONG QT  Abnormal prolongation of the 
QT interval is associated with the polymorphic VT torsades des pointes 
(Fig. 250-1). The VT often has a characteristic initiation sequence of a 
premature ventricular beat that induces a pause, followed by a sinus 
beat that has a longer QT interval and interruption of the T-wave by 
the premature ventricular contraction (PVC) that is the first beat of 
the polymorphic VT. This characteristic initiation is termed “pause- 
dependent” (Fig. 250-1). Causes of QT prolongation include electrolyte 
abnormalities, bradycardia, and a number of medications that block 
repolarizing potassium currents, notably the antiarrhythmic drugs 
sotalol, dofetilide, and ibutilide, but also a number of other medica-
tions used for non-cardiac diseases, including erythromycin, pent-
amidine, haloperidol, phenothiazines, and methadone (Table 250-1). 
Individual susceptibility may be related to genetic polymorphisms or 
mutations that influence repolarization.
Patients typically present with near-syncope, syncope, or cardiac 
arrest. Sustained episodes degenerate to VF requiring defibrillation. 
PVCs and non-sustained VT often precede episodes of sustained VT. 
Intravenous administration of 1–2 g of magnesium sulphate, usually 
suppresses recurrent episodes. If magnesium alone is ineffective, 
increasing heart rate with isoproterenol infusion or pacing, to a rate of 
100–120 depolarizations/min as required to suppress PVCs, usually 
suppresses VT recurrences. These maneuvers allow time for correction 
of associated electrolyte disturbance (hypokalemia and hypocalcemia) 
and bradycardia and removal of any causative drugs (Table 250-1). 
Drug interactions that elevate levels of the offending agent are often 
a precipitating factor. Patients who experience a polymorphic VT 
induced by QT prolongation should be considered to have a suscepti-
bility to the arrhythmia, and should avoid all future exposure to medi-
cations known to prolong the QT interval.
QT = 680 ms
Sinus
beat
I
II
III
II
V1
aVR
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
II
V1
V1
PVC
Long interval 
Short
interval
Initiating beat of
polymorphic VT
A
B
FIGURE 250-1  Torsades des pointes VT in patient with bradycardia and marked QT prolongation. A.12-lead ECG showing 2:1 AV block (P waves marked by blue arrows) 
with heart rate of 40 bpm and QT interval of 680 ms and corrected QT of 550 ms. B. The bottom panel shows a telemetry rhythm strip with periods of self-limiting 
torsades des pointes polymorphic VT. Following a normally conducted sinus beat, a premature ventricular contraction (PVC) causes a compensatory pause leading to a 
long RR interval. A PVC after the next sinus beat initiates VT. This is the classic “pause dependent” mode of initiation of torsades des pointes VT with long–short intervals. 
VT, ventricular tachycardia.
CONGENITAL LONG QT SYNDROME  The congenital long QT syndrome 
(LQTS) is caused by mutations in genes coding for cardiac ion chan-
nels responsible for ventricular repolarization. The corrected QT (QTc) 
is typically prolonged to >440 ms in men and 460 ms in women. 
Symptoms are due to torsades des pointes VT (Fig. 250-1). Several forms 
of congenital LQTS have been identified, but three groups of mutations 
that lead to LQT-1, LQT-2 or LQT-3 syndromes account for 90% of 
cases. The most frequently encountered mutations, LQTS 1 and 2, are 
due to abnormalities of potassium channels, but mutations affecting 
the sodium channel (LQTS-3) and calcium channels have also been 
described (Table 250-1).
Typical presentation is with syncope or cardiac arrest, usually dur-
ing childhood. In LQTS-1, episodes tend to occur during exertion, par-
ticularly swimming. In LQTS-2, sudden auditory stimuli or emotional 
upset predispose to events. In LQTS-3, sudden death tends to occur 
during sleep. Asymptomatic patients may be discovered in the course 
of family screening or on a routine ECG. Genotyping can be helpful for 
family screening and to provide reassurance regarding the diagnosis. 
Correlations of genotype with risk and response to therapy are begin-
ning to emerge. In most patients with LQT-1 or LQT-2, adequate doses 
of beta-blocker therapy (the non-selective agents nadolol or propra-
nolol are favored) are sufficient protection from arrhythmia episodes. 
Markers of increased risk include QTc interval exceeding 0.5 s, female 
gender, and a history of syncope or cardiac arrest. Recurrent syncope 
despite beta-blocker therapy or a high-risk profile merits consideration 
of an ICD. Avoidance of QT prolonging drugs is critical for all patients 
with the LQTS including those who are genotype positive, but have 
normal QT intervals.
SHORT QT SYNDROME  Short QT syndrome is very rare compared to 
the LQTS. The QTc is shorter than 0.36, and usually less than 0.3 s. The 
genetic abnormality causes a gain of function of the potassium chan-
nel (IKr) or reduced inward depolarizing currents. The abnormality is 
associated with atrial fibrillation, polymorphic VT, and sudden death.
BRUGADA SYNDROME  Brugada syndrome is a rare syndrome charac-
terized by >0.2 mV of ST segment elevation with a coved ST segment 
CHAPTER 250 Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia and Ventricular Fibrillation
1761
TABLE 250-1  Causes of QT Prolongation and Torsade de Pointes 
Ventricular Tachycardia (VT)
1.  Congenital long QT syndromes (see text for details)
  Long QT syndrome type 1: Reduced repolarizing current IKs due to 
mutation in KCNQ1 gene
  Long QT syndrome type 2: Reduced repolarizing current IKr due to 
mutation in KCNH2 gene
  Long QT syndrome type 3: Delayed inactivation of the INa due to 
mutations in SCN5A gene
  Others: Several other types of Long QT syndromes have been described; 
long QT types 1, 2, and 3 account for 80–90% of cases
2.  Acquired Prolongation of QT Interval
Electrolyte abnormalities:
  Hypokalemia
  Hypomagnesemia
  Hypocalcemia
Drugs:
Antiarrhythmic drugs
  Class IA: Quinidine, disopyramide, procainamide
  Class III: Sotalol, amiodarone (QT prolongation common but torsade VT 
is rare), ibutilide, dofetilide, almokalant
Antibiotics
  Macrolides: Erythromycin, clarithromycin, azithromycin
  Fluroquinolones: Levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin,
  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
  Clindamycin
  Pentamidine
  Chloroquine
  Antifungals: Ketoconazole, itraconazole
  Antivirals: Amantadine
Antipsychotics
  Haloperidol, phenothiazines, thioridazine, trifluoperazine, sertindole, 
zimeldine, ziprasidone
  Tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants
Antihistamines (histamine 1-receptor antagonists)
  Terfenadine, astemizole, diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine
Cholinergic antagonists: Cisapride, organophosphates
Citrate (massive blood transfusions)
Cocaine
Methadone
Fluoxetine (in conjunction with other drugs that prolong QT)
Cardiac conditions
  Myocardial ischemia and infarction
  Myocarditis
  Marked bradycardia
  Stress cardiomyopathy
Endocrine disorders
  Hypothyroidism
  Hyperparathyroidism
  Pheochromocytoma
  Hyperaldosteronism
Intracranial disorders
  Subarachnoid hemorrhage
  Thalamic hematoma
  Cerebrovascular accident
  Encephalitis
  Head injury
Nutritional disorders
  Anorexia nervosa
  Starvation
  Liquid protein diets
  Gastroplasty and ileojejunal bypass
  Celiac disease
and negative T-wave in more than one anterior precordial lead (V1–V3) 
(see Fig. 248-1) and episodes of syncope or cardiac arrest due to 
polymorphic VT in the absence of structural heart disease. Cardiac 
arrest may occur during sleep or be provoked by febrile illness. Males 
are more commonly affected than females. Mutations involving car-
diac sodium channels are identified in ~25% of cases. Distinction from 
patients with similar ST elevation owing to left ventricular hypertrophy, 
pericarditis, myocardial ischemia or MI hyperkalemia, hypothermia, 
right bundle branch block and arrhythmogenic right ventricular car-
diomyopathy (ARVC) is often difficult. Furthermore, the characteristic 
ST-segment elevation can wax and wane over time and may become 
pronounced during acute illness and fever. Administration of the 
sodium channel blocking drug flecainide, ajmaline, or procainamide 
can augment or unmask ST elevation in affected individuals. An ICD is 
indicated for individuals who have had unexplained syncope or been 
resuscitated from cardiac arrest. Quinidine and catheter ablation of 
abnormal regions in the epicardial right ventricular (RV) has been used 
successfully to suppress frequent episodes of VT.
EARLY REPOLARIZATION SYNDROME  Patients resuscitated from VF who 
have no structural heart disease or other identified abnormality have 
a higher prevalence of J-point elevation with notching in the terminal 
QRS. A family history of sudden death is present in some patients, sug-
gesting a potential genetic basis. J-point elevation is also seen in some 
patients with the Brugada syndrome and is associated with a higher 
risk of arrhythmias. An ICD is recommended for those who have had 
prior cardiac arrest. It should be noted that J-point elevation is com-
monly seen as a normal variant in patients without arrhythmias and in 
the absence of specific symptoms, the clinical relevance is not known.
CATECHOLAMINERGIC POLYMORPHIC VT  This rare familial syndrome is 
due to mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor and less commonly, 
the sarcoplasmic calcium binding protein, calsequestin 2. These muta-
tions result in abnormal sarcoplasmic calcium handling and polymor-
phic ventricular arrhythmias that resemble those seen with digitalis 
toxicity. The VT is polymorphic or has a characteristic alternating QRS 
morphology termed bidirectional VT. Patients usually present during 
childhood with exercise or emotion induced palpitations, syncope, or 
cardiac arrest. Beta-adrenergic blockers (e.g., nadolol and propranolol) 
and an implantable defibrillator are usually recommended. Verapamil 
or flecainide or surgical left cardiac sympathetic denervation reduces 
or prevents recurrent VT in some patients.
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY (HCM)  HCM is the most common 
genetic cardiovascular disorder occurring in 1 in 500 individuals and is a 
prominent cause of sudden death before the age of 35 years (Chap. 254). 
Sudden death can be due to polymorphic VT/VF. Rarely sustained 
monomorphic VT occurs related to areas of ventricular scar. Risk fac-
tors for sudden death in this disease include young age, non-sustained 
VT, failure of blood pressure to increase during exercise, recent (within 
6 months) syncope, ventricular wall thickness >3 cm, and possibly the 
severity of LV outflow obstruction. An ICD is generally indicated for 
high-risk subjects, but the specific risk profile warranting an ICD con-
tinues to be debated. Surgical myectomy, performed to relieve outflow 
obstruction has been associated with a sudden death rate of <1% per 
year. The reported annual rate of sustained VT or sudden death after 
transcoronary ethanol septal ablation done to relieve outflow obstruc-
tion has been reported to range between 1 and 5%.
GENETIC DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHIES  Genetic dilated cardiomyop-
athies account for 30–40% of cases of nonischemic dilated cardiomy-
opathies. Some are associated with muscular dystrophy. Autosomal 
dominant, recessive, X-linked, and mitochondrial inheritance patterns 
are recognized. Mutations in genes coding for structural proteins of 
the nuclear lamina (Lamin A/C) and the SCN5A gene are particularly 
associated with conduction system disease and ventricular arrhyth-
mias. They can experience polymorphic VT and cardiac arrest or 
develop areas of scar causing sustained monomorphic VT. ICDs are 
recommended for those who have had a sustained VT or are at high 
risk due to significantly depressed ventricular function (LV ejection 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1762 fraction ≤0.35 and associated with heart failure) or a malignant family 
history of sudden death.
■
■VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION
VF is characterized by disordered electrical ventricular activation with-
out identifiable QRS complexes (see Fig. 247-3E). Spiral wave reentry 
and multiple circulating reentry wavefronts are possible mechanisms. 
Sustained polymorphic or monomorphic VT that degenerates to VF is 
a common cause of out of hospital cardiac arrest. Treatment follows 
ACLS guidelines with defibrillation to restore sinus rhythm. If resus-
citation is successful, further evaluation is performed to identify and 
treat underlying heart disease and potential causes of the arrhythmia, 
including the possibility that monomorphic or polymorphic VT could 
have initiated VF. If a transient reversible cause such as acute MI is not 
identified, therapy to reduce the risk of sudden death with an ICD is 
often warranted. Chronic amiodarone therapy may be considered for 
individuals who are not ICD candidates.
■
■FURTHER READING
Adler A, Gollob M: A practical guide to early repolarization. Curr 
Opin Cardiol 30:8, 2015.
Priori SG et al: HRS/EHRA/APHRS Expert consensus statement on 
the diagnosis and management of patients with inherited primary 
arrhythmia syndromes. Heart Rhythm 10:1932, 2013.
■
■ELECTRICAL STORM
Electrical storm or ventricular tachycardia (VT) storm refers to the 
occurrence of three or more episodes of VT or ventricular fibrillation 
(VF) within 24 h. This severity of electrical instability is associated 
with a high mortality and requires prompt therapeutic intervention. 
Electrical storms occur in 4% of patients with a primary prevention 
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) but in as many as 20% of 
patients with a history of known VT or resuscitated sudden death.
■
■MANAGEMENT OF THE PATIENT WITH ELECTRICAL 
STORM
Patients should be adequately sedated to allay anxiety. Recurrent VT/
VF is treated using standard advanced cardiac life support guidelines 
and include the use of medications such as beta blockers, amiodarone, 
lidocaine with correction of any metabolic abnormalities. Recordings 
from ECG monitoring or an implanted ICD are important to assess 
whether VT is monomorphic or polymorphic that suggest possible 
precipitating or aggravating factors. Ischemia should be considered espe-
cially if polymorphic VT or VF is identified as the primary arrhythmia. 
If QT prolongation causing torsades des pointes is possible intravenous 
magnesium should be administered and bradycardia treated. If the 
QT interval is not prolonged and Brugada syndrome is possible, 
administration of quinidine and/or isoproterenol may abolish recur-
rent polymorphic VT/VF episodes. If the above measures fail, general 
251 Electrical Storm and  
Incessant VT
Roy M. John, William G. Stevenson  
anesthesia should be considered for suppression of recurrent hemody-
namically unstable ventricular arrhythmia. Left stellate ganglion block 
and upper thoracic epidural anesthesia may reduce cardiac sympa-
thetic outflow and have been used to restore stability in some patients. 
Catheter ablation of PVCs that are observed to repeatedly initiate the 
arrhythmia can be effective. Rarely, mechanical ventricular support or 
transplantation may have to be considered.
Once the acute episode is controlled, strategies to prevent recurrent 
VT or VF should be considered (see below).
■
■INCESSANT VT
VT is designated incessant when VT continues to recur shortly after 
electrical, pharmacologic, or spontaneous conversion to sinus rhythm 
(Fig. 251-1). Typically, VT is monomorphic. Rarely, a slow incessant 
monomorphic VT will fail detection by the ICD because it falls outside 
of the programmed detection parameters. If the arrhythmia is hemo-
dynamically stable acutely, patients can present with symptoms of 
gradual cardiac decompensation. VT may become incessant due to the 
pro-arrhythmic effect of an antiarrhythmic drugs such as amiodarone 
or a sodium channel blocker such as flecainide. Hemodynamic support 
may be required until the precipitating factors can be corrected. Urgent 
catheter ablation is often warranted.
■
■MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS PRESENTING WITH 
ICD SHOCKS
A substantial number of patients who receive an ICD can be expected 
to have an arrhythmia that is terminated by the ICD, either by a shock 
or antitachycardia pacing. Although this is an expected event, it can 
be a sign of impending instability, deterioration of cardiac function, 
emergence of a new arrhythmia or ICD malfunction, and therefore 
requires evaluation. Interrogation of the ICD is crucial after a patient 
reports a shock or symptoms of arrhythmia to confirm that the therapy 
was indeed delivered for a ventricular arrhythmia and not for lead 
malfunction or an atrial arrhythmia. After a single shock or two suc-
cessive shocks occurring within a few seconds, and in the absence of 
other symptoms to suggest arrhythmia or ischemia, patients have the 
option of waiting until the next working day or using remote monitor-
ing to transmit device interrogation data to their physician. However, 
occurrence of multiple ICD shocks constitutes a medical emergency 
and warrants immediate medical attention, usually by summoning 
emergency medical responders.
Spontaneous arrhythmias, particularly those that are converted 
with a shock, are associated with a subsequent increased risk of death 
and hospitalization in patients with depressed ventricular function. 
The occurrence of an arrhythmia, therefore, warrants a re-evaluation 
for possible decline in cardiac function, emergence of ischemia or 
inter-current illness.
If the ICD therapy is appropriate for VT or VF, consideration is 
given to whether therapy is warranted to reduce further episodes with 
either antiarrhythmic drug therapy or catheter ablation. Patients who 
have a rare episode of VT that is appropriately terminated and who 
have no other evidence of instability may not need any additional 
therapy, particularly if the VT is terminated by antitachycardia pacing 
rather than a shock (see Fig. 247-6). Shocks reduce quality of life and 
can lead to posttraumatic stress disorder. In many patients the possi-
bility of a shock can be reduced with appropriate ICD programming. 
Studies have shown that antitachycardia pacing effectively terminates 
>70% of VT episodes, even when VT is very rapid. Most ICDs can be 
VT
Anti-tachycardia pacing
terminates VT
Spontaneous recurrence of VT
II
FIGURE 251-1  Example of incessant monomorphic VT. In the initial portion of this ECG tracing, monomorphic VT is present. A train of antitachycardia pacing (area 
bracketed by arrows) that is initiated at the 4th VT complex results in ventricular capture with fusion by the 8th beat and termination of VT at cessation of pacing. The 
patient has underlying atrial fibrillation. Multifocal PVCs are present. VT similar in morphology to the initial VT restarts spontaneously toward the latter part of the trace 
(arrow). VT, ventricular tachycardia.
CHAPTER 252 Heart Failure: Pathophysiology and Diagnosis  
1763
programmed to attempt overdrive pace-termination during capacitor 
charge. If the arrhythmia then terminates, the shock is aborted. Appro-
priate programming of antitachycardia pacing is therefore critical for 
reducing shocks. For patients implanted with ICDs as primary preven-
tion, programming of VF detection zones >220 beats/min significantly 
reduce unnecessary and inappropriate shocks. Long detection times 
will also help avoid unnecessary therapies for VT episodes liable to 
terminate spontaneously.
Recurrent symptomatic episodes of VT or VF warrant specific ther-
apy with antiarrhythmic drugs or ablation as discussed for the specific 
arrhythmia in Chaps. 247–250. Beta blockers sotalol and amiodarone 
are the most common pharmacological options. Amiodarone combined 
with beta blockers is more effective than sotalol or beta blockers alone. 
It is important to recognize that although VT/VF episodes may rep-
resent a deterioration of clinical status in these patients, interventions 
to control the arrhythmia itself may have adverse effects on outcome. 
Most antiarrhythmic drugs have the potential to induce bradycardia 
to the point of requiring pacing from the ICD that in itself, may have 
deleterious effects on ventricular function. Catheter ablation is an 
important option for patients with monomorphic VT.
■
■FURTHER READING
Deneke T et al: Catheter ablation of electrical storm. Expert Rev Car-
diovasc Ther 9:1051, 2011.
John RM, Stevenson WG: Ventricular arrhythmias in patients with 
implanted cardioverter defibrillators. Trends Cardiovasc Med 22:169, 
2012.
Section 4  Disorders of the Heart
HEART FAILURE
■
■DEFINITION
Despite repeated attempts to develop a mechanistic definition that 
encompasses the heterogeneity and complexity of heart failure (HF), 
no single conceptual paradigm has withstood the test of time. The cur-
rent American College of Cardiology Foundation (ACCF)/American 
Heart Association (AHA) guidelines define HF as a complex clinical 
syndrome that results from structural or functional impairment of 
ventricular filling or ejection of blood, which in turn leads to the 
cardinal clinical symptoms of dyspnea and fatigue and signs of HF, 
namely edema and rales. Because many patients present without signs 
or symptoms of volume overload, the term “heart failure” is preferred 
over the older term “congestive heart failure.”
■
■EPIDEMIOLOGY
HF is a burgeoning problem worldwide, with >20 million 
people affected. The overall prevalence of HF in the adult 
population in developed countries is 2%. HF prevalence fol-
lows an exponential pattern, rising with age, and affects 6–10% of 
people aged >65. Although the relative incidence of HF is lower in 
women than in men, women constitute at least one-half the cases of HF 
because of their longer life expectancy. In North America and Europe, 
the lifetime risk of developing HF is approximately one in five for a 
40-year-old. The overall prevalence of HF is thought to be increasing, 
in part because current therapies for cardiac disorders, such as myocar-
dial infarction (MI), valvular heart disease, and arrhythmias, are 
Heart Failure:  
Pathophysiology and  
Diagnosis
Douglas L. Mann, Murali Chakinala 
252
allowing patients to survive longer. The prevalence of HF in emerging 
nations is uncertain because of the lack of population-based studies in 
those countries. HF was once thought to arise primarily in the setting 
of a depressed left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF); however, 
epidemiologic studies have shown that approximately one-half of 
patients who develop HF have a normal or preserved EF (EF ≥50%). 
Accordingly, the historical terms “systolic” and “diastolic” HF have 
been abandoned, and HF patients are now broadly categorized into HF 
with a reduced EF (HFrEF; formerly systolic failure) or HF with a pre-
served EF (HRpEF; formerly diastolic failure). Patients with a LV EF 
between 40 and 50% have been considered as having a borderline or 
mid-range EF. At the time of this writing, the epidemiology of these 
patients is unclear.
■
■ETIOLOGY
As shown in Table 252-1, any condition that leads to an alteration in 
LV structure or function can predispose a patient to developing HF. 
Although the etiology of HF in patients with a preserved EF differs 
from that of patients with depressed EF, there is considerable over-
lap between the etiologies of these two conditions. In industrialized 
countries, coronary artery disease (CAD) has become the predominant 
cause in men and women and is responsible for 60–75% of cases of HF. 
Hypertension contributes to the development of HF in 75% of patients, 
including most patients with CAD. Both CAD and hypertension inter-
act to augment the risk of HF, as does diabetes mellitus.
In 20–30% of the cases of HF with a depressed EF, the exact etiologic 
basis is not known. These patients are referred to as having nonische-
mic, dilated, or idiopathic cardiomyopathy if the cause is unknown 
(Chap. 254). Prior viral infection or toxin exposure (e.g., alcoholic or 
chemotherapeutic) also may lead to a dilated cardiomyopathy. More-
over, it is becoming increasingly clear that a large number of cases 
of dilated cardiomyopathy are secondary to specific genetic defects, 
most notably those in the cytoskeleton. Most forms of familial dilated 
cardiomyopathy are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. 
Mutations of genes that encode cytoskeletal proteins (desmin, cardiac 
myosin, vinculin) and nuclear membrane proteins (laminin) have been 
TABLE 252-1  Etiologies of Heart Failure
Depressed Ejection Fraction (<40%)
Coronary artery disease
  Myocardial infarctiona
  Myocardial ischemiaa
Chronic pressure overload
  Hypertensiona
  Obstructive valvular diseasea
Chronic volume overload
  Regurgitant valvular disease
  Intracardiac (left-to-right) shunting
  Extracardiac shunting
Chronic lung disease
  Cor pulmonale
  Pulmonary vascular disorders
Nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
  Familial/genetic disorders
  Infiltrative disordersa
Toxic/drug-induced damage
  Metabolic disordera
  Viral
Chagas’ disease
Disorders of rate and rhythm
  Chronic bradyarrhythmias
  Chronic tachyarrhythmias
Preserved Ejection Fraction (>40–50%)
Pathologic hypertrophy
  Primary (hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathies)
  Secondary (hypertension)
Aging
Endomyocardial disorders
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
  Infiltrative disorders (amyloidosis, 
sarcoidosis)
  Storage diseases 
(hemochromatosis)
Fibrosis
High-Output States
Metabolic disorders
  Thyrotoxicosis
Nutritional disorders (beriberi)
Excessive blood flow requirements
  Systemic arteriovenous shunting
  Chronic anemia
aIndicates conditions that can also lead to heart failure with a preserved ejection 
fraction.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1764 identified thus far. Dilated cardiomyopathy also is associated with 
Duchenne’s, Becker’s, and limb-girdle muscular dystrophies. Con-
ditions that lead to a high cardiac output (e.g., arteriovenous fistula, 
anemia) are seldom responsible for the development of HF in a normal 
heart; however, in the presence of underlying structural heart disease, 
these conditions can lead to overt HF.
■
■GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
Rheumatic heart disease remains a major cause of HF in Africa 
and Asia, especially in the young. Hypertension is an impor-
tant cause of HF in the African and African-American popula-
tions. Chagas’ disease is still a major cause of HF in South America. Not 
surprisingly, anemia is a frequent concomitant factor in HF in many 
developing nations. As developing nations undergo socioeconomic 
development, the epidemiology of HF is becoming similar to that of 
Western Europe and North America, with CAD emerging as the single 
most common cause of HF. Although the contribution of diabetes mel-
litus to HF is not well understood, diabetes accelerates atherosclerosis 
and often is associated with hypertension.
■
■PROGNOSIS
Despite recent advances in the management of HF, the development of 
symptomatic HF still carries a poor prognosis. Community-based stud-
ies indicate that 30–40% of patients die within 1 year of diagnosis and 
60–70% die within 5 years, mainly from worsening HF or as a sudden 
event (probably because of a ventricular arrhythmia). Although it is diffi-
cult to predict prognosis in an individual, patients with symptoms at rest 
(New York Heart Association [NYHA] class IV) have a 30–70% annual 
mortality rate, whereas patients with symptoms with moderate activity 
(NYHA class II) have an annual mortality rate of 5–10%. Thus, functional 
status is an important predictor of patient outcome (Table 252-2).
■
■PATHOGENESIS
Figure 252-1 provides a conceptual framework for considering the 
development and progression of HFrEF. HF is a progressive disorder 
that is initiated after an index event either damages the heart muscle, 
with a resultant loss of functioning cardiac myocytes, or, alternatively, 
disrupts the ability of the myocardium to generate force, thereby pre-
venting the heart from contracting normally. This index event may 
have an abrupt onset, as in the case of an MI; it may have a gradual 
or insidious onset, as in the case of hemodynamic pressure or volume 
overloading; or it may be hereditary, as in the case of many of the 
genetic cardiomyopathies. Regardless of the nature of the inciting 
event, the feature that is common to each of these index events is that 
they all in some manner produce a decline in the pumping capacity of 
the heart. In most instances, patients remain asymptomatic or mini-
mally symptomatic after the initial decline in pumping capacity of the 
heart or develop symptoms only after the dysfunction has been present 
for some time.
Although the precise reasons why patients with LV dysfunction 
may remain asymptomatic is not certain, one potential explanation is 
that a number of compensatory mechanisms become activated in the 
presence of cardiac injury and/or LV dysfunction allowing patients to 
sustain and modulate LV function for a period of months to years. The 
compensatory mechanisms that have been described thus far include 
(1) activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) and 
the adrenergic nervous system, which are responsible, respectively, 
for maintaining cardiac output through increased retention of salt and 
water (Fig. 252-2) and (2) increased myocardial contractility. In addi-
tion, a family of countervailing vasodilatory molecules are activated, 
including the atrial and brain natriuretic peptides (ANP and BNP), 
bradykinin, prostaglandins (PGE2 and PGI2), and nitric oxide (NO), 
that offset the excessive peripheral vascular vasoconstriction. Many 
of these vasodilatory peptides, including bradykinin and natriuretic 
peptides, are degraded by a neprilysin, which is a membrane-bound 
peptidase. These compensatory mechanisms are able to modulate LV 
function within a physiologic/homeostatic range so that the functional 
capacity of the patient is preserved or is minimally depressed. Thus, 
patients may remain asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic for a 
period of years; however, at some point patients become overtly symp-
tomatic, with a resultant striking increase in morbidity and mortality 
rates. Although the exact mechanisms that are responsible for this 
transition are not known, as will be discussed below, the transition 
to symptomatic HF is accompanied by increasing activation of neu-
rohormonal, adrenergic, and cytokine systems that lead to a series of 
adaptive changes within the myocardium collectively referred to as LV 
remodeling.
In contrast to our understanding of the pathogenesis of HF with a 
depressed EF, our understanding of the mechanisms that contribute to 
the development of HF with a preserved EF is still evolving. That is, 
although diastolic dysfunction (see below) was thought to be the only 
mechanism responsible for the development of HF with a preserved 
EF, community-based studies suggest that additional extracardiac 
mechanisms may be important, such as increased vascular stiffness and 
impaired renal function.
TABLE 252-2  New York Heart Association Classification
FUNCTIONAL 
CAPACITY
OBJECTIVE ASSESSMENT
Class I
Patients with cardiac disease but without resulting 
limitation of physical activity. Ordinary physical activity does 
not cause undue fatigue, palpitations, dyspnea, or anginal 
pain.
Class II
Patients with cardiac disease resulting in slight limitation 
of physical activity. They are comfortable at rest. Ordinary 
physical activity results in fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea, or 
anginal pain.
Class III
Patients with cardiac disease resulting in marked limitation 
of physical activity. They are comfortable at rest. Less than 
ordinary activity causes fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea, or 
anginal pain.
Class IV
Patients with cardiac disease resulting in inability to carry 
on any physical activity without discomfort. Symptoms of 
heart failure or the anginal syndrome may be present even 
at rest. If any physical activity is undertaken, discomfort is 
increased.
Source: Adapted from New York Heart Association, Inc., Diseases of the Heart 
and Blood Vessels: Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagnosis, 6th ed. Boston, Little 
Brown, 1964, p. 114.
Asymptomatic
Symptomatic
Time, years
Ejection fraction
60%
20%
Compensatory
mechanisms
Secondary
damage
Index event
FIGURE 252-1  Pathogenesis of heart failure with a depressed ejection fraction. 
Heart failure begins after an index event produces an initial decline in the 
heart’s pumping capacity. After this initial decline in pumping capacity, a variety 
of compensatory mechanisms are activated, including the adrenergic nervous 
system, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, and the cytokine system. In 
the short term, these systems are able to restore cardiovascular function to a 
normal homeostatic range with the result that the patient remains asymptomatic. 
However, sustained activation of these systems leads to secondary end-organ 
damage within the ventricle, with worsening left ventricular remodeling and 
subsequent cardiac decompensation. (From D Mann: Circulation 100:999, 1999.)
CHAPTER 252 Heart Failure: Pathophysiology and Diagnosis  
1765
■
■BASIC MECHANISMS OF HF
HF with a Reduced Ejection Fraction  LV remodeling devel-
ops in response to a series of complex events that occur at the cellular 
and molecular levels (Table 252-3). These changes include (1) myocyte 
hypertrophy; (2) alterations in the contractile properties of the myo-
cyte; (3) progressive loss of myocytes through necrosis, apoptosis, and 
autophagic cell death; (4) β-adrenergic desensitization; (5) abnormal 
myocardial energetics and metabolism; and (6) reorganization of the 
extracellular matrix with dissolution of the organized structural col-
lagen weave surrounding myocytes and subsequent replacement by an 
interstitial collagen matrix that does not provide structural support to 
the myocytes. The biologic stimuli for these profound changes include 
mechanical stretch of the myocyte, circulating neurohormones (e.g., 
norepinephrine, angiotensin II), inflammatory cytokines (e.g., tumor 
necrosis factor [TNF]), other peptides and growth factors (e.g., endo-
thelin), and reactive oxygen species (e.g., superoxide). The sustained 
overexpression of these biologically active molecules contributes to 
the progression of HF by virtue of the deleterious effects they exert 
on the heart and the circulation. Indeed, this insight forms the clinical 
rationale for using pharmacologic agents that antagonize these systems 
(e.g., angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors, angiotensin 
receptor-neprilysin inhibitors [ARNIs] and beta blockers) in treating 
patients with HF (Chap. 253).
To understand how the changes that occur in the failing cardiac 
myocyte contribute to depressed LV systolic function in HF, it is 
instructive first to review the biology of the cardiac muscle cell 
(Chap. 232). Sustained neurohormonal activation and mechanical 
overload result in transcriptional and posttranscriptional changes 
↑ Sympathetic nervous
   system activity
↑ Vasopressin
   secretion
Baroreceptor
dysfunction
↓ Afferent
inhibitory signals
↓ Limb blood flow
Vasomotor center
↑ Renin secretion
↑ Angiotensin II
↓ Renal blood flow
↑ Aldosterone secretion
↑ Sodium reabsorption
↑ Water reabsorption
↑
dium reabso
terone se
dost rone
ne se
ter
dosterone
n
flflo
nal 
d 
d f
blood 
d 
d 
d f
tor cente
oto
to
o
Vasomo
Vasomo
Vasomo
er
er
nte
nter
mb 
b 
b b
b b
b
lololoo
o
FIGURE 252-2  Activation of neurohormonal systems in heart failure. The decreased cardiac output in heart 
failure (HF) patients results in an “unloading” of high-pressure baroreceptors (circles) in the left ventricle, 
carotid sinus, and aortic arch. This unloading of the peripheral baroreceptors leads to a loss of inhibitory 
parasympathetic tone to the central nervous system (CNS), with a resultant generalized increase in efferent 
sympathetic tone, and nonosmotic release of arginine vasopressin (AVP) from the pituitary. AVP (or antidiuretic 
hormone [ADH]) is a powerful vasoconstrictor that increases the permeability of the renal collecting ducts, 
leading to the reabsorption of free water. These afferent signals to the CNS also activate efferent sympathetic 
nervous system pathways that innervate the heart, kidney, peripheral vasculature, and skeletal muscles. 
  Sympathetic stimulation of the kidney leads to the release of renin, with a resultant increase in the circulating 
levels of angiotensin II and aldosterone. The activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system promotes 
salt and water retention and leads to vasoconstriction of the peripheral vasculature, myocyte hypertrophy, 
myocyte cell death, and myocardial fibrosis. Although these neurohormonal mechanisms facilitate short-
term adaptation by maintaining blood pressure, these same neurohormonal mechanisms result in end-organ 
changes in the heart and the circulation, as well as to the excessive salt and water retention in advanced HF. 
(Modified from A Nohria et al: Atlas of Heart Failure: Cardiac Function and Dysfunction, 4th ed, WS Colucci [ed]. 
Philadelphia, Current Medicine Group, 2002, p. 104 and J Hartupee, DL Mann: Nat Rev Cardiol 14:30, 2017.)
TABLE 252-3  Overview of Left Ventricular Remodeling
Alterations in Myocyte Biology
Excitation-contraction coupling
Myosin heavy chain (fetal) gene expression
β-Adrenergic desensitization
Hypertrophy
Myocytolysis
Cytoskeletal proteins
Myocardial Changes
Myocyte loss
  Necrosis
  Apoptosis
  Autophagy
Alterations in extracellular matrix
  Matrix degradation
  Myocardial fibrosis
Alterations in Left Ventricular Chamber Geometry
Left ventricular (LV) dilation
Increased LV sphericity
LV wall thinning
Mitral valve incompetence
Source: Adapted from D. Mann: Pathophysiology of heart failure, in Braunwald’s 
Heart Disease, 8th ed, PL Libby et al (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2008, p. 550.
in the genes and proteins that regulate 
excitation-contraction coupling and cross-
bridge interaction (see Figs. 232-6 and 
232-7). The changes that regulate excitation-
contraction include decreased function of 
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ adenosine 
triphosphatase (SERCA2A), resulting in 
decreased calcium uptake into the SR, and 
hyperphosphorylation of the ryanodine 
receptor, leading to calcium leakage from 
the SR. The changes that occur in the cross-
bridges include decreased expression of 
α-myosin heavy chain and increased expres-
sion of β-myosin heavy chain, myocytoly-
sis, and disruption of the cytoskeletal links 
between the sarcomeres and the extracellular 
matrix. Collectively, these changes impair the 
ability of the myocyte to contract and there-
fore contribute to the depressed LV systolic 
function observed in patients with HF.
Myocardial relaxation is an adenosine tri-
phosphate (ATP)-dependent process that is 
regulated by uptake of cytoplasmic calcium 
into the SR by SERCA2A and extrusion of cal-
cium by sarcolemmal pumps (see Fig. 232-7). 
Accordingly, reductions in ATP concentra-
tion, as occurs in ischemia, may interfere with 
these processes and lead to slowed myocar-
dial relaxation. Alternatively, if LV filling is 
delayed because LV compliance is reduced 
(e.g., from hypertrophy or fibrosis), LV filling 
pressures will similarly remain elevated at 
end diastole (see Fig. 232-11). An increase in 
heart rate disproportionately shortens the 
time for diastolic filling, which may lead to 
elevated LV filling pressures, particularly in 
noncompliant ventricles. Elevated LV end- 
diastolic filling pressures result in increases 
in pulmonary capillary pressures, which can 
contribute to the dyspnea experienced by patients with diastolic dys-
function. In addition to impaired myocardial relaxation, increased 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1766 myocardial stiffness secondary to cardiac hypertrophy and increased 
myocardial collagen content may contribute to diastolic failure. Impor-
tantly, diastolic dysfunction can occur alone or in combination with 
systolic dysfunction in patients with HF.
Left Ventricular Remodeling  Ventricular remodeling refers to 
the changes in LV mass, volume, and shape and the composition of the 
heart that occur after cardiac injury and/or abnormal hemodynamic 
loading conditions. LV remodeling contributes to the progression of HF 
by virtue of the mechanical burdens that are engendered by the changes 
in the geometry of the remodeled LV. In addition to the increase in LV 
end-diastolic volume, LV wall thinning occurs as the left ventricle 
begins to dilate. The increase in wall thinning, along with the increase 
in afterload created by LV dilation, leads to a functional afterload mis-
match that may contribute further to a decrease in stroke volume. More-
over, the high end-diastolic wall stress might be expected to lead to (1) 
hypoperfusion of the subendocardium, with resultant worsening of LV 
function; (2) increased oxidative stress, with the resultant activation of 
families of genes that are sensitive to free radical generation (e.g., TNF 
and interleukin 1β); and (3) sustained expression of stretch activation 
of hypertrophic signaling pathways. Increasing LV dilation also results 
in tethering of the papillary muscles with resulting incompetence of the 
mitral valve apparatus and functional mitral regurgitation, which in 
turn leads to further hemodynamic overloading of the ventricle. Taken 
together, the mechanical burdens that are engendered by LV remodel-
ing contribute to the progression of HF. Recent studies have shown that 
LV remodeling can be reversed following medical and device therapy 
and that reverse LV remodeling is associated with improved clinical 
outcomes in patients with HFrEF. Indeed, one of the goals of therapy 
for HF is to prevent and/or reverse LV remodeling.
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Symptoms  The cardinal symptoms of HF are fatigue and shortness 
of breath. Although fatigue traditionally has been ascribed to the low 
cardiac output in HF, it is likely that skeletal-muscle abnormalities and 
other noncardiac comorbidities (e.g., anemia) also contribute to this 
symptom. In the early stages of HF, dyspnea is observed only during 
exertion; however, as the disease progresses, dyspnea occurs with less 
strenuous activity, and it ultimately may occur even at rest. The ori-
gin of dyspnea in HF is probably multifactorial (Chap. 33). The most 
important mechanism is pulmonary congestion with accumulation of 
interstitial or intra-alveolar fluid, which activates juxtacapillary J recep-
tors, which in turn stimulate the rapid, shallow breathing characteristic 
of cardiac dyspnea. Other factors that contribute to dyspnea on exer-
tion include reductions in pulmonary compliance, increased airway 
resistance, respiratory muscle and/or diaphragm fatigue, and anemia. 
Dyspnea may become less frequent with the onset of right ventricular 
(RV) failure and tricuspid regurgitation.
ORTHOPNEA  Orthopnea, which is defined as dyspnea occurring in the 
recumbent position, is usually a later manifestation of HF than is exer-
tional dyspnea. It results from redistribution of fluid from the splanch-
nic circulation and lower extremities into the central circulation during 
recumbency, with a resultant increase in pulmonary capillary pressure. 
Nocturnal cough is a common manifestation of this process and a fre-
quently overlooked symptom of HF. Orthopnea generally is relieved 
by sitting upright or sleeping with additional pillows. Although ortho-
pnea is a relatively specific symptom of HF, it may occur in patients 
with abdominal obesity or ascites and patients with pulmonary disease 
whose lung mechanics favor an upright posture.
PAROXYSMAL NOCTURNAL DYSPNEA (PND)  This term refers to acute epi-
sodes of severe shortness of breath and coughing that generally occur 
at night and awaken the patient from sleep, usually 1–3 h after the 
patient retires. PND may manifest as coughing or wheezing, possibly 
because of increased pressure in the bronchial arteries leading to air-
way compression, along with interstitial pulmonary edema that leads 
to increased airway resistance. Whereas orthopnea may be relieved by 
sitting upright at the side of the bed with the legs in a dependent posi-
tion, patients with PND often have persistent coughing and wheezing 
even after they have assumed the upright position. Cardiac asthma is 
closely related to PND, is characterized by wheezing secondary to 
bronchospasm, and must be differentiated from primary asthma and 
pulmonary causes of wheezing.
CHEYNE-STOKES RESPIRATION  Also referred to as periodic respiration 
or cyclic respiration, Cheyne-Stokes respiration is present in 40% of 
patients with advanced HF and usually is associated with low cardiac 
output. Cheyne-Stokes respiration is caused by an increased sensitivity 
of the respiratory center to arterial Pco2 and a lengthy circulatory time. 
There is an apneic phase, during which arterial Po2 falls and arterial 
Pco2 rises. These changes in the arterial blood gas content stimulate 
the respiratory center, resulting in hyperventilation and hypocapnia, 
followed by recurrence of apnea.
ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA  See Chap. 298.
Other Symptoms  Patients with HF also may present with gas-
trointestinal symptoms. Anorexia, nausea, and early satiety associated 
with abdominal pain and fullness are common complaints and may be 
related to edema of the bowel wall and/or a congested liver. Conges-
tion of the liver and stretching of its capsule may lead to right upper-
quadrant pain. Cerebral symptoms such as confusion, disorientation, 
and sleep and mood disturbances may be observed in patients with 
severe HF, particularly elderly patients with cerebral arteriosclerosis 
and reduced cerebral perfusion. Nocturia is common in HF and may 
contribute to insomnia.
■
■PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A careful physical examination is always warranted in the evaluation 
of patients with HF, in order to determine the cause of HF, as well as to 
assess the severity of the syndrome.
General Appearance and Vital Signs  In mild or moderately 
severe HF, the patient appears to be in no distress at rest except for 
feeling uncomfortable when lying flat for more than a few minutes. 
In more severe HF, the patient must sit upright, may have labored 
breathing, and may not be able to finish a sentence because of shortness 
of breath. Systolic blood pressure may be normal or high in early HF, 
but it generally is reduced in advanced HF because of severe LV dys-
function. The pulse pressure may be diminished, reflecting a reduction 
in stroke volume. Sinus tachycardia is a nonspecific sign caused by 
increased adrenergic activity. Peripheral vasoconstriction leading to 
cool peripheral extremities and cyanosis of the lips and nail beds is also 
caused by excessive adrenergic activity.
Jugular Veins (See also Chap. 234)  Examination of the jugular 
veins provides an estimation of right atrial pressure. The jugular venous 
pressure is best appreciated with the patient lying recumbent, with the 
head tilted at 45°. The jugular venous pressure should be quantified 
in centimeters of water (normal ≤8 cm) by estimating the height of the 
venous column of blood above the sternal angle in centimeters and 
then adding 5 cm. In the early stages of HF, the venous pressure may 
be normal at rest but may become abnormally elevated with sustained 
(~15 s) pressure on the abdomen (positive abdominojugular reflux). 
Giant v waves indicate the presence of tricuspid regurgitation.
Pulmonary Examination  Pulmonary crackles (rales or crepi-
tations) result from the transudation of fluid from the intravascular 
space into the alveoli. In patients with pulmonary edema, rales may 
be heard widely over both lung fields and may be accompanied by 
expiratory wheezing (cardiac asthma). When present in patients with-
out concomitant lung disease, rales are specific for HF. Importantly, 
rales are frequently absent in patients with chronic HF, even when LV 
filling pressures are elevated, because of increased lymphatic drainage 
of alveolar fluid. Pleural effusions result from the elevation of pleural 
capillary pressure and the resulting transudation of fluid into the pleu-
ral cavities. Since the pleural veins drain into both the systemic and 
the pulmonary veins, pleural effusions occur most commonly with 
biventricular failure. Although pleural effusions are often bilateral in 
HF, when they are unilateral, they occur more frequently in the right 
pleural space.
CHAPTER 252 Heart Failure: Pathophysiology and Diagnosis  
1767
Cardiac Examination  Examination of the heart, although essen-
tial, frequently does not provide useful information about the sever-
ity of HF. If cardiomegaly is present, the point of maximal impulse 
(PMI) usually is displaced below the fifth intercostal space and/or 
lateral to the midclavicular line, and the impulse is palpable over two 
interspaces. Severe LV hypertrophy leads to a sustained PMI. In some 
patients, a third heart sound (S3) is audible and palpable at the apex. 
Patients with enlarged or hypertrophied right ventricles may have a 
sustained and prolonged left parasternal impulse extending through-
out systole. An S3 (or protodiastolic gallop) is most commonly present in 
patients with volume overload who have tachycardia and tachypnea, 
and it often signifies severe hemodynamic compromise. A fourth heart 
sound (S4) is not a specific indicator of HF but is usually present in 
patients with diastolic dysfunction. The murmurs of mitral and tricus-
pid regurgitation are frequently present in patients with advanced HF.
Abdomen and Extremities  Hepatomegaly is an important sign 
in patients with HF. When it is present, the enlarged liver is frequently 
tender and may pulsate during systole if tricuspid regurgitation is pres-
ent. Ascites, a late sign, occurs as a consequence of increased pressure 
in the hepatic veins and the veins draining the peritoneum. Jaundice, 
also a late finding in HF, results from impairment of hepatic function 
secondary to hepatic congestion and hepatocellular hypoxemia and is 
associated with elevations of both direct and indirect bilirubin.
Peripheral edema is a cardinal manifestation of HF, but it is nonspe-
cific and usually is absent in patients who have been treated adequately 
with diuretics. Peripheral edema is usually symmetric and dependent 
in HF and occurs predominantly in the ankles and the pretibial region 
in ambulatory patients. In bedridden patients, edema may be found in 
the sacral area (presacral edema) and the scrotum. Long-standing edema 
may be associated with indurated and pigmented skin.
Cardiac Cachexia  With severe chronic HF, there may be marked 
weight loss and cachexia. Although the mechanism of cachexia is 
not entirely understood, it is probably multifactorial. When present, 
cachexia augurs a poor overall prognosis.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of HF is relatively straightforward when the patient 
presents with classic signs and symptoms of HF; however, the signs 
and symptoms of HF are neither specific nor sensitive. Accordingly, the 
key to making the diagnosis is to have a high index of suspicion, par-
ticularly for high-risk patients. When these patients present with signs 
or symptoms of HF, additional laboratory testing should be performed.
Routine Laboratory Testing  Patients with new-onset HF and 
those with chronic HF and acute decompensation should have a com-
plete blood count, a panel of electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, serum 
creatinine, hepatic enzymes, and a urinalysis. Selected patients should 
have assessment for diabetes mellitus (fasting serum glucose or oral 
glucose tolerance test), dyslipidemia (fasting lipid panel), and thyroid 
abnormalities (thyroid-stimulating hormone level).
Electrocardiogram (ECG)  A routine 12-lead ECG is recom-
mended. The major importance of the ECG is to assess cardiac rhythm 
and determine the presence of LV hypertrophy or a prior MI (presence 
or absence of Q-waves) as well as to determine QRS width to ascertain 
whether the patient may benefit from resynchronization therapy (see 
below). A normal ECG virtually excludes LV systolic dysfunction.
Chest X-Ray  A chest x-ray provides useful information about 
cardiac size and shape, as well as the state of the pulmonary vascula-
ture, and may identify noncardiac causes of the patient’s symptoms. 
Although patients with acute HF have evidence of pulmonary hyper-
tension, interstitial edema, and/or pulmonary edema, the majority 
of patients with chronic HF do not. The absence of these findings in 
patients with chronic HF reflects the increased capacity of the lymphat-
ics to remove interstitial and/or pulmonary fluid.
Assessment of LV Function  Noninvasive cardiac imaging 
(Chap. 236) is essential for the diagnosis, evaluation, and management of 
HF. The most useful test is the two-dimensional (2-D) echocardiogram/
Doppler, which can provide a semiquantitative assessment of LV size 
and function as well as the presence or absence of valvular and/or 
regional wall motion abnormalities (indicative of a prior MI). The 
presence of left atrial dilation and LV hypertrophy, together with 
abnormalities of LV diastolic filling provided by pulse-wave and tissue 
Doppler, is useful for the assessment of HF with a preserved EF. The 
2-D echocardiogram/Doppler is also invaluable in assessing RV size 
and pulmonary pressures, which are critical in the evaluation and man-
agement of cor pulmonale (see below). Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) also provides a comprehensive analysis of cardiac anatomy and 
function and is now the gold standard for assessing LV mass and vol-
umes. MRI also is emerging as a useful and accurate imaging modality 
for evaluating patients with HF, both in terms of assessing LV structure 
and for determining the cause of HF (e.g., amyloidosis, ischemic car-
diomyopathy, hemochromatosis).
The most useful index of LV function is the EF (stroke volume 
divided by end-diastolic volume). Because the EF is easy to measure 
by noninvasive testing and easy to conceptualize, it has gained wide 
acceptance among clinicians. Unfortunately, the EF has a number of lim-
itations as a true measure of contractility, since it is influenced by altera-
tions in afterload and/or preload. Nonetheless, with the exceptions 
indicated above, when the EF is normal (≥50%), systolic function is usu-
ally adequate, and when the EF is significantly depressed (<30–40%), 
contractility is usually depressed. Myocardial strain rate imaging using 
speckle tracking has been shown to add incremental value to standard 
measurements of LV EF and to have prognostic value.
Biomarkers  Circulating levels of natriuretic peptides are use-
ful and important adjunctive tools in the diagnosis of patients with 
HF. Both B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and N-terminal pro-BNP 
(NT-proBNP), which are released from the failing heart, are relatively 
sensitive markers for the presence of HF with depressed EF; they 
also are elevated in HF patients with a preserved EF, albeit to a lesser 
degree. In ambulatory patients with dyspnea, the measurement of 
BNP or NT-proBNP is useful to support clinical decision-making 
regarding the diagnosis of HF, especially in the setting of clinical 
uncertainty. Moreover, the measurement of BNP or NT-proBNP is 
useful for establishing prognosis or disease severity in chronic HF and 
can be useful to achieve optimal dosing of medical therapy in select 
clinically euvolemic patients. However, it is important to recognize 
that natriuretic peptide levels increase with age and renal impairment, 
are more elevated in women, and can be elevated in right HF from any 
cause. BNP levels may increase in patients taking ARNIs. Levels can be 
falsely low in obese patients. Other biomarkers, such as soluble ST-2 
and galectin-3, are newer biomarkers that can be used for determining 
the prognosis of HF patients.
Exercise Testing  Treadmill or bicycle exercise testing is not rou-
tinely advocated for patients with HF, but either is useful for assessing 
the need for cardiac transplantation in patients with advanced HF 
(Chap. 255). A peak oxygen uptake (vo2) <14 mL/kg per min is asso-
ciated with a relatively poor prognosis. Patients with a vo2 <14 mL/kg 
per min have been shown, in general, to have better survival when 
transplanted than when treated medically.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
HF resembles but should be distinguished from (1) conditions in which 
there is circulatory congestion secondary to abnormal salt and water 
retention but in which there is no disturbance of cardiac structure or 
function (e.g., renal failure), and (2) noncardiac causes of pulmonary 
edema (e.g., acute respiratory distress syndrome). In most patients 
who present with classic signs and symptoms of HF, the diagnosis is 
relatively straightforward. However, even experienced clinicians have 
difficulty differentiating the dyspnea that arises from cardiac and pul-
monary causes (Chap. 33). In this regard, noninvasive cardiac imaging, 
biomarkers, pulmonary function testing, and chest x-ray may be useful. 
A very low BNP or NT-proBNP may be helpful in excluding a cardiac 
cause of dyspnea in this setting. Ankle edema may arise secondary to 
varicose veins, obesity, renal disease, or gravitational effects. When 
HF develops in patients with a preserved EF, it may be difficult to 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1768 determine the relative contribution of HF to the dyspnea that occurs in 
chronic lung disease and/or obesity.
COR PULMONALE
■
■DEFINITION
Cor pulmonale, also referred to as pulmonary heart disease, is broadly 
defined by altered RV structure and/or function in the context of 
chronic lung disease and is triggered by the presence of pulmonary 
hypertension. Although RV dysfunction is an important sequela of 
HFpEF and HFrEF, this is not considered as cor pulmonale.
■
■ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Chronic cor pulmonale develops in response to chronic pulmonary 
hypertension resulting from parenchymal lung disorders, primary 
pulmonary vascular diseases, or conditions leading to alveolar hypoxia 
(Table 252-4). The true prevalence of cor pulmonale is difficult to 
ascertain. First, not all patients with chronic lung disease will develop 
cor pulmonale, which may be subclinical in compensated individuals. 
Second, the ability to detect pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmon-
ale by routine physical examination and laboratory testing is relatively 
insensitive. However, advances in 2-D echo/Doppler imaging and 
biomarkers (BNP) can make it easier to identify.
Once susceptible patients develop cor pulmonale, their prognosis 
worsens, regardless of the underlying etiology. Although chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease (COPD) and chronic bronchitis are responsible 
for ~50% of the cases of cor pulmonale in North America (Chap. 286), 
any disease that affects the pulmonary vasculature (Chap. 277) or par-
enchyma can lead to cor pulmonale (Table 252-4). Primary pulmonary 
vascular disorders, such as pulmonary arterial hypertension or chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension, are relatively rare causes 
of cor pulmonale, but cor pulmonale is extremely common with these 
conditions, given the magnitude of elevated pulmonary artery pres-
sures and pulmonary vascular resistance.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND BASIC MECHANISMS
Although many conditions can lead to cor pulmonale, the com-
mon pathophysiologic mechanism is pulmonary hypertension and 
increased RV afterload sufficient to alter RV structure (i.e., dilation with 
or without hypertrophy) and function. Normally, mean pulmonary 
artery pressure is only ~15 mmHg and does not increase significantly 
even with increasing multiples of cardiac output, because of pulmo-
nary vasodilation and blood vessel recruitment in the pulmonary 
circulatory bed. But, in the setting of parenchymal lung diseases, pri-
mary pulmonary vascular disorders, or chronic (alveolar) hypoxia, the 
circulatory bed undergoes vascular remodeling, vasoconstriction, and 
destruction. As a result, pulmonary artery pressures and RV afterload 
increases, setting the stage for cor pulmonale (Table 252-4). The sys-
temic consequences of cor pulmonale relate to alterations in cardiac 
output as well as salt and water homeostasis. Anatomically, the RV is a 
thin-walled, compliant chamber better suited to handle volume over-
load than pressure overload. Thus, the sustained pressure overload 
eventually leads to RV dysfunction and failure.
The response of the RV to pulmonary hypertension depends on the 
acuteness and severity of the pressure overload. Acute cor pulmonale 
occurs after a sudden and severe stimulus (e.g., massive pulmonary 
embolus), with RV dilatation and failure but no RV hypertrophy 
(Chap. 273). Chronic cor pulmonale, however, evolves slowly and in 
conjunction with modest, compensatory RV hypertrophy that lowers 
wall tension and preserves RV function. Over time, RV dilation ensues 
leading to an increase in RV wall tension and overt dysfunction. 
Acute decompensation of compensated chronic cor pulmonale is a 
common clinical occurrence. Triggers include worsening hypoxia from 
any cause (e.g., pneumonia), acidemia (e.g., exacerbation of COPD), 
acute pulmonary embolus, atrial tachyarrhythmia, hypervolemia, and 
mechanical ventilation that compresses blood vessels associated with 
alveoli and further increasing RV afterload.
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Symptoms  The symptoms in chronic cor pulmonale generally are 
related to the underlying pulmonary disorder. Dyspnea, the most com-
mon symptom, is usually the result of the increased work of breathing 
secondary to changes in elastic recoil of the lung (fibrosing lung dis-
eases), altered respiratory mechanics (e.g., over-inflation with COPD), 
or inefficient ventilation (e.g., primary pulmonary vascular disease). 
Dyspnea can also be due to cardiovascular limitations with decreased 
oxygen delivery due to reduced cardiac output. Lower-extremity 
edema and even increased abdominal girth due to ascites formation 
occurs secondary to neurohormonal activation, elevated RV filling and 
right atrial pressures, or increased levels of carbon dioxide and hypox-
emia, which can lead to peripheral vasodilation and edema formation.
Signs  Auscultation of the heart reveals the findings of pulmonary 
hypertension (Chap. 33), while auscultation of the lungs can highlight 
the underlying parenchymal lung disorder. In chronic cor pulmonale, 
the murmur of tricuspid regurgitation, an S3 gallop and a RV heave 
palpable along the left sternal border can be appreciated. But the most 
blatant findings are reflective of high right-sided filling pressures and 
hypervolemia such as elevated jugular venous pressures with promi-
nent v waves indicative of tricuspid regurgitation, hepatomegaly, pul-
satile liver, ascites, and especially lower-extremity edema. Cyanosis is a 
late finding in cor pulmonale and is secondary to a low cardiac output 
(i.e., cardiogenic shock), systemic vasoconstriction, and hypoxemia.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
It is important to evaluate the patient for LV systolic and diastolic dys-
function as a cause of right-sided HF. The ECG in severe pulmonary 
hypertension shows P pulmonale, right axis deviation, and RV hyper-
trophy. Radiographic examination of the chest may show enlargement 
TABLE 252-4  Etiology of Chronic Cor Pulmonale
Diseases of the Lung Parenchyma
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
  Emphysema
  Chronic bronchitis
Interstitial lung diseases
  Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias (e.g., IPF, UIP)
  Secondary interstitial diseases
  Sarcoidosis
Combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema
Bronchiectasis
  Cystic fibrosis
Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
Developmental lung disorders
Disorders of Chronic (Alveolar) Hypoxia
Alveolar hypoventilation syndromes
  Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
Central hypoventilation syndrome
Neuromuscular respiratory failure
Chest wall disorders
  Kyphoscoliosis
Chronic exposure to high altitude
Diseases of the Pulmonary Vasculature
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
  Idiopathic PAH
  Heritable PAH
  Drug and toxin-induced
  Associated PAH
  Venoocclusive disease
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary tumor thrombotic microangiopathy
Mediastinal disorders affecting central pulmonary vasculature
Abbreviations: IPF, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis; UIP, usual interstitial pneumonitis.
CHAPTER 253 Heart Failure: Management
1769
of the main central pulmonary arteries and hilar vessels. Spirometry 
and lung volumes can identify obstructive and/or restrictive defects 
indicative of parenchymal lung diseases and reduced diffusing capac-
ity; arterial blood gases typically reveal hypoxemia with or without 
hypercapnia. A high-resolution computed tomography (CT) scan of 
the chest can identify interstitial lung disease and the extent of emphy-
sema. Chest CT angiogram is useful in diagnosing acute pulmonary 
emboli; however, the ventilation-perfusion scan remains best suited for 
diagnosing chronic thromboembolic disease (Chap. 273).
Two-dimensional echocardiography is used to measure RV wall 
thickness and chamber dimensions. The interventricular septum may 
move paradoxically during systole in the presence of RV pressure over-
load, highlighting a deleterious interaction between the RV and the LV. 
Doppler echocardiography can be used to assess pulmonary artery 
pressures. The location of the RV behind the sternum and its crescent 
shape can challenge assessment of RV function by echocardiography, 
especially when parenchymal lung disease is present. Calculated mea-
sures of RV function (e.g., tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion 
[TAPSE], systolic velocity of the RV free wall, strain of the RV free wall, 
or the Tei Index) supplement more subjective assessments. MRI is also 
useful for assessing RV structure and function, particularly in patients 
who are difficult to image with 2-D echocardiography because of 
severe lung disease. Cardiac catheterization confirms the diagnosis of 
pulmonary hypertension and can exclude elevated left-sided pressures 
(measured as the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure or the LV end- 
diastolic pressure) as a cause for right-sided HF. BNP and N-terminal 
BNP levels are elevated in patients with cor pulmonale secondary to 
RV myocardial stretch.
■
■FURTHER READING
Braunwald E: Heart failure. JACC Heart Fail 1:1, 2013.
Hartupee J, Mann DL: Neurohormonal activation in heart failure with 
reduced ejection fraction. Nat Rev Cardiol 14:30, 2017.
Pengo V et al: Incidence of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hyper-
tension after pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 350:2257, 2004.
Reddy YN, Borlaug BA: Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. 
Curr Probl Cardiol 41:145, 2016.
Distinctive phenotypes of presentation with diverse management 
targets exemplify the extensive syndrome of heart failure. These range 
from chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) or 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), acute decom-
pensated heart failure (ADHF), and advanced heart failure. Early 
management evolved from symptom control to disease-modifying 
therapy in HFrEF with the advent of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system (RAAS)–directed therapy, beta receptor antagonists, miner-
alocorticoid receptor antagonists, cardiac resynchronization therapy, 
and implantable cardio-defibrillators. However, similar advances 
have been elusive in the syndromes of HFpEF and ADHF, which have 
remained devoid of convincing therapeutic advances to alter their 
natural history. In advanced heart failure, a stage of disease typically 
encountered in HFrEF, the patient remains markedly symptomatic 
with demonstrated refractoriness or inability to tolerate full-dose neu-
rohormonal antagonism, often requires escalating doses of diuretics, 
and exhibits persistent hyponatremia and renal insufficiency with 
frequent episodes of heart failure decompensation requiring recurrent 
hospitalizations. Such individuals are at the highest risk of sudden 
or progressive pump failure–related deaths (Chap. 255). In contrast, 
early-stage asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction is amenable to 
preventive care, and its natural history is modifiable by neurohormonal 
antagonism (not further discussed).
Heart Failure: Management
Mandeep R. Mehra 
253
HEART FAILURE WITH PRESERVED EJECTION 
FRACTION
■
■GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Therapeutic targets in HFpEF include control of congestion, stabiliza-
tion of heart rate and blood pressure, and efforts at improving exercise 
tolerance. Addressing surrogate targets, such as regression of ventric-
ular hypertrophy in hypertensive heart disease, and use of lusitropic 
agents, such as calcium channel blockers and beta receptor antagonists, 
have been disappointing. Experience has demonstrated that lowering 
blood pressure alleviates symptoms more effectively than targeted 
therapy with specific agents.
■
■CLINICAL TRIALS IN HFpEF
The Candesartan in Heart Failure—Assessment of Mortality and Mor-
bidity (CHARM) Preserved study showed a statistically significant 
reduction in hospitalizations but no difference in all-cause mortality in 
patients with HFpEF who were treated with the angiotensin receptor 
blocker (ARB), candesartan. Similarly, the Irbesartan in Heart Failure 
with Preserved Systolic Function (I-PRESERVE) trial demonstrated 
no differences in meaningful endpoints in such patients treated with 
irbesartan. An earlier analysis of a subset of the Digitalis Investigation 
Group (DIG) trial found no role for digoxin in the treatment of HFpEF. 
In the Study of the Effects of Nebivolol Intervention on Outcomes and 
Rehospitalization in Seniors with Heart Failure (SENIORS) trial of 
nebivolol, a vasodilating beta blocker, the subgroup of elderly patients 
with prior hospitalization and HFpEF did not appear to benefit in 
terms of all-cause or cardiovascular mortality. Much smaller mecha-
nistic studies in the elderly with the angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitor (ACEI) enalapril showed no effect on peak exercise oxygen 
consumption, 6-min walk distance, aortic distensibility, left ventricular 
mass, or peripheral neurohormone expression.
■
■NOVEL TARGETS
A small trial demonstrated that the phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor silden-
afil improved filling pressures and right ventricular function in a cohort 
of HFpEF patients with pulmonary venous hypertension. This finding 
led to the phase II trial, Phosphodiesterase-5 Inhibition to Improve Clin-
ical Status and Exercise Capacity in Diastolic Heart Failure (RELAX), in 
HFpEF patients (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] >50%) with New 
York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II or III symptoms, who 
received sildenafil at 20 mg three times daily for 3 months, followed by 
60 mg three times daily for another 3 months, compared with a placebo. 
There was no improvement in functional capacity, quality of life (QOL), 
or other clinical and surrogate parameters. Conceptually targeting 
myocardial fibrosis in HFpEF, the large-scale Aldosterone Antagonist 
Therapy in Adults with Preserved Ejection Fraction Congestive Heart 
Failure (TOPCAT) trial has been completed. This trial demonstrated no 
improvement in the primary composite endpoint, but did show a second-
ary signal of benefit on HF hospitalizations, counterbalanced, however, 
by an increase in adverse effects, particularly hyperkalemia. However, 
pessimism has been generated by the negative outcome of the Aldoster-
one Receptor Blockade in Diastolic Heart Failure (ALDO-DHF) study 
wherein spironolactone improved echocardiographic indices of diastolic 
dysfunction but failed to improve exercise capacity, symptoms, or QOL 
measures. On the premise that nitrates, which are nitric oxide donors, 
might improve preload, coronary perfusion, endothelial function and 
improved exercise tolerance, the Nitrate’s Effect on Activity Tolerance 
in Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction (NEAT-HFpEF) study 
was conducted. Isosorbide mononitrate did not improve QOL or sub- 
maximal exercise capacity, and decreased overall activity levels in 
treated patients. A unique molecule that hybridizes an ARB with an 
endopeptidase inhibitor, LCZ696, increases the generation of myocardial 
cyclic guanosine 3′,5′-monophosphate, enhances myocardial relaxation, 
and reduces ventricular hypertrophy. This dual blocker has been shown 
to reduce circulating natriuretic peptides and reduce left atrial size 
to a significantly greater extent than valsartan alone in patients with 
HFpEF. This molecule is currently being tested in a pivotal clinical trial 
(PARAGON-HF).
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1770
■
■CLINICAL PEARLS
Even as efforts to control hypertension in HFpEF are critical, evaluation 
for and correction of underlying ischemia may be beneficial. Appropri-
ate identification and treatment of sleep-disordered breathing should 
be strongly considered. Excessive decrease in preload with vasodilators 
may lead to underfilling the ventricle and subsequent hypotension and 
syncope. Some investigators have suggested that the exercise intoler-
ance in HFpEF is a manifestation of chronotropic insufficiency and 
that such aberrations could be corrected with use of rate responsive 
pacemakers, but this remains an inadequately investigated contention 
(Fig. 253-1).
ACUTE DECOMPENSATED HEART FAILURE
■
■GENERAL PRINCIPLES
ADHF is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome most often resulting in 
need for hospitalization due to confluence of interrelated abnormalities 
of decreased cardiac performance, renal dysfunction, and alterations in 
vascular compliance. Admission with a diagnosis of ADHF is associ-
ated with excessive morbidity and mortality, with nearly half of these 
patients readmitted for management within 6 months, and a high 
short-term (5% in-hospital) and long-term cardiovascular mortality 
(20% at 1 year). Importantly, long-term aggregate outcomes remain 
poor, with a combined incidence of cardiovascular deaths, heart fail-
ure hospitalizations, myocardial infarction, strokes, or sudden death 
reaching 50% at 12 months after hospitalization. The management of 
these patients has remained difficult and principally revolves around 
volume control and decrease of vascular impedance while maintaining 
attention to end-organ perfusion (coronary and renal).
The first principle of management of these patients is to identify 
and tackle known precipitants of decompensation. Identification 
and management of medication nonadherence and use of prescribed 
medicines such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, cold and flu 
preparations with cardiac stimulants, and herbal preparations, includ-
ing licorice, ginseng, and herbal forms of ephedrine (now banned in 
most places), are required. Active infection and overt or covert pul-
monary thromboembolism should be sought, identified, and treated 
when clinical clues suggest such direction. When possible, arrhythmias 
should be corrected by controlling heart rate or restoring sinus rhythm 
in patients with poorly tolerated rapid atrial fibrillation and by correct-
ing ongoing ischemia with coronary revascularization or by correcting 
offenders such as ongoing bleeding in demand-related ischemia. A 
parallel step in management involves stabilization of hemodynam-
ics in those with instability. The routine use of a pulmonary artery 
catheter is not recommended and should be restricted to those who 
respond poorly to diuresis or experience hypotension or signs and 
symptoms suggestive of a low cardiac output where therapeutic tar-
gets are unclear. Analysis of in-hospital registries has identified several 
parameters associated with worse outcomes: a blood urea nitrogen 
level >43 mg/dL (to convert to mmol/L, multiply by 0.357), systolic 
blood pressure <115 mmHg, a serum creatinine level >2.75 mg/dL (to 
convert to μmol/L, multiply by 88.4), and an elevated troponin I level. 
A useful clinical schema to identify treatment targets for the various 
phenotypic presentations and management goals in ADHF is depicted 
in Fig. 253-2.
■
■VOLUME MANAGEMENT
Intravenous Diuretic Agents  Intravenous diuretic agents rap-
idly and effectively relieve symptoms of congestion and are essential 
when oral drug absorption is impaired. When high doses of diuretic 
agents are required or when the effect is suboptimal, a continuous 
infusion may be needed to reduce toxicity and maintain stable serum 
drug levels. Randomized clinical trials of high- versus low-dose or 
bolus versus continuous infusion diuresis have not provided clear 
justification for the best diuretic strategy in ADHF, and as such, the use 
Pathology 
Hypertrophy
Fibrosis/altered collagen
Infarction/ischemia 
Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction: Management
General Therapeutic Principles
• 
Reduce the congestive state
 
   – 
Caution to not reduce preload excessively
• 
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone–directed therapy
 
   – 
ACEIs and ARBs ineffective (except in “prevention”)
 
   – 
Aldosterone antagonists (may be beneficial)
• 
Digoxin
 
   – 
Ineffective (may reduce hospitalizations)
• 
Beta blockers and calcium channel blockers
 
   – 
Ineffective (useful in preventing tachycardia)
• 
Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors
 
   – 
Sildenafil ineffective
• 
Novel Therapy
 
   – 
ARNIs show early promise
 
   – 
Isosorbide Mononitrate ineffective (reduces activity tolerance) 
• 
Chronotropic insufficiency
 
   – 
? Targeted pacing (unproven)
• 
Control blood pressure
 
   – 
Central aortic blood pressure control may be more relevant
• 
Maintain atrial contraction and prevent tachycardia
 
   – 
Efforts to maintain sinus rhythm in atrial fibrilation may be beneficial
• 
Treat and prevent myocardial ischemia
 
   – 
May mimic HF as an “angina equivalent”
• 
Detect and treat sleep apnea
 
   – 
Common co-morbidity causing systemic hypertension, pulmonary
 
 
hypertension  and right heart dysfunction (adaptive servo-ventilation 
 
 
ineffective)
Specific Therapy Targets
(beyond general management)
Diabetes
Aging
Atherosclerosis
Hypertension
Risk markers
FIGURE 253-1  Pathophysiologic correlations, general therapeutic principles, and results of specific “directed” therapy in heart failure (HF) with preserved ejection 
fraction. ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ARNI, angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor.
CHAPTER 253 Heart Failure: Management
1771
of diuretic regimens remains an art rather than science. Addition of a 
thiazide diuretic agent such as metolazone in combination provides a 
synergistic effect and is often required in patients receiving long-term 
therapy with loop diuretic agents. Change in weight is often used as a 
surrogate for adequate diuresis, but this objective measure of volume 
status may be surprisingly difficult to interpret, and weight loss during 
hospitalization does not necessarily correlate closely with outcomes. 
It is generally advisable to continue diuresis until euvolemia has 
been achieved. Physical examination findings, specifically the jugular 
venous pressure coupled with biomarker trends, are useful in timing 
discharge planning.
The Cardiorenal Syndrome  The cardiorenal syndrome is being 
recognized increasingly as a complication of ADHF. Multiple defini-
tions have been proposed for the cardiorenal syndrome, but at its sim-
plest, it can be thought to reflect the interplay between abnormalities 
of heart and kidney function, with deteriorating function of one organ 
while therapy is administered to preserve the other. Approximately 
30% of patients hospitalized with ADHF exhibit abnormal renal func-
tion at baseline, and this is associated with longer hospitalizations and 
increased mortality. However, mechanistic studies have been largely 
unable to find correlation between deterioration in renal function, car-
diac output, left-sided filling pressures, and reduced renal perfusion; 
most patients with cardiorenal syndrome demonstrate a preserved car-
diac output. It is hypothesized that in patients with established heart 
failure, this syndrome represents a complex interplay of neurohor-
monal factors, potentially exacerbated by “backward failure” resulting 
from increased intraabdominal pressure and impairment in return of 
renal venous blood flow. Continued use of diuretic therapy may be 
associated with a reduction in glomerular filtration rate and a wors-
ening of the cardiorenal syndrome when right-sided filling pressures 
remain elevated. In patients in the late stages of disease characterized 
by profound low cardiac output state, inotropic therapy or mechani-
cal circulatory support has been shown to preserve or improve renal 
function in selected individuals in the short term until more defini-
tive therapy such as assisted circulation or cardiac transplantation is 
implemented.
Ultrafiltration  Ultrafiltration (UF) is an invasive fluid removal 
technique that may supplement the need for diuretic therapy. Proposed 
benefits of UF include controlled rates of fluid removal, neutral effects 
on serum electrolytes, and decreased neurohormonal activity. This 
technique has also been referred to as aquapheresis in recognition of 
its electrolyte depletion–sparing effects. In a pivotal study evaluating 
UF versus conventional therapy, fluid removal was improved and 
subsequent heart failure hospitalizations and urgent clinic visits were 
reduced with UF; however, no improvement in renal function and no 
subjective differences in dyspnea scores or adverse outcomes were 
noted. In the Cardiorenal Rescue Study in Acute Decompensated Heart 
Failure (CARRESS-HF) trial, 188 patients with ADHF and worsening 
renal failure were randomized to stepped pharmacologic care or UF. 
The primary endpoint was a change in serum creatinine and change in 
weight (reflecting fluid removal) at 96 h. Although similar weight loss 
occurred in both groups (~5.5 kg), there was worsening in creatinine 
in the UF group. Deaths and hospitalizations for heart failure were no 
different between groups, but there were more adverse events in the 
UF group, mainly due to kidney failure, bleeding complications, and 
intravenous catheter-related complications. This investigation argues 
against using UF as a primary strategy in patients with ADHF who are 
nonetheless responsive to diuretics. Whether UF is useful in states of 
diuretic unresponsiveness remains an open question, and this strategy 
continues to be employed judiciously in such situations.
Extreme distress
Pulmonary congestion
Renal failure
Low pulse pressure
Cool extremities
Cardio-renal syndrome
Hepatic congestion
New onset arrhythmia
Valvular heart disease
Inflammatory heart disease
Myocardial ischemia
CNS injury
Drug toxicity
Renal insufficiency
Biomarkers of injury
Acute coronary syndrome, arrhythmia, hypoxia, pulmonary embolism, infection
High-Risk Features
Hypertensive
Heterogeneity of ADHF: Management Principles
Severe Pulmonary Congestion with Hypoxia
Hypoperfusion with End-Organ Dysfunction
Hypotension, Low Cardiac Output, and End-Organ Failure
Acute Decompensation
“Typical”
Acute Decompensation
“Pulmonary edema”
Acute Decompensation
“Low output”
Acute Decompensation
“Cardiogenic shock”
Normotensive
(usually volume overloaded)
(usually not volume overloaded)
Hemodynamic monitoring
(suboptimal initial therapeutic response)
Inotropic therapy
(usually catecholamines)
Mechanical circulatory support
(IABP, percutaneous VAD,
ultrafiltration)
Inotropic therapy
(if low blood pressure or
diuretic refractoriness)
Vasodilators
Vasodilators
Vasodilators
Opiates
Diuretics
O2 and noninvasive ventilation
Diuretics
FIGURE 253-2  The distinctive phenotypes of acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF), their presentations, and suggested therapeutic routes. (Unique causes of 
ADHF, such as isolated right heart failure and pericardial disease, and rare causes, such as aortic and coronary dissection or ruptured valve structures or sinuses of 
Valsalva, are not delineated and are covered elsewhere.) IABP, intraaortic balloon pump; VAD, ventricular assist device.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1772
■
■VASCULAR THERAPY
Vasodilators including intravenous nitrates, nitroprusside, and nesiritide 
(a recombinant brain-type natriuretic peptide) have been advocated 
for upstream therapy in an effort to stabilize ADHF. The latter agent 
was introduced in a fixed dose for therapy after a comparison with 
intravenous nitrates suggested more rapid and greater reduction 
in pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. Enthusiasm for nesiritide 
waned due to concerns within the pivotal trials for development of 
renal insufficiency and an increase in mortality. To address these con-
cerns, a large-scale morbidity and mortality trial, the Acute Study of 
Clinical Effectiveness of Nesiritide in Decompensated Heart Failure 
(ASCEND-HF) study was completed in 2011 and randomly enrolled 
7141 patients with ADHF to nesiritide or placebo for 24–168 h in addi-
tion to standard care. Nesiritide was not associated with an increase 
or a decrease in the rates of death and rehospitalization and had a 
clinically insignificant benefit on dyspnea. Renal function did not 
worsen, but increased rates of hypotension were noted. Although 
this trial established the safety for this drug, the routine use cannot 
be advocated due to lack of significant efficacy. Recombinant human 
relaxin-2, or serelaxin, is a peptide upregulated in pregnancy and 
examined in ADHF patients with a normal or elevated blood pressure. 
In the Relaxin in Acute Heart Failure (RELAX-AHF) trial, serelaxin or 
placebo was added to a regimen of standard therapy in 1161 patients 
hospitalized with ADHF, evidence of congestion, and systolic pressure 
>125 mmHg. Serelaxin improved dyspnea, reduced signs and symp-
toms of congestion, and was associated with less early worsening of 
HF. Exploratory endpoints of hard outcomes at 6 months suggested 
positive signals in favor of mortality reduction. A subsequent larger 
study failed to demonstrate a benefit. Recently, the natriuretic peptide 
urodilatin was tested in a large trial (TRUE-AHF) in ADHF patients 
and while evidence for decongestion was forthcoming along with a 
reduction in net endogenous expression of natriuretic peptides, there 
was no improvement in clinical outcomes at 6 months. Urodilatin was 
associated with a higher rate of hypotension and worsening serum 
creatinine.
■
■INOTROPIC THERAPY
Impairment of myocardial contractility often accompanies ADHF, 
and pharmacologic agents that increase intracellular concentration of 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate via direct or indirect pathways, such 
as sympathomimetic amines (dobutamine) and phosphodiesterase-3 
inhibitors (milrinone), respectively, serve as positive inotropic agents. 
Their activity leads to an increase in cytoplasmic calcium. Inotropic 
therapy in those with a low-output state augments cardiac output, 
improves perfusion, and relieves congestion acutely. Although mil-
rinone and dobutamine have similar hemodynamic profiles, milri-
none is slower acting and is renally excreted and thus requires dose 
adjustments in the setting of kidney dysfunction. Since milrinone acts 
downstream from the β1-adrenergic receptor, it may provide an advan-
tage in patients receiving beta blockers when admitted to the hospital. 
Studies are in universal agreement that long-term inotropic therapy 
increases mortality. However, the short-term use of inotropic agents in 
ADHF is also associated with increased arrhythmia, hypotension, and 
no beneficial effects on hard outcomes. Inotropic agents are currently 
indicated as bridge therapy (to either left ventricular assist device sup-
port or to transplant) or as selectively applied palliation in end-stage 
heart failure.
Novel inotropic agents that leverage the concept of myofilament 
calcium sensitization rather than increasing intracellular calcium 
levels have been introduced. Levosimendan is a calcium sensitizer that 
provides inotropic activity, but also possesses phosphodiesterase-3 
inhibition properties that are vasodilators in action. This makes the 
drug unsuitable in states of low output in the setting of hypotension. 
Two trials, the second Randomized Multicenter Evaluation of Intra-
venous Levosimendan Efficacy (REVIVE II) and Survival of Patients 
with Acute Heart Failure in Need of Intravenous Inotropic Support 
(SURVIVE), have tested this agent in ADHF. SURVIVE compared 
levosimendan with dobutamine, and despite an initial reduction in 
circulating B-type natriuretic peptide levels in the levosimendan group 
compared with patients in the dobutamine group, this drug did not 
reduce all-cause mortality at 180 days or affect any secondary clinical 
outcomes. The second trial compared levosimendan against traditional 
non-inotropic therapy and found a modest improvement in symptoms 
with worsened short-term mortality and ventricular arrhythmias. 
Another drug that functions as a selective myosin activator, omecamtiv 
mecarbil, prolongs the ejection period and increases fractional short-
ening. Distinctively, the force of contraction is not increased, and as 
such, this agent does not increase myocardial oxygen demand. As a 
follow-up to early encouraging data, the COSMIC-HF (Chronic Oral 
Study of Myosin Activation to Increase Contractility in Heart Failure) 
study evaluated 448 patients with chronic heart failure and left ven-
tricular systolic dysfunction, for 20 weeks of treatment, and observed 
improvements with this agent on cardiac function, left ventricular 
remodeling indices and natriuretic peptide expression. Other inotropic 
agents that increase myocardial calcium sensitivity through mecha-
nisms that reduce cTnI phosphorylation or inhibit protein kinase A are 
being developed. (Table 253-1 depicts typical inotropic, vasodilator, 
and diuretic drugs used in ADHF.)
■
■NEUROHORMONAL ANTAGONISTS
Other trials testing unique agents have yielded disappointing results 
in the situation of ADHF. The Placebo-Controlled Randomized Study 
of the Selective A1 Adenosine Receptor Antagonist Rolofylline for 
Patients Hospitalized with Acute Decompensated Heart Failure and 
Volume Overload to Assess Treatment Effect on Congestion and Renal 
Function (PROTECT) trial of selective adenosine antagonism and the 
Efficacy of Vasopressin Antagonism in Heart Failure Outcome Study 
with Tolvaptan (EVEREST) trial of an oral selective vasopressin-2 
antagonist in ADHF were both negative with respect to hard outcomes.
In patients who fail to respond adequately to medical therapy, 
mechanical assist devices may be required. This is covered in more 
detail in Chap. 255.
HEART FAILURE WITH REDUCED EJECTION 
FRACTION
The last 50 years have witnessed great strides in the management of 
HFrEF. The treatment of symptomatic heart failure that evolved from a 
renocentric (diuretics) and hemodynamic therapy model (digoxin, ino-
tropic therapy) ushered in the era of disease-modifying therapy with 
neurohormonal antagonism. In this regard, RAAS blockers and beta 
blockers form the cornerstone of pharmacotherapy and lead to attenua-
tion of decline and improvement in cardiac structure and function with 
consequent reduction in symptoms, improvement in QOL, decreased 
burden of hospitalizations, and a decline in mortality from both pump 
failure and arrhythmic deaths (Fig. 253-3).
■
■NEUROHORMONAL ANTAGONISM
Meta-analyses suggest a 23% reduction in mortality and a 35% reduc-
tion in the combination endpoint of mortality and hospitalizations for 
heart failure in patients treated with ACEIs. Patients treated with beta 
blockers provide a further 35% reduction in mortality on top of the ben-
efit provided by ACEIs alone. Increased experience with both agents in 
a broad range of patients with HFrEF has demonstrated the safety of 
ACEIs in treating patients with mild renal insufficiency and the tolera-
bility of beta blockers in patients with moderately controlled diabetes, 
asthma, and obstructive lung disease. The benefits of ACEIs and beta 
blockers extend to advanced symptoms of disease (NYHA class IIIb–IV). 
However, a substantial number of patients with advanced heart failure 
may not be able to achieve optimal doses of neurohormonal inhibitors 
and require cautious reduction in dose exposure to maintain clinical 
stability. Such individuals with lower exposure to ACEIs and beta 
blockers represent a high-risk cohort with poor prognosis.
Class Effect and Sequence of Administration  ACEIs exert 
their beneficial effects in HFrEF as a class; however, the beneficial 
effects of beta blockers are thought to be limited to specific drugs. 
Beta blockers with intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (xamoterol) and 
other agents, including bucindolol, have not demonstrated a survival 
benefit. On the basis of investigations, beta blocker use in HFrEF 
CHAPTER 253 Heart Failure: Management
1773
should ideally be restricted to carvedilol, bisoprolol, and metoprolol 
succinate—agents tested and proven to improve survival in clinical 
trials. Whether beta blockers or ACEIs should be started first was 
answered by the Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study (CIBIS) III, 
in which outcomes did not vary when either agent was initiated first. 
Thus, it matters little which agent is initiated first; what does matter is 
that optimally titrated doses of both ACEIs and beta blockers be estab-
lished in a timely manner.
Dose and Outcome  A trial has indicated that higher tolerated 
doses of ACEIs achieve greater reduction in hospitalizations without 
materially improving survival. Beta blockers demonstrate a dose- 
dependent improvement in cardiac function and reductions in mor-
tality and hospitalizations. Clinical experience suggests that, in the 
absence of symptoms to suggest hypotension (fatigue and dizziness), 
pharmacotherapy may be up-titrated every 2 weeks in stable ambula-
tory patients as tolerated.
■
■MINERALOCORTICOID ANTAGONISTS
Aldosterone antagonism is associated with a reduction in mortality 
in all stages of symptomatic NYHA class II to IV HFrEF. Elevated 
aldosterone levels in HFrEF promote sodium retention, electrolyte 
imbalance, and endothelial dysfunction and may directly contribute to 
myocardial fibrosis. The selective agent eplerenone (tested in NYHA 
class II and post–myocardial infarction heart failure) and the nonse-
lective antagonist spironolactone (tested in NYHA class III and IV 
heart failure) reduce mortality and hospitalizations, with significant 
reductions in sudden cardiac death (SCD). Hyperkalemia and worsen-
ing renal function are concerns, especially in patients with underlying 
chronic kidney disease, and renal function and serum potassium levels 
must be closely monitored.
■
■RAAS THERAPY AND NEUROHORMONAL “ESCAPE”
Neurohormonal “escape” has been witnessed in patients with HFrEF 
by the finding that circulating levels of angiotensin II return to pretreat-
ment levels with long-term ACEI therapy. ARBs blunt this phenom-
enon by binding competitively to the AT1 receptor. Meta-analysis of 
24 randomized trials demonstrated the superiority of ARBs to placebo 
in patients with intolerable adverse effects with ACEIs and their non
-inferiority in all-cause mortality or hospitalizations when compared 
with ACEIs. The Valsartan Heart Failure Trial (Val-HeFT) suggested 
that addition of valsartan in patients already receiving treatment 
with ACEIs and beta blockers was associated with a trend toward 
worse outcomes. Similarly, adding valsartan to captopril in patients 
with heart failure after myocardial infarction who were receiving 
background beta blocker therapy was associated with an increase in 
adverse events without any added benefit compared with monother-
apy for either group. Thus, the initial clinical strategy should be to use 
a two-drug combination first (ACEI and beta blocker; if beta blocker 
intolerant, then ACEI and ARB; if ACEI intolerant, then ARB and beta 
blocker). In symptomatic patients (NYHA class II–IV), an aldosterone 
antagonist should be strongly considered, but four-drug therapy 
should be avoided.
TABLE 253-1  Intravenous Therapy in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure
DRUG CLASS
GENERIC DRUG
USUAL DOSING
SPECIAL CAUTION
COMMENTS
Inotropic 
therapy
 
 
 
 
Use in hypotension, end-organ hypoperfusion, or shock states
Dobutamine
2–20 μg/kg per min
Increased myocardial oxygen 
demand, arrhythmia
Short acting, an advantage; variable efficacy in presence of beta 
blockers (requires higher doses); clinical tolerance to prolonged 
infusions; concerns with hypersensitivity carditis (rare)
 
Milrinone
0.375–0.75 μg/kg 
per min
Hypotension, arrhythmia
Decrease dose in renal insufficiency; avoid initial bolus; 
effectiveness retained in presence of beta blockers
 
Levosimendan
0.1 μg/kg per min, 
range, 0.05–0.2 μg/
kg per min
Hypotension, arrhythmia
Long acting; should not be used in presence of low blood 
pressure; similar effectiveness as dobutamine but effectiveness 
retained in presence of beta blockers
 
Omecamtiv Mecarbil N/A
*In trials
Increases contractility without increasing myocardial oxygen 
demand; in confirmatory trials
Vasodilators
 
 
 
Use in presence of pulmonary congestion for rapid relief of 
dyspnea, in presence of a preserved blood pressure
 
Nitroglycerine
10–20 μg/min, 
increase up to  
200 μg/min
Headache, flushing, tolerance
Most common vasodilator but often underdosed; effective in 
higher doses
 
Nesiritide
Bolus 2 μg/kg  
and infusion at  
0.01 μg/kg per min
Hypotension
Decrease in blood pressure may reduce renal perfusion pressure; 
bolus may be avoided since it increases hypotension predilection
 
Nitroprusside
0.3 μg/kg per min 
titrated to 5 μg/kg 
per min
Thiocyanate toxicity in renal 
insufficiency (>72 h)
Requires arterial line placement for titration for precise blood 
pressure management and prevention of hypotension
 
Serelaxin
N/A (tested at  
30 μg/kg per d)
Baseline blood pressure 
should be >125 mmHg
Not widely commercially available; ineffective in confirmatory trials
Ularitide
15 ng/kg/min (48 h)
Baseline blood pressure  
>116 mmHg
Excess hypotension and increase serum creatinine
Diuretics
 
 
 
First line of therapy in volume overload with congestion; may use 
bolus or continuous dosing; initial low dose (1 × home dose) or 
high dose (2.5 × home dose) equally effective with higher risk of 
renal worsening with higher dose
 
Furosemide
20–240 mg daily
Monitor for electrolyte loss
In severe congestion, use intravenously and consider continuous 
infusion (not trial supported)
 
Torsemide
10–100 mg daily
Monitor for electrolyte loss
High bioavailability, can be given orally; anecdotally more effective 
in advanced heart failure states if furosemide less bioavailable 
(due to gut congestion)
 
Bumetanide
0.5–5 mg daily
Monitor for electrolyte loss
Can be used orally; intermediate bioavailability
 
Adjuvant diuretics 
for augmentation
n/a
Metolazone, chlorthalidone, 
spironolactone, acetazolamide
Acetazolamide is useful in presence of alkalosis; metolazone 
given in 2.5- to 10-mg doses; causes severe electrolyte 
imbalance; spironolactone is useful in presence of severe 
hypokalemia and normal renal function
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1774
A recent trial called the Aliskiren Trial on Acute Heart Failure 
Outcomes (ASTRONAUT) tested a direct renin inhibitor, aliskiren, in 
addition to other heart failure medications, within a week after dis-
charge from a hospitalization for decompensated HFrEF. No significant 
difference in cardiovascular death or hospitalization at 6 or 12 months 
was noted. Aliskiren was associated with a reduction in circulating 
natriuretic peptides, but any disease-modifying effect was overcome 
by excessive adverse events including hyperkalemia, hypotension, 
and renal dysfunction. These studies point to the limits achieved with 
RAAS modulation in this clinical syndrome.
■
■ARTERIOVENOUS VASODILATION
The combination of hydralazine and nitrates has been demonstrated 
to improve survival in HFrEF. Hydralazine reduces systemic vascular 
resistance and induces arterial vasodilatation by affecting intracellular 
calcium kinetics; nitrates are transformed in smooth muscle cells into 
nitric oxide, which stimulates cyclic guanosine monophosphate pro-
duction and consequent arterial-venous vasodilation. This combination 
improves survival, but not to the magnitude evidenced by ACEIs or 
ARBs. However, in individuals with HFrEF unable to tolerate RAAS-
based therapy for reasons such as renal insufficiency or hyperkalemia, 
this combination is preferred as a disease-modifying approach. A trial 
conducted in self-identified African Americans, the African-American 
Heart Failure Trial (A-Heft), studied a fixed dose of isosorbide dinitrate 
with hydralazine in patients with advanced symptoms of HFrEF who 
were receiving standard background therapy. The study demonstrated 
benefit in survival and hospitalization recidivism in the treatment 
group. Adherence to this regimen is limited by the thrice-daily dosing 
schedule.
■
■NOVEL NEUROHORMONAL ANTAGONISM
Despite an abundance of animal and clinical data demonstrating 
deleterious effects of activated neurohormonal pathways beyond the 
RAAS and sympathetic nervous system, targeting such pathways with 
incremental blockade has been largely unsuccessful. As an example, 
the endothelin antagonist bosentan is associated with worsening 
heart failure in HFrEF despite demonstrating benefits in right-sided 
heart failure due to pulmonary arterial hypertension. Similarly, the 
centrally acting sympatholytic agent moxonidine worsens outcomes in 
left heart failure. The combined drug omapatrilat hybridizes an ACEI 
with a neutral endopeptidase inhibitor, and this agent was tested in the 
Omapatrilat Versus Enalapril Randomized Trial of Utility in Reducing 
Events (OVERTURE) trial. This drug did not favorably influence the 
primary outcome measure of the combined risk of death or hospital-
ization for heart failure requiring intravenous treatment. The risk of 
angioedema was notably higher with omapatrilat than ACEIs alone.
More recently, the introduction of LCZ696, an ARB (valsartan) with 
an endopeptidase inhibitor (sacubitril), has shown a survival benefit in 
a large trial versus ARB alone. The drug, referred to as an angiotensin 
receptor–neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI) (and denoted Entrezto), was 
tested in the PARADIGM-HF trial as an alternate to optimally dosed 
ACEI and demonstrated an incremental improvement in survival 
when compared to ACEI alone. Most guidelines now advocate switch-
ing ACEI to this drug as a standard in patients with mild-moderate 
systolic heart failure when they remain symptomatic despite fully 
tolerated doses of conventional therapy.
Table 253-2 lists the common neurohormonal and vasodilator regi-
mens for HFrEF.
■
■HEART RATE MODIFICATION
Ivabradine, an inhibitor of the If current in the sinoatrial node, slows the 
heart rate without a negative inotropic effect. The Systolic Heart Failure 
Treatment with Ivabradine Compared with Placebo Trial (SHIFT) was 
conducted in patients with class II or III HFrEF, a heart rate >70 beats/min, 
and history of hospitalization for heart failure during the previous year. 
Ivabradine reduced hospitalizations and the combined endpoint of car-
diovascular-related death and heart failure hospitalization. The study 
population was not necessarily representative of North American patients 
with HFrEF since, with a few exceptions, most did not receive internal 
cardioverter-defibrillation or cardiac resynchronization therapy and 
40% did not receive a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist. Although 
90% received beta blockers, only a quarter were on full doses. Whether 
this agent would have been effective in patients receiving robust, 
guideline-recommended therapy for heart failure remains unclear. In 
the 2012 European Society of Cardiology guidelines for the treatment 
of heart failure, clinically, Ivabradine should be considered in patients 
who remain symptomatic after guideline-based ACEIs, beta blockers, 
Potentially effective
• Fish oil (PUFA)
• Ivabradine
• Iron supplementation (?)
(Diuretics and digoxin)
Placebo
ACE inhibitors
or ARBs
(ARNIs instead
of ACEI  more
effective)
Mineralocorticoid receptor
antagonists
β-Blockers
(except bucindolol)
Moxonidine
Omapatrilat
Etanercept
Endothelin
antagonists
Xamoterol
• EPO for anemia
• Warfarin for
   thromboembolism
• SSRI for depression
• Statins for HF
Ineffective
Limits of Pharmacologic Therapy in HFrEF
Incremental benefit
Mortality reduction
*Hydralazine-nitrates
FIGURE 253-3  Progressive decline in mortality with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) or angiotensin receptor 
neprilysin inhibitors (ARNIs), beta blockers, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, and balanced vasodilators (*selected populations such as African Americans); 
further stack-on neurohormonal therapy is ineffective or results in worse outcome; management of comorbidity is of unclear efficacy. EPO, erythropoietin; HF, heart 
failure; HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acid; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
CHAPTER 253 Heart Failure: Management
1775
and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists and with residual heart 
rate >70 beats/min. Another group in whom potential benefit may be 
expected includes those unable to tolerate beta blockers.
■
■DIGOXIN
Digitalis glycosides exert a mild inotropic effect, attenuate carotid 
sinus baroreceptor activity, and are sympatho-inhibitory. These effects 
decrease serum norepinephrine levels, plasma renin levels, and possi-
bly aldosterone levels. The DIG trial demonstrated a reduction in heart 
failure hospitalizations in the treatment group (patients with heart 
failure and sinus rhythm) but no reduction in mortality or improve-
ment in QOL. Importantly, treatment with digoxin resulted in a higher 
mortality rate and hospitalizations in women than men. It should be 
noted that low doses of digoxin are sufficient to achieve any potentially 
beneficial outcomes, and higher doses breach the therapeutic safety 
index. Although digoxin levels should be checked to minimize toxic-
ity and although dose reductions are indicated for higher levels, no 
adjustment is made for low levels. Generally, digoxin is now relegated 
as therapy for patients who remain profoundly symptomatic despite 
optimal neurohormonal blockade and adequate volume control.
■
■ORAL DIURETICS
Neurohormonal activation results in avid salt and water retention. 
Loop diuretic agents are often required because of their increased 
potency, and frequent dose adjustments may be necessary because of 
variable oral absorption and fluctuations in renal function. Importantly, 
clinical trial data confirming efficacy are limited, and no data suggest 
that these agents improve survival. Thus, diuretic agents should ide-
ally be used in tailored dosing schedules to avoid excessive exposure. 
Indeed, diuretics are essential at the outset to achieve volume control 
before neurohormonal therapy is likely to be well tolerated or titrated.
■
■CALCIUM CHANNEL ANTAGONISTS
Amlodipine and felodipine, second-generation calcium channel–blocking 
agents, safely and effectively reduce blood pressure in HFrEF but do 
not affect morbidity, mortality, or QOL. The first-generation agents, 
including verapamil and diltiazem, may exert negative inotropic effects 
and destabilize previously asymptomatic patients. Their use should be 
discouraged.
■
■INFLAMMATION
Targeting inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor α 
(TNF-α) by using anticytokine agents such as infliximab and etanercept 
has been unsuccessful and associated with worsening heart failure. Use 
of intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in nonischemic etiology of 
heart failure has not been shown to result in beneficial outcomes. Non-
specific immunomodulation has been tested in the Advanced Chronic 
Heart Failure Clinical Assessment of Immune Modulation Therapy 
(ACCLAIM-HF) trial where ex-vivo exposure of a blood sample from 
systolic heart failure patients to controlled oxidative stress was hypoth-
esized to initiate apoptosis of leukocytes soon after intramuscular 
gluteal injection of the treated sample. The physiologic response to 
apoptotic cells results in a reduction in inflammatory cytokine produc-
tion and upregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines. This promising 
hypothesis was not proven, although certain subgroups (those with no 
history of previous myocardial infarction and those with mild heart 
failure) showed signals in favor of immunomodulation.
■
■STATINS
Potent lipid-altering and pleiotropic effects of statins reduce major 
cardiovascular events and improve survival in non–heart failure popu-
lations. Once heart failure is well established, this therapy may not be 
as beneficial and theoretically could even be detrimental by depleting 
ubiquinone in the electron transport chain. Two trials, Controlled Rosu-
vastatin Multinational Trial in Heart Failure (CORONA) and Gruppo 
Italiano per lo Studio della Sopravvivenza nell’Insufficienza Cardiac 
(GISSI-HF), have tested low-dose rosuvastatin in patients with HFrEF 
and demonstrated no improvement in aggregate clinical outcomes. If 
statins are required to treat progressive coronary artery disease in the 
background setting of heart failure, then they should be employed. 
However, no rationale appears to exist for routine statin therapy in 
nonischemic heart failure.
■
■ANTICOAGULATION AND ANTIPLATELET THERAPY
HFrEF is accompanied by a hypercoagulable state and therefore a high 
risk of thromboembolic events, including stroke, pulmonary embolism, 
and peripheral arterial embolism. Although long-term oral anticoagu-
lation is established in certain groups, including patients with atrial 
TABLE 253-2  Pharmacologic Therapy and Target Doses in Heart Failure with Reduced Ejection Fraction
DRUG CLASS
GENERIC DRUG
MEAN DAILY DOSE IN 
CLINICAL TRIALS (mg)
INITIATION (mg)
TARGET DOSE (mg)
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
 
Lisinopril
4.5–33
2.5–5 qd
20–35 qd
 
Enalapril
17
2.5 bid
10–20 bid
 
Captopril
123
6.25 tid
50 tid
 
Trandolapril
N/A
0.5–1 qd
4 qd
Angiotensin Receptor Blockers
 
Losartan
129
50 qd
150 qd
 
Valsartan
254
40 bid
160 bid
 
Candesartan
24
4–8 qd
32 qd
Aldosterone Antagonists
 
 
 
 
 
Eplerenone
42.6
25 qd
50 qd
 
Spironolactone
26
12.5–25 qd
25–50 qd
Beta Blockers
 
 
 
 
 
Metoprolol succinate CR/XL
159
12.5–25 qd
200 qd
 
Carvedilol
37
3.125 bid
25–50 bid
 
Bisoprolol
8.6
1.25 qd
10 qd
Arteriovenous Vasodilators
 
 
 
 
 
Hydralazine isosorbide 
dinitrate
270/136
37.5/20 tid
75/40 tid
 
Fixed-dose hydralazine/
isosorbide dinitrate
143/76
37.5/20 qid
75/40 qid
Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitor
 
Sacubitril-valsartan
375
100 bid
200 bid
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1776 fibrillation, the data are insufficient to support the use of warfarin in 
patients in normal sinus rhythm without a history of thromboembolic 
events or echocardiographic evidence of left ventricular thrombus. In 
the large Warfarin versus Aspirin in Reduced Cardiac Ejection Fraction 
(WARCEF) trial, full-dose aspirin or international normalized ratio–
controlled warfarin was tested with follow-up for 6 years. Among 
patients with reduced LVEF in sinus rhythm, there was no significant 
overall difference in the primary outcome between treatment with 
warfarin and treatment with aspirin. A reduced risk of ischemic stroke 
with warfarin was offset by an increased risk of major hemorrhage. 
Aspirin blunts ACEI-mediated prostaglandin synthesis, but the clinical 
importance of this finding remains unclear. Current guidelines support 
the use of aspirin in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy.
■
■FISH OIL
Treatment with long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (ω-3 
PUFAs) has been shown to be associated with modestly improved 
clinical outcomes in patients with HFrEF. This observation from the 
GISSI-HF trial was extended to measurements of ω-3 PUFAs in plasma 
phospholipids at baseline and after 3 months. Three-month treatment 
with ω-3 PUFAs enriched circulating eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and 
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). Low EPA levels are inversely related to 
total mortality in patients with HFrEF.
■
■MICRONUTRIENTS
A growing body of evidence suggests an association between heart 
failure and micronutrient status. Reversible heart failure has been 
described as a consequence of severe thiamine and selenium deficiency. 
Thiamine deficiency has received attention in heart failure due to the 
fact that malnutrition and diuretics are prime risk factors for thiamine 
loss. Small exploratory randomized studies have suggested a benefit 
of supplementation of thiamine in HFrEF with evidence of improved 
cardiac function. This finding is restricted to chronic heart failure states 
and does not appear to be beneficial in the ADHF phenotype. Due to 
the exploratory nature of the evidence, no recommendations for rou-
tine supplementation or testing for thiamine deficiency can be made.
■
■ENHANCED EXTERNAL COUNTERPULSATION (EECP)
Peripheral lower extremity therapy using graded external pneumatic 
compression at high pressure is administered in 1-h sessions for 35 
treatments (7 weeks) and has been proposed to reduce angina symp-
toms and extend time to exercise-induced ischemia in patients with 
coronary artery disease. The Prospective Evaluation of Enhanced 
External Counterpulsation in Congestive Heart Failure (PEECH) study 
assessed the benefits of enhanced external counterpulsation in the 
treatment of patients with mild-to-moderate heart failure. This ran-
domized trial improved exercise tolerance, QOL, and NYHA functional 
classification but without an accompanying increase in peak oxygen 
consumption. A placebo effect due to the nature of the intervention 
simply cannot be excluded.
■
■EXERCISE
The Heart Failure: A Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes of Exer-
cise Training (HF-ACTION) study investigated short-term (3-month) 
and long-term (12-month) effects of a supervised exercise training 
program in patients with moderate HFrEF. Exercise was safe, improved 
patients’ sense of well-being, and correlated with a trend toward mor-
tality reduction. Maximal changes in 6-min walk distance were evi-
dent at 3 months with significant improvements in cardiopulmonary 
exercise time and peak oxygen consumption persisting at 12 months. 
Therefore, exercise training is recommended as an adjunctive treatment 
in patients with heart failure.
MANAGEMENT OF SELECTED 
COMORBIDITY
Sleep-disordered breathing is common in HF and particularly in 
HFrEF. A range of presentations exemplified by obstructive sleep 
apnea, central sleep apnea, and its extreme form of Cheyne-Stokes 
breathing are noted. Frequent periods of hypoxia and repeated 
micro- and macro-arousals trigger adrenergic surges, which can 
worsen hypertension and impair systolic and diastolic function. A high 
index of suspicion is required, especially in patients with difficult-to- 
control hypertension or with predominant symptoms of fatigue despite 
reverse remodeling in response to optimal medical therapy. Worsening 
of right heart function with improvement of left ventricular function 
noted on medical therapy should immediately trigger a search for 
underlying sleep-disordered breathing or pulmonary complications 
such as occult embolism or pulmonary hypertension. Treatment with 
nocturnal positive airway pressure improves oxygenation, LVEF, and 
6-min walk distance. However, no conclusive data exist to support this 
therapy as a disease-modifying approach with reduction in mortality. 
A recent trial, using adaptive servo-ventilation in patients who had 
HFrEF and predominantly central sleep apnea increased all cause and 
cardiovascular mortality.
Anemia is common in heart failure patients, reduces functional sta-
tus and QOL, and is associated with increased proclivity for hospital 
admissions and mortality. Anemia in heart failure is more common in 
the elderly, in those with advanced stages of HFrEF, in the presence 
of renal insufficiency, and in women and African Americans. The 
mechanisms include iron deficiency, dysregulation of iron metabolism, 
and occult gastrointestinal bleeding. Intravenous iron using either 
iron sucrose or carboxymaltose (Ferric Carboxymaltose Assessment 
in Patients with Iron Deficiency and Chronic Heart Failure [FAIR-HF] 
trial) has been shown to correct anemia and improve functional 
capacity. Another trial, CONFIRM-HF, enrolled similar patients with 
iron deficiency (ferritin <100 ng/mL or 100–300 ng/mL if transferrin 
saturation <20%) and demonstrated that use of ferric carboxymaltose 
in a simplified high dose schedule resulted in improvement in func-
tional capacity, symptoms, and QOL. Oral iron supplementation does 
not appear to be effective in treating iron deficiency in heart failure. 
Erythropoiesis-regulating agents such as erythropoietin analogues 
have been studied with disappointing results. The Reduction of Events 
by Darbepoetin Alfa in Heart Failure (RED-HF) trial demonstrated that 
treatment with darbepoetin alfa did not improve clinical outcomes in 
patients with systolic heart failure.
Depression is common in HFrEF, with a reported prevalence of one 
in five patients, and is associated with a poor QOL, limited functional 
status, and increased risk of morbidity and mortality in this popula-
tion. However, the largest randomized study of depression in HFrEF, 
the Sertraline Against Depression and Heart Disease in Chronic Heart 
Failure (SADHART-CHF) trial, showed that although sertraline was 
safe, it did not provide greater reduction in depression or improve 
cardiovascular status among patients with heart failure and depression 
compared with nurse-driven multidisciplinary management.
Atrial arrhythmias, especially atrial fibrillation, are common and 
serve as a harbinger of worse prognosis in patients with heart failure. 
When rate control is inadequate or symptoms persist, pursuing a 
rhythm control strategy is reasonable. Rhythm control may be achieved 
via pharmacotherapy or by percutaneous or surgical techniques, and 
referral to practitioners or centers experienced in these modalities is 
recommended. Antiarrhythmic drug therapy should be restricted to 
amiodarone and dofetilide, both of which have been shown to be safe 
and effective but do not alter the natural history of the underlying dis-
ease. The Antiarrhythmic Trial with Dronedarone in Moderate-to-Severe 
Congestive Heart Failure Evaluating Morbidity Decrease (ANDROM-
EDA) studied the effects of the novel antiarrhythmic agent dronedar-
one and found an increased mortality due to worsening heart failure. 
Catheter ablation and pulmonary vein isolation appear to be safe and 
effective in this high-risk cohort and compare favorably with the more 
established practice of atrioventricular node ablation and biventricular 
pacing.
Diabetes mellitus is a frequent co-morbidity in heart failure. Prior 
studies using thiazolidinediones (activators of peroxisome proliferator- 
activated receptors) have been associated with worsening heart failure. 
Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) agonists such as liraglutide have also 
been tested and do not lead to greater post-hospitalization clinical sta-
bility or worsening in heart failure. Recently, the drug empagloflozin 
was tested in the EMPA-REG study and demonstrated a decrease in 
CHAPTER 253 Heart Failure: Management
1777
cardiovascular mortality as well as hospitalizations for heart failure. 
This drug, a sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2), induces an 
osmotic diuresis as well as ketosis. This drug class may represent a 
viable therapeutic avenue in diabetics with heart failure.
■
■NEUROMODULATION USING DEVICE THERAPY
Autonomic dysfunction is common in heart failure and attempts at 
using devices to modulate the sympathetic and parasympathetic sys-
tems have been undertaken. Broadly, devices that achieve vagal nerve 
stimulation, baroreflex activation, renal sympathetic denervation, spi-
nal cord stimulation, or left cardiac sympathetic denervation have been 
employed. While small preclinical and clinical studies have demon-
strated benefits, large-sized randomized trials, when conducted, have 
failed. The INOVATE-HF study tested vagal nerve stimulation versus 
optimal medical therapy among individuals with stable HF. Vagus 
nerve stimulation did not reduce the rate of death or hospitalization 
for HF. However, functional capacity and QOL were favorably affected 
by vagus nerve stimulation.
CARDIAC RESYNCHRONIZATION THERAPY
Nonsynchronous contraction between the walls of the left ventricle 
(intraventricular) or between the ventricular chambers (interventric-
ular) impairs systolic function, decreases mechanical efficiency of 
contraction, and adversely affects ventricular filling. Mechanical dys-
synchrony results in an increase in wall stress and worsens functional 
mitral regurgitation. The single most important association of extent of 
dyssynchrony is a widened QRS interval on the surface electrocardio-
gram, particularly in the presence of a left bundle branch block pattern. 
With placement of a pacing lead via the coronary sinus to the lateral 
wall of the ventricle, cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) enables 
a more synchronous ventricular contraction by aligning the timing of 
activation of the opposing walls. Early studies showed improved exer-
cise capacity, reduction in symptoms, and evidence of reverse remodel-
ing. The Cardiac Resynchronization in Heart Failure Study (CARE-HF) 
trial was the first study to demonstrate a reduction in all-cause mor-
tality with CRT placement in patients with HFrEF on optimal therapy 
with continued moderate-to-severe residual symptoms of NYHA 
class III or IV heart failure. More recent clinical trials have demonstrated 
disease-modifying properties of CRT in even minimally symptomatic 
patients with HFrEF, including the Resynchronization–Defibrillation 
for Ambulatory Heart Failure Trial (RAFT) and Multicenter Automatic 
Defibrillator Implantation Trial with Cardiac Resynchronization Ther-
apy (MADIT-CRT), both of which sought to use CRT in combination 
with an implantable defibrillator. Most benefit in mildly symptomatic 
HFrEF patients accrues from applying this therapy in those with a QRS 
width of >149 ms and a left bundle branch block pattern. Attempts 
to further optimize risk stratification and expand indications for CRT 
using modalities other than electrocardiography have proven disap-
pointing. In particular, echocardiographically derived measures of 
dyssynchrony vary tremendously, and narrow QRS dyssynchrony has 
not proven to be a good target for treatment. Uncertainty surrounds 
the benefits of CRT in those with ADHF, a predominant right bun-
dle branch block pattern, atrial fibrillation, and evidence of scar in 
the lateral wall, which is the precise location where the CRT lead is 
positioned.
SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH PREVENTION IN 
HEART FAILURE
SCD due to ventricular arrhythmias is the mode of death in approx-
imately half of patients with heart failure and is particularly propor-
tionally prevalent in HFrEF patients with early stages of the disease. 
Patients who survive an episode of SCD are considered to be at very 
high risk and qualify for placement of an implantable cardioverter- 
defibrillator (ICD). Although primary prevention is challenging, the 
degree of residual left ventricular dysfunction despite optimal medical 
therapy (≤35%) to allow for adequate remodeling and the underlying 
etiology (post–myocardial infarction or ischemic cardiomyopathy) are 
the two single most important risk markers for stratification of need 
and benefit. Currently, patients with NYHA class II or III symptoms 
of heart failure and an LVEF <35%, irrespective of etiology of heart 
failure, are appropriate candidates for ICD prophylactic therapy. In 
patients with a myocardial infarction and optimal medical therapy 
with residual LVEF ≤30% (even when asymptomatic), placement of an 
ICD is appropriate. A recent Danish trial suggested that prophylactic 
ICD implantation in patients with symptomatic systolic heart failure 
not caused by coronary artery disease was not associated with a sig-
nificantly lower long-term rate of death from any cause than was usual 
clinical care. In this trial, benefits were noted in those aged <60 years. In 
patients with a terminal illness and a predicted life span of <6 months 
or in those with NYHA class IV symptoms who are refractory to medi-
cations and who are not candidates for transplant, the risks of multiple 
ICD shocks must be carefully weighed against the survival benefits. If 
a patient meets the QRS criteria for CRT, combined CRT with ICD is 
often employed (Table 253-3).
SURGICAL THERAPY IN HEART FAILURE
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is considered in patients 
with ischemic cardiomyopathy with multivessel coronary artery 
disease. The recognition that hibernating myocardium, defined as 
myocardial tissue with abnormal function but maintained cellular 
function, could recover after revascularization led to the notion that 
revascularization with CABG would be useful in those with living 
myocardium. Revascularization is most robustly supported in individ-
uals with ongoing angina and left ventricular failure. Revascularizing 
those with left ventricular failure in the absence of angina remains con-
troversial. The Surgical Treatment for Ischemic Heart Failure (STICH) 
trial in patients with an ejection fraction of ≤35% and coronary artery 
disease amenable to CABG demonstrated no significant initial benefit 
compared to medical therapy. However, patients assigned to CABG 
had lower rates of death from cardiovascular causes and of death from 
any cause or hospitalization for cardiovascular causes over 10 years 
than among those who received medical therapy alone. An ancillary 
study of this trial also determined that the detection of hibernation 
pre-revascularization did not materially influence the efficacy of this 
approach, nor did it help to define a population unlikely to benefit if 
hibernation was not detected.
Surgical ventricular restoration (SVR), a technique character-
ized by infarct exclusion to remodel the left ventricle by reshaping it 
surgically in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy and dominant 
anterior left ventricular dysfunction, has been proposed. However, 
in a 1000-patient trial in patients with HFrEF who underwent CABG 
alone or CABG plus SVR, the addition of SVR to CABG had no disease- 
modifying effect. However, left ventricular aneurysm surgery is 
still advocated in those with refractory heart failure, ventricular 
TABLE 253-3  Principles of ICD Implantation for Primary Prevention 
of Sudden Death
PRINCIPLE
COMMENT
Arrhythmia–sudden death 
mismatch
Sudden death in heart failure patients is 
generally due to progressive LVD, not a focal 
arrhythmia substrate (except in patients with 
post-MI HF)
Diminishing returns with 
advanced disease
Intervention at early stages of HF most 
successful since sudden death diminishes as 
cause of death with advanced HF
Timing of benefits
LVEF should be evaluated on optimal medical 
therapy or after revascularization before ICD 
therapy is employed; no benefit to ICD implant 
within 40 days of an MI (unless for secondary 
prevention)
Estimation of benefits and 
prognosis
Patients and clinicians often overestimate 
benefits of ICDs; an ICD discharge is not 
equivalent to an episode of sudden death (some 
ventricular arrhythmias terminate spontaneously); 
appropriate ICD discharges are associated with a 
worse near-term prognosis
Abbreviations: HF, heart failure; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; LVD, 
left ventricular disease; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; MI, myocardial 
infarction.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1778 arrhythmias, or thromboembolism arising from an akinetic aneurysmal 
segment of the ventricle. Other remodeling procedures, such as use of 
an external mesh-like net attached around the heart to limit further 
enlargement, have not been shown to provide hard clinical benefits, 
although favorable cardiac remodeling was noted.
Mitral regurgitation (MR) occurs with varying degrees in patients 
with HFrEF and dilated ventricles. Annular dilatation and leaflet non-
coaptation in the setting of anatomically normal papillary muscles, 
chordal structures, and valve leaflets characterize functional MR. In 
patients who are not candidates for surgical coronary revasculari-
zation, mitral valve repair remains controversial. Ischemic MR (or 
infarct-related MR) is typically associated with leaflet tethering and 
displacement related to abnormal left ventricular wall motion and 
geometry. No evidence to support the use of surgical or percutaneous 
valve correction for functional MR exists as disease-modifying therapy 
even though MR can be corrected.
CELLULAR AND GENE-BASED THERAPY
The cardiomyocyte possesses regenerative capacity and such renewal 
is accelerated under conditions of stress and injury, such as an ischemic 
event or heart failure. Investigations that use either bone marrow–
derived precursor cells or autologous cardiac-derived cells have gained 
traction but have not generally improved clinical outcomes in a con-
vincing manner. More promising, however, are cardiac-derived stem 
cells. Two preliminary pilot trials delivering cells via an intracoronary 
approach have been reported. In one, autologous c-kit–positive cells 
isolated from the atria obtained from patients undergoing CABG were 
cultured and reinfused. In another, cardiosphere-derived cells grown 
from endomyocardial biopsy specimens were used. These small trials 
demonstrated improvements in left ventricular function but require far 
more work to usher in a clinical therapeutic success. The appropriate 
route of administration, the quantity of cells to achieve a minimal 
therapeutic threshold, the constitution of these cells (single source or 
mixed), the mechanism by which benefit accrues, and short- and long-
term safety remain to be elucidated.
Targeting molecular aberrations using gene transfer therapy, mostly 
with an adenoviral vector, has been tested in HFrEF. A cellular target 
includes calcium cycling proteins such as inhibitors of phospholamban 
such as SERCA2a which is deficient in patients with HFrEF. Primarily 
responsible for reincorporating calcium into the sarcoplasmic reticu-
lum during diastole, this target was tested in the CUPID (Efficacy and 
Safety Study of Genetically Targeted Enzyme Replacement Therapy for 
Advanced Heart Failure) trial. This study used coronary arterial infu-
sion of adeno-associated virus type 1 carrying the gene for SERCA2a 
and initially demonstrated that natriuretic peptides were decreased, 
reverse remodeling was noted, and symptomatic improvements were 
forthcoming. However, a confirmatory trial failed to meet its primary 
efficacy endpoint.
More advanced therapies for late-stage heart failure such as left 
ventricular assist devices and cardiac transplantation are covered in 
detail in Chap. 255.
DISEASE MANAGEMENT AND SUPPORTIVE 
CARE
Despite stellar outcomes with medical therapy, admission rates following 
heart failure hospitalization remain high, with nearly half of all patients 
readmitted to hospital within 6 months of discharge. Recurrent heart 
failure and related cardiovascular conditions account for only half of 
readmissions in patients with heart failure, whereas other comorbidity- 
related conditions account for the rest. The key to achieving enhanced 
outcomes must begin with the attention to transitional care at the 
index hospitalization with facilitated discharge through comprehen-
sive discharge planning, patient and caregiver education, appropriate 
use of visiting nurses, and planned follow-up. Early postdischarge 
follow-up, whether by telephone or clinic-based, may be critical to 
ensuring stability because most heart failure–related readmissions tend 
to occur within the first 2 weeks after discharge. Although routinely 
advocated, intensive surveillance of weight and vital signs with use 
of telemonitoring has not decreased hospitalizations. Intrathoracic 
impedance measurements have been advocated for the identification of 
early rise in filling pressure and worsened hemodynamics so that pre-
emptive management may be employed. However, this has not been 
successful and may worsen outcomes in the short term. Implantable 
pressure monitoring systems do tend to provide signals for early dec-
ompensation, and in patients with moderately advanced symptoms, 
such systems have been shown to provide information that can allow 
implementation of therapy to avoid hospitalizations by as much as 
39% (in the CardioMEMS Heart Sensor Allows Monitoring of Pres-
sure to Improve Outcomes in NYHA Class III Heart Failure Patients 
[CHAMPION] trial). Once heart failure becomes advanced, regularly 
scheduled review of the disease course and options with the patient 
and family is recommended including discussions surrounding end-
of-life preferences when patients are comfortable in an outpatient set-
ting. As the disease state advances further, integrating care with social 
workers, pharmacists, and community-based nursing may be critical in 
improving patient satisfaction with the therapy, enhancing QOL, and 
avoiding heart failure hospitalizations. Equally important is attention 
to seasonal influenza vaccinations and periodic pneumococcal vaccines 
that may obviate non–heart failure hospitalizations in these ill patients. 
When nearing end of life, facilitating a shift in priorities to outpatient 
and hospice palliation is key, as are discussions around advanced ther-
apeutics and continued use of ICD prophylaxis, which may worsen 
QOL and prolong death.
GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
Substantial differences exist in the practice of heart failure 
therapeutics and outcomes by geographic location. The pene-
trance of CRT and ICD is higher in the United States than in 
Europe. Conversely, therapy unavailable in the United States, such as 
levosimendan, is designated as useful in Europe. Variation in the bene-
fits of beta blockers based on world region remains an area of contro-
versy. In oral pharmacologic therapy trials of HFrEF, patients from 
southwest Europe have a lower incidence of ischemic cardiomyopathy 
and those in North America tend to have more diabetes and prior cor-
onary revascularization. There is also regional variation in medication 
use even after accounting for indication. In trials of heart failure, 
disparate effects are noted across populations. As a recent example, 
in TOPCAT, the drug spironolactone was effective when used in the 
US population while patients recruited from Russia and contiguous 
territories showed no difference. Whether this represents population 
differences or trial conduct disparity remains to be investigated. ADHF, 
patients in Eastern Europe tend to be younger, with higher ejection 
fractions and lower natriuretic peptide levels. Patients from South 
America tend to have the lowest rates of comorbidities, revasculariza-
tion, and device use. In contrast, patients from North America have the 
highest comorbidity burden with high revascularization and device use 
rates. Given geographic differences in baseline characteristics and clin-
ical outcomes, the generalizability of therapeutic outcomes in patients 
in the United States and Western Europe may require verification.
■
■FURTHER READING
Braunwald E: Heart failure. JACC Heart Fail 1:1, 2013.
Braunwald E: The war against heart failure: The Lancet lecture. Lancet 
385:812, 2015.
Cowie MR et al: Adaptive servo-ventilation for central sleep apnea in 
systolic heart failure. N Engl J Med 373:1095, 2015.
Kusumoto FM et al: HRS/ACC/AHA expert consensus statement on 
the use of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy in patients 
who are not included or not well represented in clinical trials. Circu-
lation 130:94, 2014.
McMurray JJ et al: PARADIGM-HF Investigators and Committees. 
Angiotensin-neprilysin inhibition versus enalapril in heart failure. 
N Engl J Med. 371:993, 2014.
Ramani GV et al: Chronic heart failure: Contemporary diagnosis and 
management. Mayo Clin Proc 85:180, 2010.
Redfield MM et al: NHLBI Heart Failure Clinical Research Network. 
Isosorbide mononitrate in heart failure with preserved ejection frac-
tion. N Engl J Med 373:2314, 2015.
CHAPTER 254 Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
1779
Shah SJ et al: Phenotype-specific treatment of heart failure with pre-
served ejection fraction: A multiorgan roadmap. Circulation 134:73, 
2016.
Velazquez EJ et al: STICHES Investigators. Coronary-artery bypass 
surgery in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 
374:1511, 2016.
Zinman B et al: EMPA-REG OUTCOME investigators. Empagliflozin, 
cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J 
Med 373:2117, 2015.
254 Cardiomyopathy and 
Myocarditis
Neal K. Lakdawala, Lynne Warner Stevenson, 
Joseph Loscalzo 
■
■DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
Cardiomyopathy is disease of the heart muscle. It is estimated 
that cardiomyopathy accounts for 5–10% of the heart failure in the 
5–6 million patients carrying that diagnosis in the United States. This 
term is intended to exclude cardiac dysfunction that results from other 
structural heart disease, such as coronary artery disease, primary 
valve disease, or severe hypertension; however, in general usage, the 
phrase ischemic cardiomyopathy is sometimes applied to describe diffuse 
dysfunction attributed to multivessel coronary artery disease, and 
nonischemic cardiomyopathy to describe cardiomyopathy from other 
causes. As of 2013, cardiomyopathies are defined as “disorders charac-
terized by morphologically and functionally abnormal myocardium in 
the absence of any other disease that is sufficient, by itself, to cause the 
observed phenotype.” It was further specified that many cardiomyopathies 
will be attributable to genetic disease.1
The traditional classification of cardiomyopathies into a triad of 
dilated, restrictive, and hypertrophic was based initially on autopsy 
specimens and later on echocardiographic findings. Dilated and 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathies can be distinguished on the basis of 
left ventricular wall thickness and cavity dimension; however, restric-
tive cardiomyopathy can have variably increased wall thickness and 
chamber dimensions that range from reduced to slightly increased, 
with prominent atrial enlargement. Restrictive cardiomyopathy is now 
defined more on the basis of abnormal diastolic function, which is also 
present but initially less prominent in dilated and hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy. Restrictive cardiomyopathy can overlap in presentation, 
gross morphology, and etiology with both hypertrophic and dilated 
cardiomyopathies (Table 254-1).
Expanding information renders this classification triad based on 
phenotype increasingly inadequate to define disease or therapy. 
Identification of more genetic determinants of cardiomyopathy has 
suggested a four-way classification scheme of etiology as primary 
(affecting primarily the heart) and secondary to other systemic dis-
ease. The primary causes are then divided into genetic, mixed genetic 
and acquired, and acquired. In practice however, genetic information 
is rarely available at initial presentation, the phenotypic expression 
of a given mutation varies widely, and genetic predisposition also 
influences acquired cardiomyopathies. Although the proposed genetic 
classification does not yet guide many current clinical strategies, it will 
become increasingly relevant as classification of disease moves beyond 
individual organ pathology to more integrated systems approaches.
GENERAL PRESENTATION
For all cardiomyopathies, the early symptoms often relate to exertional 
intolerance with breathlessness or fatigue, usually from inadequate 
cardiac reserve during exercise. These symptoms may initially be 
1From E Arbustini et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 62:2046, 2013.
unnoticed or attributed to other causes, commonly lung disease or 
“getting older.” As fluid retention leads to elevation of resting filling 
pressures, shortness of breath may occur during routine daily activity 
such as dressing and may manifest as dyspnea or cough when lying 
down at night. Although often considered the hallmark of congestion, 
peripheral edema may be absent despite severe fluid retention, partic-
ularly in younger patients in whom ascites and abdominal discomfort 
may dominate. The nonspecific term congestive heart failure describes 
only the resulting syndrome of fluid retention, which is common to all 
three types of cardiomyopathy and also to cardiac structural diseases 
associated with elevated filling pressures. All three types of cardiomyo-
pathy can be associated with atrioventricular (AV) valve regurgitation, 
typical and atypical chest pain, atrial and ventricular tachyarrhyth-
mias, and embolic events (Table 254-1). Initial evaluation begins with a 
detailed clinical history and examination, looking for clues to cardiac, 
extracardiac, and familial disease (Table 254-2).
■
■GENETIC CAUSES OF CARDIOMYOPATHY
Estimates for the prevalence of genetic etiology of cardiomyopa-
thy continue to rise, with increasing availability of genetic testing 
and attention to the family history. Well-recognized in hypertro-
phic cardiomyopathy, heritability is also present in at least 30% of 
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) without other clear etiology. Careful 
family history should elicit not only known cardiomyopathy and heart 
failure, but also family members who have had sudden death, often 
incorrectly attributed to “a massive heart attack,” who have had atrial 
fibrillation or pacemaker implantation by middle age, or who have 
muscular dystrophy.
Most familial cardiomyopathies are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant pattern, with occasional autosomal recessive and X-linked 
inheritance (Table 254-3). Missense mutations with amino acid substi-
tutions are the most common in cardiomyopathy. Expressed mutant 
proteins may interfere with function of the normal allele through a 
dominant negative mechanism. Mutations introducing a premature 
stop codon (nonsense) or shift in the reading frame (frameshift) may 
create a truncated or unstable protein the lack of which causes cardio-
myopathy (haploinsufficiency). Deletions or duplications of an entire 
exon or gene are uncommon causes of cardiomyopathy, except for the 
dystrophinopathies.
Many different genes have been implicated in human cardiomyo-
pathy (locus heterogeneity), and many mutations within those genes 
have been associated with disease (allelic heterogeneity). Although 
most identified mutations are “private” to individual families, several 
specific mutations are found repeatedly, either due to a founder effect 
or recurrent mutations at a common residue.
Genetic cardiomyopathy is characterized by age-dependent and 
incomplete penetrance. The defining phenotype of cardiomyopathy is 
rarely present at birth and, in some individuals, may never manifest. 
Related individuals who carry the same mutation may differ in the 
severity and rate of progression of cardiac dysfunction and associated 
rhythm disorders, indicating the important role of other genetic, epige-
netic, and environmental modifiers in disease expression. Sex appears 
to play a role, as penetrance and clinical severity may be greater in 
men for most cardiomyopathies. Clinical disease expression is gener-
ally more severe in the 3–5% of individuals who harbor two or more 
mutations linked to cardiomyopathy. However, the clinical course 
of a patient usually cannot be predicted based on which mutation is 
present; thus, current therapy is based on the phenotype rather than 
the genetic defect. Currently, the greatest utility of genetic testing for 
cardiomyopathy is to inform family evaluations. However, genetic 
testing occasionally enables the detection of a disease for which specific 
therapy is indicated, such as the replacements for defective metabolic 
enzymes in Fabry’s disease and Gaucher disease.
■
■GENES AND PATHWAYS IN CARDIOMYOPATHY
Mutations in sarcomeric genes, encoding the thick and thin myofil-
ament proteins, are the best characterized. While the majority are 
associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, an increasing number 
of sarcomeric mutations have now been implicated in DCM, and some 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1780
TABLE 254-1  Presentation with Symptomatic Cardiomyopathy
 
DILATED
RESTRICTIVE
HYPERTROPHIC
Ejection fraction (normal >55%)
Usually <30% when symptoms severe
25–50%
>60%
Left ventricular diastolic 
dimension (normal <55 mm)
≥60 mm
<60 mm (may be decreased)
Often decreased
Left ventricular wall thickness
Normal or decreased
Normal or increased
Markedly increased
Atrial size
Increased, may also be primarily affected
Increased; may be massive
Increased; related to 
elevated filling pressures
Valvular regurgitation
Related to annular dilation; mitral appears 
earlier during decompensation; tricuspid 
regurgitation with right ventricular dysfunction
Related to endocardial involvement; frequent 
mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, rarely severe
Related to valve-septum 
interaction; mitral 
regurgitation
Common first symptoms
Exertional intolerance
Exertional intolerance, fluid retention early, may 
have dominant right-sided symptoms
Exertional intolerance; may 
have chest pain
Congestive symptomsa
Left before right, except right prominent in 
young adults
Right often dominates
Left-sided congestion at 
rest may develop late
Arrhythmias
Ventricular tachyarrhythmia; conduction block 
in Chagas’ disease, and some families. Atrial 
fibrillation.
Ventricular uncommon except in sarcoidosis, 
conduction block in sarcoidosis and 
amyloidosis. Atrial fibrillation.
Ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias; atrial 
fibrillation
aLeft-sided symptoms of pulmonary congestion: dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. Right-sided symptoms of systemic venous congestion: 
hepatic and abdominal distention, discomfort on bending, peripheral edema.
TABLE 254-2  Initial Evaluation of Cardiomyopathy
Clinical Evaluation
Thorough history and physical examination to identify cardiac and noncardiac 
disordersa
Detailed family history of heart failure, cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, 
conduction disorders, tachyarrhythmias, and sudden death
History of alcohol, illicit drugs, chemotherapy or radiation therapya
Assessment of ability to perform routine and desired activitiesa
Assessment of volume status, orthostatic blood pressure, body mass indexa
Laboratory Evaluation
Electrocardiograma
Chest radiographa
Two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiograma
Magnetic resonance imaging for evidence of myocardial inflammation and 
fibrosis
Chemistry:
  Serum sodium,a potassium,a calcium,a magnesiuma
  Fasting glucose (glycohemoglobin in diabetes mellitus)
  Creatinine,a blood urea nitrogena
  Albumin,a total protein,a liver function testsa
  Lipid profile
  Thyroid-stimulating hormonea
  Serum iron, transferrin saturation
  Urinalysis
  Creatine kinase isoforms
  Cardiac troponin levels
Hematology:
  Hemoglobin/hematocrita
  White blood cell count with differential,a including eosinophils
  Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Initial Evaluation When Specific Diagnoses Are Suspected
DNA sequencing for genetic disease, panel selection based on phenotype
Titers for infection in the setting of clinical suspicion:
  Acute viral (coxsackie, echovirus, influenza)
  Human immunodeficiency virus
  Chagas’ (Trypanosoma cruzi), Lyme (Borrelia burgdorferi), toxoplasmosis
Catheterization with coronary angiography in patients with angina who are 
candidates for interventiona
Serologies for active rheumatologic disease
Endomyocardial biopsy including sample for electron microscopy when 
suspecting specific diagnosis with therapeutic implications
Screening for sleep-disordered breathing
aLevel I recommendations from ACC/AHA Practice Guidelines for Chronic Heart 
Failure in the Adult.
in left ventricular noncompaction. The most commonly recognized 
genetic causes of DCM are truncating mutations of the giant protein 
titin, encoded by TTN, which maintains sarcomere structure and acts 
as a key signaling molecule.
As cytoskeletal proteins play crucial roles in the structure, connec-
tion, and stability of the myocyte, multiple defects in these proteins can 
lead to cardiomyopathy, usually with a dilated phenotype (Fig. 254-1). 
For example, desmin forms intermediate filaments that connect the 
nuclear and plasma membranes, Z-lines, and the intercalated disks 
between muscle cells. Desmin mutations impair the transmission of 
force and signaling for both cardiac and skeletal muscle and may cause 
combined cardiac and skeletal myopathy.
Defects in the sarcolemmal membrane proteins are associated with 
DCM. The best known is dystrophin, encoded by the X chromosome 
gene DMD, abnormalities of which cause Duchenne’s and Becker’s 
muscle dystrophy. (Interestingly, abnormal dystrophin can be acquired 
when the coxsackie virus cleaves dystrophin during viral myocarditis.) 
This protein provides a network that supports the sarcolemma and also 
connects to the sarcomere. The progressive functional defect in both 
cardiac and skeletal muscle reflects vulnerability to mechanical stress. 
Dystrophin is associated at the membrane with a complex of other pro-
teins, such as metavinculin, abnormalities of which also cause DCM. 
Defects in the sarcolemmal channel proteins (channelopathies) are gen-
erally associated with primary arrhythmias, but mutations in SCN5A, 
distinct from those that cause the Brugada or long QT syndromes, have 
been implicated in DCM with conduction disease.
Nuclear membrane protein defects in cardiac and skeletal muscle 
occur in either autosomal (lamin A/C) or X-linked (emerin) patterns. 
These defects are associated with a high prevalence of atrial arrhyth-
mias and conduction system disease, which can occur in some family 
members without or before detectable cardiomyopathy.
Intercalated disks contribute to intracellular connections, allowing 
mechanical and electrical coupling between cells and also connec-
tions to desmin filaments within the cell. Mutations in proteins of 
the desmosomal complex compromise attachment of the myocytes, 
which can become disconnected and die, to be replaced by fat and 
fibrous tissue. These areas are highly arrhythmogenic and may dilate 
to form aneurysms. Although more often noted in the right ventricle 
(arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy), this condition 
can affect both ventricles and has also been termed “arrhythmogenic 
cardiomyopathy.”
As many signaling pathways are conserved over multiple systems, 
we anticipate discovering extracardiac manifestations of abnormal 
proteins initially considered restricted to the heart. In contrast, the 
monogenic disorders of metabolism that affect the heart are already 
clearly recognized to affect multiple organ systems. Currently, it is most 
important to diagnose defective enzymes for which specific enzyme 
CHAPTER 254 Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
1781
TABLE 254-3  Selected Genetic Defects Associated with Cardiomyopathy
 
GENE PRODUCT
INHERITANCE
CARDIAC 
PHENOTYPE
ISOLATED CARDIAC 
PHENOTYPEa
EXTRACARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS
Sarcomere
MYH7 (β myosin heavy chain)
AD
HCM, DCM, LVNC
Yes
Skeletal myopathy
 
MYBPC3 (myosin binding protein C)
AD
HCM
Yes
 
 
TNNT2 (cardiac troponin T)
AD
HCM, DCM, LVNC
Yes
 
 
TNNI3 (cardiac troponin I)
AD, AR
HCM, DCM, RCM
Yes
 
 
TTN (Titin)
AD
DCM
Yes
 
 
TPM1 (α-tropomyosin)
AD
HCM, DCM
Yes
 
 
TNNC1 (cardiac troponin C)
AD
DCM
Yes
 
 
MYL2 (myosin regulatory light chain)
AD
HCM
Yes
Skeletal myopathy
 
MYL3 (myosin essential light chain)
AD
HCM
Yes
 
Z-disk and 
Cytoskeleton
DES (Desmin)
AD
DCM, RCM
Yes
Skeletal myopathy
 
ANKRD1 (CARP)
AD
HCM, (DCM)
Yes
 
 
CSRP3 (MLP)
AD
DCM, (HCM)
Yes
 
 
ACTN2 (α-actinin-2)
AD
DCM
Yes
 
 
CRYAB (αB-crystallin)
AD
DCM
Yes
 
 
FLNC (Filamin C)
AD
DCM
Yes
Skeletal myopathy
Nuclear 
Membrane
LMNA (Lamin A/C)
AD, AR
CDDC
Yes
Skeletal myopathy
 
EMD (Emerin)
X-linked
CDDC
No
Skeletal myopathy, contractures
Excitation-
Contraction 
Coupling
PLN (Phospholamban)
AD
DCM
Yes
 
 
SCN5A (NAV 1.5)
AD
CDDC
Yes
Note other mutations associated 
with Brugada syndrome
 
RYR2 (cardiac ryanodine receptor)
AD
ARVC
Yes
 
 
CASQ2 (calsequestrin 2)
AR
ARVC
Yes
 
Cellular 
Metabolism
PRKAG2 (γ-subunit of AMP kinase)
AD
HCM+
Yes
 
 
LAMP2 (lysosomal associated 
membrane protein)
X-linked
HCM+
Noa
Danon’s disease: skeletal myopathy, 
cognitive impairment
 
TAZ (Tafazzin)
X-linked
DCM, LVNC
No
Barth’s syndrome: skeletal 
myopathy, cognitive impairment, 
neutropenia
 
FXN (Frataxin)
AR
HCM
No
Friedreich’s ataxia: ataxia, diabetes 
mellitus type 2
 
TMEM43 (transmembrane protein 43)
AD
ARVC
Yes
 
 
GLA (α-galactosidase-A)
X-linked
HCM+
Yes
Fabry’s disease: renal failure, 
angiokeratomas and painful 
neuropathy
Mitochondria
Mitochondrial DNA
Maternal 
transmission
DCM, HCM
No
MELAS, MERRF, Kearns-Sayre 
syndrome, ocular myopathy
Sarcolemmal 
Membrane
DMD (Dystrophin)
X-linked
DCM
Noa
Duchenne’s and Becker’s muscular 
dystrophy
 
DMPK (dystrophica myotonica protein 
kinase)
AD
DCM
No
Myotonic dystrophy type 1
 
SGCD (δ-sarcoglycan)
AD
DCM
Yes
 
Desmosome
DSP (Desmoplakin) JUP (Plakoglobin)
AD, AR
ARVC
Yes
Carvajal syndrome (AR), Naxos 
syndrome (AR), “woolly hair” and 
hyperkeratosis of palms and soles
 
DSG2 (Desmoglein 2) DSC2 
(Desmocollin 2) PKP2 (Plakophilin 2)
AD
ARVC
Yes
 
Other Examples
RBM20 (RNA binding motif 20)
AD
DCM
Yes
 
 
PSEN1 (Presenilin-1,2)
AD
DCM
Yes
Dementia
 
BAG3 (BCL2-associated athanogene 3)
AD
DCM
Yes
 
 
ALPK3 (Alpha-kinase 3)
AR
HCM
Yes
 
aIndicates that the usual clinical presentation is of isolated cardiomyopathy, however occasionally present extra cardiac manifestations are also provided. aIndicates that 
isolated cardiac phenotype can occur in women with the X-linked defects.
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; CDDC, conduction disease with dilated 
cardiomyopathy; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HCM+, HCM with preexcitation; HCMc, HCM with conduction disease; LVNC, left 
ventricular noncompaction; MELAS, (mitochondrial) myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes syndrome; MERRF, myoclonic epilepsy with ragged 
red fibers; RCM, restrictive cardiomyopathy.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1782
FIGURE 254-1  Drawing of myocyte indicating multiple sites of abnormal gene products associated with cardiomyopathy. Major functional groups include the 
sarcomeric proteins (actin, myosin, tropomyosin, and the associated regulatory proteins), the dystrophin complex stabilizing and connecting the cell membrane to 
intracellular structures, the desmosome complexes associated with cell-cell connections and stability, and multiple cytoskeletal proteins that integrate and stabilize 
the myocyte. ATP, adenosine triphosphate. (Figure adapted from Jeffrey A. Towbin, MD, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, with permission.)
replacement therapy can now ameliorate the course of disease, such as 
with alpha-galactosidase A deficiency (Fabry’s disease). Abnormalities 
of mitochondrial DNA (maternally transmitted) impair energy produc-
tion with multiple clinical manifestations, including impaired cognitive 
function and skeletal myopathy. The phenotypic expression is highly 
variable depending on the distribution of the maternal mitochondria 
during embryonic development. Heritable systemic diseases, such as 
familial amyloidosis and hemochromatosis, can affect the heart with-
out mutation of genes expressed in the heart.
For any patient with suspected or proven genetic disease, family 
members should be considered and evaluated in a longitudinal fash-
ion. Screening includes an echocardiogram and electrocardiogram 
(ECG). The indications and implications for confirmatory specific 
genetic testing vary depending on the specific mutation. The profound 
questions raised by families about diseases shared and passed down 
merit serious and sensitive discussion, ideally provided by a trained 
genetic counselor.
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
An enlarged left ventricle with reduced systolic function as measured 
by left ventricular ejection fraction characterizes DCM (Figs. 254-2, 
254-3, and 254-4). Systolic failure is more prominent than diastolic dys-
function. Although the syndrome of DCM has many disparate etiolo-
gies (Table 254-4), many converge to common pathways of secondary 
response and disease progression. When myocardial injury is acquired, 
some myocytes may die initially, whereas others survive only to have 
later programmed cell death (apoptosis), and remaining myocytes 
hypertrophy in response to increased wall stress. Local and circulating 
factors stimulate deleterious secondary responses that contribute to 
progression of disease. Dynamic remodeling of the interstitial scaffold-
ing affects diastolic function and the amount of ventricular dilation. 
Mitral regurgitation commonly develops as the valvular apparatus is 
distorted and is usually substantial by the time heart failure is severe. 
Many cases that present “acutely” have progressed silently through 
these stages over months to years. Dilation and decreased function 
of the right ventricle may result directly from the initial injury, but 
more often develops later in response to elevated afterload presented 
by secondary pulmonary hypertension and in relation to mechanical 
interactions with the failing left ventricle.
Regardless of the nature and degree of direct cell injury, the result-
ing functional impairment often reflects contribution from secondary 
responses that may be modifiable or reversible. Almost half of all 
patients with new-onset cardiomyopathy demonstrate substantial 
spontaneous recovery. Even with long-standing disease, some patients 
have dramatic improvement to near-normal ejection fractions during 
pharmacologic therapy, particularly notable with the β-adrenergic 
antagonists coupled with renin-angiotensin system inhibition. For 
patients in whom left bundle branch block precedes clinical heart 
failure by many years, cardiac resynchronization pacing may be par-
ticularly likely to improve ejection fraction and decrease ventricular 
size. Interest in the potential for recovery of cardiomyopathy has been 
further stimulated by occasional “recovery” of left ventricular function 
CHAPTER 254 Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
1783
LV
LA
RV
RA
FIGURE 254-3  Dilated cardiomyopathy. This echocardiogram of a young man with 
dilated cardiomyopathy shows massive global dilation and thinning of the walls of 
the left ventricle (LV). The left atrium (LA) is also enlarged compared to normal. 
Note that the echocardiographic and pathologic images are vertically opposite, 
such that the LV is by convention on the top right in the echocardiographic image 
and bottom right in the pathologic images. RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. 
(Image courtesy of Justina Wu, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
FIGURE 254-2  Dilated cardiomyopathy. This gross specimen of a heart removed 
at the time of transplantation shows massive left ventricular dilation and 
moderate right ventricular dilation. Although the left ventricular wall in particular 
appears thinned, there is significant hypertrophy of this heart, which weighs 
>800 g (upper limit of normal = 360 g). A defibrillator lead is seen traversing the 
tricuspid valve into the right ventricular apex. (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, 
MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
FIGURE 254-4  Dilated cardiomyopathy. Microscopic specimen of a dilated 
cardiomyopathy showing the nonspecific changes of interstitial fibrosis and 
myocyte hypertrophy characterized by increased myocyte size and enlarged, 
irregular nuclei. Hematoxylin and eosin–stained section, 100× original 
magnification. (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of 
Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
after prolonged mechanical circulatory support. The current evaluation 
and therapy for DCM is generally dictated by the stage of heart failure 
(Chap. 252), with specific aspects discussed for relevant etiologies 
below.
■
■MYOCARDITIS
Myocarditis (inflammation of the heart) can result from multiple causes 
but is most commonly attributed to infective agents that can injure the 
myocardium through direct invasion, production of cardiotoxic sub-
stances, or chronic inflammation with or without persistent infection. 
Myocarditis cannot be assumed from a presentation of decreased sys-
tolic function in the setting of an acute infection, as any severe infection 
causing systemic cytokine release can depress cardiac function tran-
siently. Infectious myocarditis has been reported with almost all types 
of infective agents but is most commonly associated with viruses and 
the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi.
■
■INFECTIVE MYOCARDITIS
The pathogenesis of viral myocarditis has been extensively studied in 
murine models. After viruses gain entry through the respiratory or gas-
trointestinal tract, they can infect organs possessing specific receptors, 
such as the coxsackie-adenovirus receptor on the heart. Viral infection 
and replication can cause myocardial injury and lysis. For example, 
the enteroviral protease 2A facilitates viral replication and infection 
through degradation of the myocyte protein dystrophin, which is 
crucial for myocyte stability. Activation of viral receptor proteins can 
also activate host tyrosine kinases, which modify the cytoskeleton to 
facilitate further viral entry.
The first host response to infection is the nonspecific innate immune 
response, heavily dependent on Toll-like receptors that recognize 
common antigenic patterns. Cytokine release is rapid, followed by trig-
gered activation and expansion of specific T- and B-cell populations. 
This initial response appears to be crucial, as early immunosuppression 
in animal models can increase viral replication and worsen cardiac 
injury. However, successful recovery from viral infection depends not 
only on the efficacy of the immune response to limit viral infection, but 
also on timely downregulation to prevent ongoing autoimmune injury 
to the host.
The secondary acquired immune response is specifically addressed 
against the viral proteins and can include both T-cell infiltration 
and antibodies to viral proteins. If unchecked, the acquired immune 
response can perpetuate secondary cardiac damage. Ongoing cytokine 
release activates matrix metalloproteinases that can disrupt the collagen 
and elastin scaffolding of the heart, potentiating ventricular dilation. 
Stimulation of pro-fibrotic factors leads to pathologic interstitial fibrosis. 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1784
TABLE 254-4  Major Causes of Dilated Cardiomyopathy  
(with Common Examples)
Inflammatory Myocarditis
Infective
  Viral (coxsackie,a adenovirus,a HIV, hepatitis C)
  Parasitic (T. cruzi—Chagas’ disease, trypanosomiasis, toxoplasmosis)
  Bacterial (diphtheria)
  Spirochetal (Borrelia burgdorferi—Lyme disease)
  Rickettsial (Q fever)
  Fungal (with systemic infection)
Noninfective
  Granulomatous inflammatory disease
    Sarcoidosis
    Giant cell myocarditis
  Eosinophilic myocarditis
  Polymyositis, dermatomyositis
  Collagen vascular disease
  Checkpoint inhibitor chemotherapy
  Transplant rejection
Toxic
Alcohol
Catecholamines: amphetamines, cocaine
Chemotherapeutic agents (anthracyclines, trastuzumab)
Interferon
Other therapeutic agents (hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine)
Drugs of misuse (emetine, anabolic steroids)
Heavy metals: lead, mercury
Occupational exposure: hydrocarbons, arsenicals
Metabolica
Nutritional deficiencies: thiamine, selenium, carnitine
Electrolyte deficiencies: calcium, phosphate, magnesium
Endocrinopathy
  Thyroid disease
  Pheochromocytoma
  Diabetes
Obesity
Hemochromatosis
Inherited Metabolic Pathway Defectsa
Familiala (See Table 254-3)
Skeletal and cardiac myopathy
Dystrophin-related dystrophy (Duchenne’s, Becker’s)
Mitochondrial myopathies (e.g., Kearns-Sayre syndrome)
Arrhythmogenic ventricular cardiomyopathy
Hemochromatosis
Associated with other systemic diseases
Susceptibility to immune-mediated myocarditis
Overlap with Nondilated Cardiomyopathy
“Minimally dilated cardiomyopathy”
Hemochromatosisa
Amyloidosisa
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathya (“burned-out”)
“Idiopathic”a
Miscellaneous (Shared Elements of Above Etiologies)
Peripartum cardiomyopathy
Left ventricular noncompactiona
Tachycardia-related cardiomyopathy
  Supraventricular arrhythmias with uncontrolled rate
  Very frequent nonsustained ventricular tachycardia or high premature 
ventricular complex burden
aSome specific cases can be linked now to specific genetic mutation in a familial 
cardiomyopathy; others with similar phenotypes that appear to be acquired or 
idiopathic may represent genetic factors not yet identified.
Some of the antibodies triggered through co-stimulation or molecular 
mimicry also recognize targets within the host myocyte, such as the 
β-adrenergic receptor, troponin, and Na+/K+ ATPase, but it remains 
unclear whether these antibodies contribute actively to cardiac dys-
function in humans or merely serve as markers of cardiac injury.
It is not known how long the viruses persist in the human heart, 
whether late persistence of the viral genome continues to be delete-
rious, or how often a dormant virus can again become pathogenic. 
Genomes of common viruses have frequently been detected in patients 
with clinical diagnoses of myocarditis or DCM, but there is little infor-
mation on how often these are present in patients without cardiac 
disease (see below). Further information is needed to understand the 
relative timing and contribution of infection, immune responses, and 
secondary adaptations in the progression of heart failure after viral 
myocarditis (Fig. 254-5).
Clinical Presentation of Viral Myocarditis 
Acute viral 
myocarditis often presents with symptoms and signs of heart failure. 
Some patients present with chest pain suggestive of pericarditis or 
acute myocardial infarction. Occasionally, the presentation is domi-
nated by atrial or ventricular tachyarrhythmias, or by pulmonary or 
systemic emboli from intracardiac thrombi. Electrocardiographic or 
echocardiographic abnormalities may also be detected incidentally 
during evaluation for other diagnoses. The typical patient with pre-
sumed viral myocarditis is a young to middle-aged adult who develops 
progressive dyspnea and weakness within a few days to weeks after a 
viral syndrome that was accompanied by fever and myalgias.
A small number of patients present with fulminant myocarditis, 
with rapid progression within hours from a severe febrile respiratory 
syndrome to cardiogenic shock that may involve multiple organ sys-
tems, leading to renal failure, hepatic failure, and coagulopathy. These 
patients are typically young adults who have recently been dismissed 
from urgent care settings with antibiotics for bronchitis or oseltamivir 
for viral syndromes, only to return within a few days in rapidly pro-
gressive cardiogenic shock. Prompt triage is vital to provide aggressive 
support with high-dose intravenous catecholamine therapy and some-
times with temporary mechanical circulatory support. Recognition of 
patients with this fulminant presentation is potentially life-saving as 
more than half can survive, with marked improvement demonstra-
ble within the first few weeks. The ejection fraction function of these 
patients often recovers to near-normal, although residual diastolic dys-
function may limit vigorous exercise for some survivors.
Chronic viral myocarditis is often invoked, but rarely proven, as a 
diagnosis when no other cause of DCM can be identified. However, 
many cases assumed to result from “silent” myocarditis will later be 
recognized as due to genetic causes or consumption of excess alcohol 
or illicit stimulant drugs. The proportion of chronic, DCM due to viral 
infection remains a subject of controversy.
Laboratory Evaluation for Myocarditis  The initial evaluation 
for suspected myocarditis includes an ECG, an echocardiogram, and 
serum levels of troponin and creatine phosphokinase fractions. Mag-
netic resonance imaging is increasingly used for the diagnosis of myo-
carditis, which is supported but not proven by evidence of increased 
tissue edema and gadolinium enhancement (Fig. 254-6), particularly in 
the mid-wall (as distinct from usual coronary artery territories).
Endomyocardial biopsy is not often indicated for the initial evaluation 
of suspected viral myocarditis unless ventricular tachyarrhythmias 
suggest possible etiologies of sarcoidosis or giant cell myocarditis. The 
indications, yield, and benefit of endomyocardial biopsy for evaluation 
of myocarditis or new-onset cardiomyopathy are not well-established. 
When biopsy is performed, the Dallas Criteria for myocarditis include 
lymphocytic infiltrate with evidence of myocyte necrosis (Fig. 254-7) and 
are negative in 80–90% of patients with clinical myocarditis. Negative 
Dallas Criteria can reflect sampling error or early resolution of lym-
phocytic infiltrates, but also the insensitivity of the test when inflam-
mation results from cytokines and antibody-mediated injury. Routine 
histologic examination of endomyocardial biopsy rarely reveals a 
specific infective etiology, such as toxoplasmosis or Cytomegalovirus. 
CHAPTER 254 Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
1785
Antibodies
Against pathogen
Against surface antigens
Against myocyte proteins
Antibodies
Against
pathogen
Lymphocytes
Cytokines
Entry into   myocytes
Chronic dilated
cardiomyopathy
Persistent or latent
infection
Delayed apoptosis
Myocyte lysis
Viral replication
and protein expression
Viremia
Infection
Immune Responses
Extracellular
Matrix 
FIGURE 254-5  Schematic diagram demonstrating the possible progression from infection through direct, 
secondary, and autoimmune responses to dilated cardiomyopathy. Most of the supporting evidence for this 
sequence is derived from animal models. It is not known to what degree persistent infection and/or ongoing 
immune responses contribute to ongoing myocardial injury in the chronic phase.
FIGURE 254-6  Magnetic resonance image of myocarditis showing the typical mid-
wall location (arrow) for late gadolinium enhancement from cardiac inflammation 
and scarring. (Image courtesy of Ron Blankstein, MD, and Marcelo Di Carli, MD, 
Division of Nuclear Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
FIGURE 254-7  Acute myocarditis. Microscopic image of an endomyocardial 
biopsy showing massive infiltration with mononuclear cells and occasional 
eosinophils associated with clear myocyte damage. The myocyte nuclei are 
enlarged and reactive. Such extensive involvement of the myocardium would lead 
to extensive replacement fibrosis even if the inflammatory response could be 
suppressed. Hematoxylin and eosin–stained section, 200× original magnification. 
(Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
Immunohistochemistry of myocardial biopsy samples is commonly 
used to identify active lymphocyte subtypes and may also detect 
upregulation of HLA antigens and the presence of complement com-
ponents attributed to inflammation, but the specificity and significance 
of these findings are uncertain.
An increase in circulating viral titers between acute and convales-
cent blood samples supports a diagnosis of acute viral myocarditis with 
potential spontaneous improvement. There is no established role for 
measuring circulating anti-heart antibodies, which may be the result, 
rather than a cause, of myocardial injury and have been found also 
in patients with coronary artery disease and genetic cardiomyopathy.
Patients with recent or ongoing viral syndromes have been classified 
into three levels of myocarditis diagnosis. (1) Possible subclinical acute 
myocarditis is diagnosed when a typical viral syndrome occurs without 
cardiac symptoms, but with elevated biomarkers of cardiac injury, 
ECG suggestive of acute injury, reduced left ventricular ejection frac-
tion or regional wall motion abnormality. (2) Probable acute myocarditis 
is diagnosed when the above criteria are met 
and accompanied by cardiac symptoms, such 
as shortness of breath or chest pain, which can 
result from pericarditis or myocarditis. When 
clinical findings of pericarditis are accompanied 
by elevated troponin or CK-MB or abnormal 
cardiac wall motion, the terms perimyocardi-
tis or myopericarditis are sometimes used. (3) 
Definite myocarditis is diagnosed when there 
is histologic or immunohistologic evidence of 
inflammation on endomyocardial biopsy (see 
below) and does not require any other labo-
ratory or clinical criteria. These have not been 
revised to include findings from MRI.
■
■SPECIFIC VIRUSES IMPLICATED IN 
MYOCARDITIS
In humans, viruses are often suspected but 
rarely proven to be the direct cause of clinical 
myocarditis. First implicated was the picor-
navirus family of RNA viruses, principally 
the enteroviruses, coxsackie virus, echovirus, 
and poliovirus. Influenza, another RNA virus, 
is implicated with varying frequency every 
winter and spring as epitopes change. Of the 
DNA viruses, adenovirus, vaccinia (small-
pox vaccine), and the herpesviruses (varicella 
zoster, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, 
and human herpesvirus 6 [HHV6]) are well- 
recognized to cause myocarditis but also occur 
commonly in the healthy population. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
detects viral genomes in the majority of patients with DCM, but also in 
normal “control” hearts. Most often detected are parvovirus B19 and 
HHV6, which may affect the cardiovascular system, in part, through 
infection of vascular endothelial cells. However, their contribution to 
chronic cardiomyopathy is uncertain, as serologic evidence of exposure 
is present in many children and most adults.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was associated with an inci-
dence of DCM of 1–2%; however, with the advent of highly active 
antiretroviral therapy (HAART), HIV has been associated with a sig-
nificantly lower incidence of cardiac disease. Cardiomyopathy in HIV 
may result from cardiac involvement with other associated viruses, 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1786 such as cytomegalovirus and hepatitis C, as well as by HIV directly. 
Antiviral drugs to treat chronic HIV can cause cardiomyopathy, both 
directly and through drug hypersensitivity. The clinical picture may 
be complicated by pericardial effusions and pulmonary hypertension. 
There is a high frequency of lymphocytic myocarditis found at autopsy, 
and viral particles have been demonstrated in the myocardium in some 
cases, consistent with direct causation.
Hepatitis C has been repeatedly implicated in cardiomyopathy, par-
ticularly in Germany and Asia. Cardiac dysfunction may improve after 
interferon therapy. As this cytokine itself often depresses cardiac func-
tion transiently, careful coordination of administration and ongoing 
clinical evaluation are critical. The effect of new treatments for hepatitis C 
on cardiac function has not yet been well-studied. Involvement of the heart 
with hepatitis B is uncommon, but can be seen when associated with 
systemic vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa).
Additional viruses implicated specifically in myocarditis include 
mumps, respiratory syncytial virus, the arboviruses (dengue fever and yellow 
fever), and arenaviruses (Lassa fever). However, for any serious infection, 
the systemic inflammatory response can cause nonspecific depression 
of cardiac function, which is generally reversible if the patient survives.
■
■THERAPY
There is currently no specific therapy recommended during any 
stage of viral myocarditis. During acute infection, therapy with anti- 
inflammatory or immunosuppressive medications is avoided, as their 
use has been shown to increase viral replication and myocardial injury 
in animal models. Therapy with specific antiviral agents (such as 
oseltamivir) has not been studied in relation to cardiac involvement. 
There is ongoing investigation into the impact of antiviral therapy to 
treat chronic viral persistence identified from endomyocardial biopsy. 
Large trials of immunosuppressive therapy for Dallas Criteria–positive 
myocarditis have been negative. There are some initial encouraging 
results and ongoing investigations with immunosuppressive ther-
apy for immune-mediated myocarditis defined by immunohistologic 
criteria on biopsy or circulating anti-heart antibodies in the absence 
of myocardial viral genomes. However, neither antiviral nor anti- 
inflammatory therapies are currently recommended. Until we have a 
better understanding of the phases of viral myocarditis and the effects 
of targeted therapies, treatment will continue to be guided by general 
recommendations for DCM.
Parasitic Myocarditis  Chagas’ disease is the third most common 
parasitic infection in the world and the most common infective cause of 
cardiomyopathy. The protozoan T. cruzi is transmitted by the bite of the 
reduviid bug, endemic in the rural areas of South and Central America. 
Transmission can also occur through blood transfusion, organ dona-
tion, from mother to fetus, and occasionally orally. While programs to 
eradicate the insect vector have decreased the prevalence from about 
16 million to <10 million in South America, cases are increasingly recog-
nized in Western developed countries (see Global Perspectives below).
Multiple pathogenic mechanisms are implicated. The parasite 
itself can cause myocyte lysis and primary neuronal damage. Specific 
immune responses may recognize the parasites or related antigens 
and lead to chronic immune activation in the absence of detectable 
parasites. Molecular techniques have revealed persistent parasite DNA 
fragments in infected individuals. Further evidence for persistent infec-
tion is the eruption of parasitic skin lesions during immunosuppression 
after cardiac transplantation. As with viral myocarditis, the relative 
roles of persistent infection and of secondary autoimmune injury have 
not been resolved (Fig. 254-5). An additional factor in the progression 
of Chagas’ disease is the autonomic dysfunction and microvascular 
damage that may contribute to cardiac and gastrointestinal disease.
The acute phase of Chagas’ disease with parasitemia is usually 
unrecognized, but in fewer than 5% of cases, it presents clinically 
within a few weeks of infection, with nonspecific symptoms or 
occasionally with acute myocarditis and meningoencephalitis. In the 
absence of antiparasitic therapy, the silent stage progresses slowly 
for >10–30 years in almost half of patients to manifest chronically in 
the cardiac and gastrointestinal systems. Features typical of Chagas’ 
disease are conduction system abnormalities, particularly sinus node 
and AV node dysfunction and right bundle branch block. Atrial fibril-
lation and ventricular tachyarrhythmias also occur. Small ventricular 
aneurysms are common, particularly at the ventricular apex. These 
dilated ventricles are particularly thrombogenic, giving rise to pul-
monary and systemic emboli. Xenodiagnosis, detection of the parasite 
itself, is rarely performed. The serologic tests for specific IgG antibod-
ies against the trypanosome lack sufficient specificity and sensitivity, 
requiring two separate positive tests required to make a diagnosis.
Treatment of the advanced stages focuses on clinical manifestations 
of the disease and includes heart failure medications, pacemaker- 
defibrillators, and anticoagulation. The most common antiparasitic 
therapies are benznidazole and nifurtimox which have been effective 
in children with chronic T. cruzi infection. Both drugs are associated 
with multiple severe reactions, including dermatitis, gastrointestinal 
distress, and neuropathy. Moreover, in a large trial of adults with estab-
lished Chagas’ cardiomyopathy, benznidazole did not prevent disease 
progression, leaving the role of antiparasitic therapy unclear. Survival 
is <30% at 5 years after the onset of overt clinical heart failure. Patients 
without major extracardiac disease have occasionally undergone trans-
plantation, after which they require surveillance testing and recurrent 
antiparasitic therapy to suppress reactivation of infection.
African trypanosomiasis infection results from the tsetse fly bite and 
can occur in travelers exposed during trips to Africa. The West African 
form is caused by Trypanosoma brucei gambiense and progresses silently 
over years. The East African form caused by T. brucei rhodesiense can 
progress rapidly through perivascular infiltration to myocarditis and 
heart failure, with frequent arrhythmias. The diagnosis is made by 
identification of trypanosomes in blood, lymph nodes, or other affected 
sites. Antiparasitic therapy has limited efficacy and is determined 
by the specific type and the stage of infection (hemolymphatic or 
neurologic).
Toxoplasmosis is contracted through undercooked infected beef or 
pork, transmission from feline feces, organ transplantation, transfu-
sion, or maternal-fetal transmission. Immunocompromised hosts are 
most likely to experience reactivation of latent infection from cysts, 
found in up to 40% of autopsies of patients dying from HIV infection. 
Toxoplasmosis may present with encephalitis or chorioretinitis and, 
in the heart, can cause myocarditis, pericardial effusion, constrictive 
pericarditis, and heart failure. The diagnosis in an immunocompetent 
patient is made when the IgM is positive and the IgG becomes positive 
later. Active toxoplasmosis may be suspected in an immunocompro-
mised patient with myocarditis and a positive IgG titer for toxoplas-
mosis, particularly when avidity testing identifies high specificity of 
the antibody. Fortuitous sampling occasionally reveals the cysts in the 
myocardium. Combination therapy can include pyrimethamine and 
sulfadiazine or clindamycin.
Trichinellosis is caused by Trichinella spiralis larva ingested with 
undercooked meat. Larvae migrating into skeletal muscles cause myal-
gias, weakness, and fever. Periorbital and facial edema and conjuncti-
val and retinal hemorrhage may also be seen. Although the larva may 
occasionally invade the myocardium, clinical heart failure is rare and, 
when observed, attributed to the eosinophilic inflammatory response. 
The diagnosis is made from the specific serum antibody and is further 
supported by the presence of eosinophilia. Treatment includes anti-
helminthic drugs (albendazole, mebendazole) and glucocorticoids if 
inflammation is severe.
Cardiac involvement with Echinococcus is rare, but cysts can form 
and rupture in the myocardium and pericardium.
Bacterial Infections  Most bacterial infections can involve the 
heart occasionally through direct invasion and abscess formation, 
but do so rarely. More commonly, systemic inflammatory responses 
depress contractility in severe infection and sepsis. Diphtheria specifi-
cally affects the heart in almost one-half of cases, and cardiac involve-
ment is the most common cause of death in patients with this infection. 
The prevalence of vaccines has shifted the incidence of diphtheria from 
children worldwide to countries without routine immunization and to 
older populations who have lost their immunity. The bacillus releases 
CHAPTER 254 Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
1787
a toxin that impairs protein synthesis and may particularly affect the 
conduction system. The specific antitoxin should be administered as 
soon as possible, with higher priority than antibiotic therapy. Other 
systemic bacterial infections that can involve the heart include brucellosis, 
chlamydophila, legionella, meningococcus, mycoplasma, psittacosis, and 
salmonellosis, for which specific treatment is directed at the systemic 
infection.
Clostridial infections cause myocardial damage from the released 
toxin. Gas bubbles can be detected in the myocardium, and occasion-
ally abscesses can form in the myocardium and pericardium. Streptococ-
cal infection with β-hemolytic streptococci is most commonly associated 
with acute rheumatic fever and is characterized by inflammation and 
fibrosis of cardiac valves and systemic connective tissue, but it can also 
lead to a myocarditis with focal or diffuse infiltrates of mononuclear 
cells.
Tuberculosis can involve the myocardium directly as well as through 
tuberculous pericarditis, but rarely does so when the disease is treated 
with antibiotics. Whipple’s disease is caused by Tropheryma whipplei. The 
usual manifestations are in the gastrointestinal tract, but pericarditis, 
coronary arteritis, valvular lesions, and occasionally clinical heart fail-
ure may also occur. Multidrug antituberculous regimens are effective, 
but the disease tends to relapse even with appropriate treatment.
Other Infections  Spirochetal myocarditis has been diagnosed 
from myocardial biopsies containing Borrelia burgdorferi that causes 
Lyme disease. Lyme carditis most often presents with arthritis and 
conduction system disease that resolves within 1–2 weeks of antibiotic 
treatment, only rarely implicated in chronic heart failure. Fungal myo-
carditis can occur due to hematogenous or direct spread of infection 
from other sites, as has been described for aspergillosis, actinomyco-
sis, blastomycosis, candidiasis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, 
histoplasmosis, and mucormycosis. However, cardiac involvement is 
rarely the dominant clinical feature of these infections. The rickettsial 
infections, Q fever, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and scrub typhus are fre-
quently accompanied by ECG changes, but most clinical manifestations 
relate to systemic vascular involvement.
■
■NONINFECTIVE MYOCARDITIS
Myocardial inflammation can occur without apparent preceding infec-
tion. The paradigm of noninfective inflammatory myocarditis is car-
diac transplant rejection, from which we have learned that myocardial 
depression can develop and reverse quickly, that noncellular mediators 
such as antibodies and cytokines play a major role in addition to lym-
phocytes, and that myocardial antigens are exposed by prior physical 
injury and viral infection.
The most commonly diagnosed noninfective inflammation is gran-
ulomatous myocarditis, including both sarcoidosis and giant cell 
myocarditis. Sarcoidosis, as discussed in Chap. 360, is a multisystem 
disease most commonly affecting the lungs. Although classically 
presenting with higher prevalence in young African-American men, 
the epidemiology appears to be changing, with increasing recogni-
tion of sarcoidosis in Caucasian patients in nonurban areas. Patients 
with pulmonary sarcoid are at high risk for cardiac involvement, but 
cardiac sarcoidosis also occurs without clinical lung disease. Regional 
clustering of the disease supports the suspicion that the granulomatous 
reaction is triggered by an infectious or environmental allergen not yet 
identified.
The sites and density of cardiac granulomata, the time course, 
and the degree of extracardiac involvement are remarkably variable. 
Patients may present with rapid-onset heart failure and ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias, conduction block, chest pain syndromes, or minor 
cardiac findings in the setting of ocular involvement, an infiltrative 
skin rash, or a nonspecific febrile illness. They may also present less 
acutely after months to years of fluctuating cardiac symptoms. When 
ventricular tachycardia or conduction block dominates the initial pre-
sentation of heart failure without coronary artery disease, suspicion 
should be high for these granulomatous myocarditides.
Depending on the time course, the ventricles may appear restric-
tive or dilated. There is often right ventricular predominance of both 
dilation and ventricular arrhythmias, sometimes initially attributed to 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Small ventricular 
aneurysms are common. Computed tomography of the chest often 
reveals pulmonary lymphadenopathy even in the absence of clinical 
lung disease. Metabolic imaging (positron emission tomography 
[PET]) of the whole chest can highlight active sarcoid lesions that are 
avid for glucose. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the heart can 
identify areas likely to be inflammatory. To rule out chronic infections, 
such as tuberculosis or histoplasmosis as the cause of adenopathy, the 
diagnosis usually requires pathologic confirmation. Biopsy of enlarged 
mediastinal nodes may provide the highest yield. The scattered 
granulomata of sarcoidosis can easily be missed on cardiac biopsy 
(Fig. 254-8).
Immunosuppressive treatment for sarcoidosis is initiated with high-
dose glucocorticoids, which are often more effective for arrhythmias 
than for the heart failure. Patients with sarcoid lesions that persist or 
recur during tapering of corticosteroids are considered candidates for 
other immunosuppressive therapies, frequently with agents also used 
for cardiac transplantation. Pacemakers and implantable defibrilla-
tors are generally indicated to prevent life-threatening heart block or 
ventricular tachycardia, respectively. Because the inflammation often 
resolves into extensive fibrosis that impairs cardiac function and pro-
vides pathways for reentrant arrhythmias, the prognosis for improve-
ment is best when the granulomata are not extensive and the ejection 
fraction is not severely reduced.
Giant cell myocarditis is less common than sarcoidosis, but accounts 
for 10–20% of biopsy-positive cases of myocarditis. Giant cell myo-
carditis typically presents with rapidly progressive heart failure and 
tachyarrhythmias. Diffuse granulomatous lesions are surrounded by 
extensive inflammatory infiltrate unlikely to be missed on endomyo-
cardial biopsy, often with eosinophilic infiltration. Associated condi-
tions are thymomas, thyroiditis, pernicious anemia, other autoimmune 
diseases, and occasionally recent infections. Glucocorticoid therapy 
is less effective than for sarcoidosis and is sometimes combined with 
other immunosuppressive agents. The course is often of rapid dete-
rioration requiring urgent mechanical support or transplantation. 
Although the severity of presentation and myocardial histology are 
more fulminant than with sarcoidosis, the occasional finding of giant 
cell myocarditis after sarcoidosis suggests that they may in some cases 
represent different stages of the same disease spectrum.
Eosinophilic myocarditis can be an important manifestation of the 
hypereosinophilic syndrome, which in Western countries is often con-
sidered idiopathic, although in Mediterranean and African countries, is 
FIGURE 254-8  Sarcoidosis. Microscopic image of an endomyocardial biopsy 
showing a noncaseating granuloma and associated interstitial fibrosis typical 
of sarcoidosis. No microorganisms were present on special stains, and no 
foreign material was identified. Hematoxylin and eosin–stained section, 200× 
original magnification. (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of 
Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1788 associated with antecedent infection. It may also be seen with systemic 
eosinophilic syndromes such as Churg-Strauss syndrome or malignan-
cies. Hypersensitivity myocarditis is often an unexpected diagnosis, made 
when the biopsy reveals infiltration with lymphocytes and mononu-
clear cells with a high proportion of eosinophils. Most commonly, the 
reaction is attributed to antibiotics, particularly those taken chronically, 
but thiazides, anticonvulsants, indomethacin, and methyldopa have 
also been implicated. Occasional associations with the smallpox vac-
cine have been reported. Although the circulating eosinophil count 
may be slightly elevated in hypersensitivity myocarditis, it does not 
reach the high levels of the hypereosinophilic syndrome. High-dose 
glucocorticoids and discontinuation of the trigger agent can be curative 
for hypersensitivity myocarditis. A severe lymphocytic myocarditis has 
been seen with combination of immune checkpoint inhibitors (see toxic 
cardiomyopathy below).
Myocarditis is often associated with systemic inflammatory dis-
eases, such as polymyositis and dermatomyositis, which affect skeletal 
and cardiac muscle. Although noninfective inflammatory myocarditis 
is sometimes included in the differential diagnosis of cardiac findings 
in patients with connective tissue disease such as systemic lupus 
erythematosus, pericarditis, vasculitis, pulmonary hypertension, and 
accelerated coronary artery disease are more common cardiac manifes-
tations of connective tissue disease.
■
■PERIPARTUM CARDIOMYOPATHY
Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) develops during the last trimester 
or within the first 6 months after pregnancy, affecting between 1:2000 
and 1:4000 deliveries in the United Sates. Risk factors are increased 
maternal age, increased parity, twin pregnancy, malnutrition, use of 
tocolytic therapy for premature labor, and preeclampsia or toxemia of 
pregnancy. Several of these risk factors contribute to anti-angiogenic 
signaling through secreted vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
inhibitors, such as soluble FLT1 (sFLT1). Recent animal and human 
studies have confirmed the role of decreased angiogenic reserve in the 
pathogenesis of PPCM, which may be rescued by correcting the angio-
genic imbalance. Another recently proposed mechanism invokes an 
abnormal prolactin cleavage fragment, which is induced by oxidative 
stress and also affects angiogenesis; this observation has led to prelim-
inary investigation of bromocriptine as possible therapy.
However, other processes also contribute to PPCM. Heart failure 
early after delivery was previously common in Nigeria, when the cus-
tom for new mothers included salt ingestion while reclining on a warm 
bed, which likely impaired mobilization of the excess circulating vol-
ume after delivery. In the Western world, lymphocytic myocarditis has 
sometimes been found on myocardial biopsy. This inflammation has 
been hypothesized to reflect increased susceptibility to viral myocardi-
tis or an autoimmune myocarditis due to cross-reactivity of anti-uterine 
antibodies against cardiac muscle.
As the increased circulatory demand of pregnancy can aggravate 
other cardiac disease that was clinically unrecognized, it is crucial to 
the diagnosis of PPCM that there be no evidence for a preexisting car-
diac disorder. By contrast, heart failure presenting earlier in pregnancy 
has been termed pregnancy-associated cardiomyopathy (PACM). 
Both PPCM and PACM have been found in some families with other 
presentations of DCM. As in familial and sporadic DCM, truncating 
mutations in TTN are present in 15% of patients with PPCM and are 
associated with systolic dysfunction that persists. Pregnancy may, thus, 
represent an environmental trigger for accelerated phenotypic expres-
sion of genetic and other cardiomyopathies.
■
■TOXIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
Cardiotoxicity has been reported with multiple environmental and 
pharmacologic agents. Often these associations are seen only with very 
high levels of exposure or acute overdoses, in which acute electrocar-
diographic and hemodynamic abnormalities may reflect both direct 
drug effect and systemic toxicity.
Alcohol is the most common toxin implicated in chronic DCM. 
Excess consumption may contribute to more than 10% of cases of heart 
failure, including exacerbation of cases with other primary etiologies 
such as valvular disease or previous infarction. Toxicity is attributed both 
to alcohol and to its primary metabolite, acetaldehyde. Polymorphisms 
of the genes encoding alcohol dehydrogenase and the angiotensin-
converting enzyme may influence the likelihood of alcoholic cardio-
myopathy in an individual with excess consumption. Superimposed 
vitamin deficiencies and toxic alcohol additives are rarely implicated 
currently. The alcohol consumption necessary to produce cardiomy-
opathy in an otherwise normal heart has been estimated to be five to 
six drinks (about 4 ounces of pure ethanol) daily for 5–10 years, but 
frequent binge drinking may also be sufficient. Many patients with 
alcoholic cardiomyopathy are fully functional in their daily lives with-
out apparent stigmata of alcoholism. The cardiac impairment in severe 
alcoholic cardiomyopathy is the sum of both permanent damage and a 
substantial component that is reversible after cessation of alcohol con-
sumption. Atrial fibrillation occurs commonly both early in the disease 
(“holiday heart”) and in advanced stages. Medical therapy includes 
neurohormonal antagonists and diuretics as needed for fluid man-
agement. Withdrawal should be supervised to avoid exacerbations of 
heart failure or arrhythmias, and ongoing support arranged. Even with 
severe disease, marked improvement can occur within 3–6 months of 
abstinence. Implantable defibrillators are generally deferred until an 
adequate period of abstinence, after which they may not be necessary 
if the ejection fraction has improved. With continued consumption, the 
prognosis is grim.
Cocaine, amphetamines, and related catecholaminergic stimulants can 
produce chronic cardiomyopathy as well as acute ischemia and tach-
yarrhythmias. Pathology reveals microinfarcts consistent with small 
vessel ischemia, similar to those seen with pheochromocytoma.
Chemotherapy agents are the most common drugs implicated in 
toxic cardiomyopathy. Judicious use of these drugs requires balancing 
the risks of the malignancy and the risks of cardiotoxicity, as many 
cancers have a chronic course with better prognosis than heart failure.
Anthracyclines (e.g., doxorubicin) cause characteristic histologic 
changes of vacuolar degeneration and myofibrillar loss. Generation 
of reactive oxygen species involving heme compounds is currently 
the favored explanation for myocyte injury and fibrosis. Risk for car-
diotoxicity increases with higher doses, preexisting cardiac disease, 
extremes of age, concomitant chemotherapy, or chest irradiation and 
in women. Although cardiomyopathy has frequently been considered 
to occur late after exposure, a recent study shows that systolic dys-
function is usually evident within 1 year after anthracycline exposure 
among adult patients who develop cardiomyopathy. Doxorubicin 
cardiotoxicity generally results in minimal ventricular dilation, per-
haps due to accompanying fibrosis. Thus, the stroke volume may be 
severely reduced with an ejection fraction of 30–40%, in contrast to 
the hemodynamic compensation possible in a dilated ventricle typical 
of other heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Therapy includes 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and β-adrenergic blocking 
agents, with careful suppression of “inappropriate” sinus tachycardia, 
and attention to postural hypotension that can occur in these patients. 
Once thought to have an inexorable downward course, many patients 
with doxorubicin cardiotoxicity improve with careful management to 
near-normal clinical function, particularly if additional insults such 
as hypertension or supraventricular tachycardias can be avoided. The 
course differs for patients receiving these drugs before puberty, in 
whom inadequate growth of the heart may lead to inexorable heart 
failure by the time the patient reaches the early twenties.
Trastuzumab (Herceptin) is a monoclonal antibody that interferes 
with human epidermal growth receptor 2 (HER2) crucial for some 
tumor growth and for cardiac adaptation. The incidence of cardiotoxic-
ity is lower than for anthracyclines but enhanced by coadministration 
with them. Although considered to be more often reversible, tras-
tuzumab cardiotoxicity does not always resolve, and some patients 
progress to clinical heart failure and death. As with anthracycline 
cardiotoxicity, therapy is as usual for heart failure, but it is not clear 
whether the spontaneous rate of improvement is enhanced by neu-
rohormonal antagonists. The cardiotoxic effects of other recently 
introduced anti-HER2 therapies (e.g., pertuzumab) are similar to that 
caused by trastuzumab.
CHAPTER 254 Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
1789
Cardiotoxicity with cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide generally occurs 
acutely and with very high doses. 5-Fluorouracil, cisplatin, and some 
other alkylating agents can cause recurrent coronary spasm that 
occasionally leads to depressed contractility. Acute administration of 
interferon-α can cause hypotension and arrhythmias. Clinical heart fail-
ure occurring during repeated chronic administration usually resolves 
after discontinuation.
Many small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors that affect VEGF 
are under use for different malignancies. Although these agents are 
“targeted” at specific tumor receptors or pathways, the biologic con-
servation of signaling pathways can cause these inhibitors to have 
“off-target” effects that include the cardiovascular system and as a 
group are associated with a ~2.7-fold increased risk of heart failure. 
Recognition of cardiotoxicity during therapy with these agents is 
complicated because they occasionally cause peripheral fluid accu-
mulation (ankle edema, periorbital swelling, pleural effusions) due to 
local factors rather than elevated central venous pressures. Therapeutic 
approaches include withdrawal of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor (when 
possible) and substitution with a congener (when available), as well as 
conventional treatment for heart failure.
Proteasome inhibitors used to treat multiple myeloma are associated 
with an increased risk of heart failure. The more potent agent, carfil-
zomib, appears more cardiotoxic than bortezomib.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as ipilimumab and nivolumab, 
are associated with multisystem autoimmune inflammatory toxicities 
(e.g., thyroiditis, hypophysitis, pancreatitis, and pneumonitis) and 
rarely myocarditis. However, combination therapy with two check-
point inhibitors can cause fulminant myocarditis with associated sys-
tolic dysfunction, AV block, and ventricular tachycardia within weeks 
after initial chemotherapy. This presentation has been accompanied by 
acute skeletal myocarditis and rapid progression to death.
Other therapeutic drugs that can cause cardiotoxicity during 
chronic use include hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, emetine, and 
antiretroviral therapies.
Toxic exposures can cause arrhythmias or respiratory injury acutely 
during accidents. Chronic exposures implicated in cardiotoxicity 
include hydrocarbons, fluorocarbons, arsenicals, lead, and mercury.
■
■METABOLIC CAUSES OF CARDIOMYOPATHY
Endocrine disorders affect multiple organ systems, including the heart. 
Hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism do not often cause clinical heart 
failure in an otherwise normal heart, but commonly exacerbate heart 
failure. Clinical signs of thyroid disease may be masked, so tests of 
thyroid function are part of the routine evaluation of cardiomyopathy. 
Hyperthyroidism should always be considered with new-onset atrial 
fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia or atrial fibrillation in which the 
rapid ventricular response is difficult to control. The most common 
current reason for thyroid abnormalities in the cardiac population is 
the treatment of tachyarrhythmias with amiodarone, a drug with sub-
stantial iodine content. Hypothyroidism should be treated with very 
slow escalation of thyroid supplements to avoid exacerbating tachyar-
rhythmias and heart failure. Hyperthyroidism and heart failure create 
a dangerous combination that merits very close supervision, often hos-
pitalization, during titration of antithyroid medications, during which 
decompensation of heart failure may occur precipitously and fatally.
Pheochromocytoma is rare, but should be considered when a patient 
has heart failure and very labile blood pressure and heart rate, 
sometimes with episodic palpitations (Chap. 380). Patients with 
pheochromocytoma often have postural hypotension. In addition to 
α-adrenergic receptor antagonists, definitive therapy requires surgical 
extirpation. Very high renin states, such as those caused by renal artery 
stenosis, can lead to modest depression in ejection fraction with little 
or no ventricular dilation and markedly labile symptoms with flash 
pulmonary edema, related to sudden shifts in vascular tone and intra-
vascular volume.
Controversies remain regarding whether diabetes and obesity are suf-
ficient to cause cardiomyopathy. Most heart failure in diabetes results 
from epicardial coronary disease, with further increase in coronary 
artery risk due to accompanying hypertension and renal dysfunction. 
Cardiomyopathy may result in part from insulin resistance and 
increased advanced-glycosylation end products, which impair both 
systolic and diastolic function. However, much of the dysfunction can 
be attributed to scattered focal ischemia resulting from distal coronary 
artery tapering and limited microvascular perfusion even without 
proximal focal stenoses. Diabetes is a typical factor in heart failure with 
“preserved” ejection fraction, along with hypertension, advanced age, 
and female gender.
The existence of a cardiomyopathy due to obesity is generally 
accepted. In addition to cardiac involvement from associated diabetes, 
hypertension, and vascular inflammation of the metabolic syndrome, 
obesity alone is associated with impaired excretion of excess volume 
load, which, over time, can lead to increased wall stress and secondary 
adaptive neurohumoral responses. Fluid retention may be aggravated 
by large fluid intake and the rapid clearance of natriuretic peptides by 
adipose tissue. In the absence of another obvious cause of cardiomy-
opathy in an obese patient with systolic dysfunction without marked 
ventricular dilation, effective weight reduction is often associated with 
major improvement in ejection fraction and clinical function. Improve-
ment in cardiac function has been described after successful bariatric 
surgery, although all major surgical therapy poses increased risk for 
patients with heart failure. Postoperative malabsorption and nutri-
tional deficiencies, such as calcium and phosphate deficiencies, may be 
particularly deleterious for patients with cardiomyopathy.
Nutritional deficiencies can occasionally cause DCM but are not 
commonly implicated in developed Western countries. Beri-beri heart 
disease due to thiamine deficiency can result from poor nutrition in 
undernourished populations and in patients deriving most of their 
calories from alcohol, and has been reported in teenagers subsisting 
only on highly processed foods. This disease is initially a vasodilated 
state with very high output heart failure that can later progress to a 
low output state; thiamine repletion can lead to prompt recovery of car-
diovascular function. Abnormalities in carnitine metabolism can cause 
dilated or restrictive cardiomyopathies, usually in children. Deficiency 
of trace elements such as selenium can cause cardiomyopathy (Keshan’s 
disease).
Calcium is essential for excitation-contraction coupling. Chronic 
deficiencies of calcium, such as can occur with hypoparathyroidism 
(particularly postsurgical) or intestinal dysfunction (from diarrheal 
syndromes and following extensive resection), can cause severe 
chronic heart failure that responds over days or weeks to vigorous 
calcium repletion. Phosphate is a component of high-energy compounds 
needed for efficient energy transfer and multiple signaling pathways. 
Hypophosphatemia can develop during starvation and early refeeding 
following a prolonged fast, and occasionally during hyperalimentation. 
Magnesium is a cofactor for thiamine-dependent reactions and for the 
sodium-potassium adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), but hypo-
magnesemia rarely becomes sufficiently profound to cause clinical 
cardiomyopathy.
Hemochromatosis is variably classified as a metabolic or storage 
disease (Chap. 407). It is included among the causes of restrictive car-
diomyopathy, but the clinical presentation is often that of a DCM. The 
autosomal recessive form is related to the HFE gene. With up to 10% of 
the population heterozygous for one mutation, the clinical prevalence 
might be as high as 1 in 500. The lower observed rates highlight the 
limited penetrance of the disease, suggesting the role of additional 
genetic and environmental factors such as alcoholism affecting clinical 
expression. Hemochromatosis can also be acquired from iron overload 
due to hemolytic anemia and transfusions. Excess iron is deposited 
in the perinuclear compartment of cardiomyocytes, with resulting 
disruption of intracellular architecture and mitochondrial function. 
Diagnosis is easily made from measurement of serum iron and trans-
ferrin saturation, with a threshold of >60% for men and >45–50% for 
women. MRI can help to quantitate iron stores in the liver and heart, 
and endomyocardial biopsy tissue can be stained for iron (Fig. 254-9), 
which is particularly important if the patient has another cause for 
cardiomyopathy. If diagnosed early, hemochromatosis can often be 
managed by repeated phlebotomy to remove iron. For more severe iron 
overload, iron chelation therapy with desferrioxamine (deferoxamine) 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1790
A
B
LV
RV
FIGURE 254-10  Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. A. Cross-sectional slice of a pathology 
specimen removed at transplantation, showing severe dilation and thinning of the right ventricle (RV) 
with extensive fatty replacement of right ventricular myocardium. B. The remarkably thin right ventricular 
free wall is revealed by transillumination. LV, left ventricle. (Images courtesy of Gayle Winters, MD, and 
Richard Mitchell, MD, PhD, Division of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
FIGURE 254-9  Hemochromatosis. Microscopic image of an endomyocardial 
biopsy showing extensive iron deposition within the cardiac myocytes with the 
Prussian blue stain (400× original magnification). (Image courtesy of Robert 
Padera, MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
or deferasirox can help to improve cardiac function if myocyte loss and 
replacement fibrosis are not too severe.
Inborn disorders of metabolism occasionally present with DCM, 
although they are most often associated with restrictive cardiomyop-
athy (Table 254-4).
■
■FAMILIAL DCM
The genetic basis for cardiomyopathy is discussed in the section 
“Genetic Etiologies of Cardiomyopathy.” The recognized frequency 
of familial involvement in DCM has increased to over 30%. Mutations 
in TTN, encoding the giant sarcomeric protein titin, are the most com-
mon cause of DCM, accounting for up to 25% of familial disease. On 
average, men with TTN mutations develop cardiomyopathy a decade 
before women, without distinctive clinical features. Mutations in thick 
and thin filament genes account for ~8% of DCM and may manifest in 
early childhood.
The most recognizable familial cardiomyopathy syndromes with 
extracardiac manifestations are the muscular dystrophies. Both Duch-
enne’s and the milder Becker’s dystrophies result from abnormalities 
in the X-linked dystrophin gene of the sarcolemmal membrane. Skel-
etal myopathy is present in multiple other genetic cardiomyopathies 
(Table 254-3), some of which are associated with creatine kinase 
elevations.
Patients and families with a history of arrhythmias and/or conduc-
tion system disease which precede or supersede cardiomyopathy may 
have abnormalities of the nuclear membrane lamin proteins. While all 
dilated cardiomyopathies carry a risk of sudden 
death, a family history of cardiomyopathy with 
sudden death raises suspicion for a particularly 
arrhythmogenic mutation; affected family mem-
bers may be considered for implantable defibril-
lators even before meeting the reduced ejection 
fraction threshold for primary prevention of sud-
den death.
A prominent family history of sudden death or 
ventricular tachycardia before clinical cardiomy-
opathy suggests genetic defects in the desmoso-
mal proteins (Fig. 254-10). Originally described as 
affecting the right ventricle (arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy [ARVC]), this disorder 
(arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy) can affect either 
or both ventricles. Patients often present first with 
ventricular tachycardia. Genetic defects in pro-
teins of the desmosomal complex disrupt myocyte 
junctions and adhesions, leading to replacement of 
myocardium by deposits of fat. Thin ventricular walls may be recog-
nized on echocardiography but are better visualized on MRI. Because 
desmosomes are also important for elasticity of hair and skin, some of 
the defective desmosomal proteins are associated with striking “woolly 
hair” and thickened skin on the palms and soles. Implantable defibril-
lators are usually indicated to prevent sudden death. There is variable 
progression to right, left, or biventricular failure.
Left ventricular noncompaction is a condition of unknown prevalence 
that is increasingly revealed with the refinement of imaging techniques. 
The diagnostic criteria include the presence of multiple trabeculations 
in the left ventricle distal to the papillary muscles, creating a “spongy” 
appearance of the apex, but are increasingly recognized as non-specific 
findings in other cardiac diseases. Noncompaction has been associated 
with multiple genetic variants in the sarcomeric and other genes, such 
as TAZ (encoding tafazzin). The diagnosis may be made incidentally 
or in patients previously diagnosed with cardiomyopathy, in whom 
the criteria for noncompaction may appear and resolve with changing 
left ventricular size and function. The three cardinal clinical features of 
ventricular arrhythmias, embolic events, and heart failure are largely 
restricted to patients with concomitant systolic dysfunction. Treatment 
generally includes anticoagulation and early consideration for an 
implantable defibrillator, in addition to neurohormonal antagonists as 
indicated by stage of disease.
Some families inherit a susceptibility to viral-induced myocarditis. 
This propensity may relate to abnormalities in cell surface receptors, 
such as the coxsackie-adenovirus receptor, that bind viral proteins. 
Some may have partial homology with viral proteins such that an auto-
immune response is triggered against the myocardium.
Prognosis and therapy of familial DCM are dictated primarily by 
the stage of clinical disease and the risk for sudden death. In some 
cases, the familial etiology facilitates prognostic decisions, particularly 
regarding the likelihood of recovery after a new diagnosis, which is 
unlikely for familial disease. The rate of progression of disease is to 
some extent heritable, although marked variation can be seen. How-
ever, there have been cases of remarkable clinical remission after acute 
presentation, likely after a reversible additional insult, such as pro-
longed tachycardia or infective myocarditis.
■
■TAKOTSUBO CARDIOMYOPATHY
The apical ballooning syndrome, or stress-induced cardiomyopathy, 
occurs typically in older women after sudden intense emotional 
or physical stress. The ventricle shows global ventricular dilation 
with basal contraction, forming the shape of the narrow-necked jar 
(takotsubo) used in Japan to trap octopuses. Originally described in 
Japan, it is increasingly recognized elsewhere during emergency car-
diac catheterization and intensive care unit admissions for noncardiac 
conditions. Presentations include pulmonary edema, hypotension, and 
chest pain with ECG changes mimicking an acute infarction. The left 
ventricular dysfunction extends beyond a specific coronary artery dis-
tribution and generally resolves within days to weeks. Animal models 
CHAPTER 254 Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
1791
and ventricular biopsies suggest that this acute cardiomyopathy may 
result from intense sympathetic activation with heterogeneity of myo-
cardial autonomic innervation, diffuse microvascular spasm, and/or 
direct catecholamine toxicity. Coronary angiography may be required 
to rule out acute coronary occlusion. No therapies have been proven 
beneficial, but reasonable strategies include nitrates for pulmonary 
edema, intraaortic balloon pump if needed for low output, combined 
alpha and beta blockers rather than selective beta blockade if hemody-
namically stable, and magnesium for arrhythmias related to QT pro-
longation. Anticoagulation is generally withheld due to the occasional 
occurrence of ventricular rupture. While the prognosis is generally 
good, recurrences have been described in up to 10% of patients.
■
■IDIOPATHIC DCM
Idiopathic DCM is a diagnosis of exclusion, when all other known 
factors have been excluded. Approximately two-thirds of dilated car-
diomyopathies are still labeled as idiopathic; however, a substantial 
proportion of these may reflect unrecognized genetic disease. Contin-
ued reconsideration of etiology during chronic heart failure manage-
ment often reveals specific causes later in a patient’s course.
OVERLAPPING TYPES OF CARDIOMYOPATHY
The limitations of our phenotypic classification are revealed through 
the multiple overlaps between the etiologies and presentations of the 
three types. Cardiomyopathy with reduced systolic function but 
without severe dilation can represent early DCM, “minimally dilated 
cardiomyopathy,” or restrictive diseases without marked increases in 
ventricular wall thickness. For example, sarcoidosis and hemochro-
matosis can present as dilated or restrictive disease. Early stages of 
amyloidosis are often mistaken for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
Progression of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy into a “burned-out” 
phase occurs occasionally, with decreased contractility and modest 
ventricular dilation. Overlaps are particularly common with the inher-
ited metabolic disorders, which can present as any of the three major 
phenotypes (Fig. 254-4).
■
■DISORDERS OF METABOLIC PATHWAYS
Multiple genetic disorders of metabolic pathways can cause myo-
cardial disease, due to infiltration of abnormal products or cells con-
taining them between the myocytes, and storage disease, due to their 
accumulation within cells (see Tables 254-3, and 254-4). Hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy may be mimicked by the myocardium thickened with 
these abnormal products causing “pseudohypertrophy,” usually with 
an abnormally short PR interval. The pseudo-hypertrophic phenotype 
is most common, but restrictive and DCM may occur. Most of these 
diseases are diagnosed during childhood.
Fabry’s disease results from a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme 
alpha-galactosidase A caused by one of more than 160 mutations in 
GLA. This disorder of glycosphingolipid metabolism is an X-linked dis-
order that may also cause clinical disease in female carriers. Glycolipid 
accumulation may be limited to the cardiac tissues but usually also 
involves the skin, peripheral nerve, and kidney. Electron microscopy 
of endomyocardial biopsy tissue shows diagnostic vesicles contain-
ing concentric lamellar figures (Fig. 254-11). Diagnosis can be made 
through assessment of enzyme activity and/or GLA sequencing and is 
crucial because enzyme replacement can reduce abnormal deposits and 
improve cardiac and clinical function. The magnitude of clinical impact 
has not been well-established for this therapy, which requires frequent 
infusions of the enzyme at a cost of >$100,000 a year. Enzyme replace-
ment can also improve the course of Gaucher’s disease, in which cere-
broside-rich cells accumulate in multiple organs due to a deficiency of 
beta-glucosidase. Cerebroside-rich cells infiltrate the heart, which can 
also lead to a hemorrhagic pericardial effusion and valvular disease.
Glycogen storage diseases lead to accumulation of lysosomal stor-
age products and intracellular glycogen accumulation, particularly 
with glycogen storage disease type III, due to a defective debranching 
enzyme. There are >10 types of mucopolysaccharidoses, in which autoso-
mal recessive or X-linked deficiencies of lysosomal enzymes lead to the 
accumulation of glycosaminoglycans in the skeleton, nervous system, 
and occasionally the heart. With characteristic facies, short stature, and 
frequent cognitive impairment, most individuals are diagnosed early in 
childhood and die before adulthood.
Carnitine is an essential cofactor in long-chain fatty acid metab-
olism. Multiple defects have been described that lead to carnitine 
deficiency, causing intracellular lipid inclusions and restrictive or 
DCM, often presenting in children. Fatty acid oxidation requires many 
metabolic steps with specific enzymes that can be deficient, with com-
plex interactions with carnitine. Depending on the defect, cardiac and 
skeletal myopathy can be ameliorated with replacement of fatty acid 
intermediates and carnitine.
Two monogenic metabolic cardiomyopathies cause markedly 
increased ventricular wall thickness without an increase of muscle sub-
units or an increase in contractility. Mutations in the gamma-2 regula-
tory subunit of the adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein 
kinase important for glucose metabolism (PRKAG2) have been associ-
ated with a high prevalence of conduction abnormalities, such as AV 
block and ventricular preexcitation. Several defects have been reported 
in an X-linked lysosome-associated membrane protein (LAMP2). This 
defect can be maternally transmitted or sporadic and has occasionally 
been isolated to the heart, although it often leads to a syndrome of skel-
etal myopathy, mental retardation, and hepatic dysfunction referred to 
as Danon’s disease. Extreme left ventricular hypertrophy appears early, 
often in childhood, and can progress rapidly to end-stage heart failure 
with low ejection fraction. Electron microscopy of these metabolic dis-
orders shows that the myocytes are enlarged by multiple intracellular 
vacuoles of metabolic by-products.
RESTRICTIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is dominated by abnormal diastolic func-
tion, often with mildly decreased contractility and ejection fraction 
(usually >30–50%). Both atria are enlarged, sometimes massively. 
Modest left ventricular dilation can be present, usually with an 
end-diastolic dimension <6 cm. End-diastolic pressures are elevated 
in both ventricles, with preservation of cardiac output until late in the 
disease. Subtle exercise intolerance is usually the first symptom but is 
often not recognized until after clinical presentation with congestive 
symptoms. The restrictive diseases often present with relatively more 
right-sided symptoms, such as edema, abdominal discomfort, and 
ascites, although filling pressures are elevated in both ventricles. The 
cardiac impulse is less displaced than in DCM and less dynamic than 
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A fourth heart sound is more com-
mon than a third heart sound in sinus rhythm, but atrial fibrillation 
is common. Jugular venous pressures often show rapid Y descents 
and may increase during inspiration (positive Kussmaul’s sign). 
FIGURE 254-11  Fabry’s disease. Transmission electron micrograph of a right 
ventricular endomyocardial biopsy specimen at high magnification showing the 
characteristic concentric lamellar inclusions of glycosphingolipids accumulating 
as a result of deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A. Image 
taken at 15,000× original magnification. (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, 
PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1792
TABLE 254-5  Causes of Restrictive Cardiomyopathies
Infiltrative (Between Myocytes)
Amyloidosis
  Primary (light chain amyloid)
  Familial (abnormal transthyretin)a
  Senile (normal transthyretin or atrial peptides)
Inherited metabolic defectsa
Storage (Within Myocytes)
Hemochromatosis (iron)a
Inherited metabolic defectsa
  Fabry’s disease
  Glycogen storage disease (II, III)
Fibrotic
Radiation
Scleroderma
Endomyocardial
Possibly related fibrotic diseases
  Tropical endomyocardial fibrosis
  Hypereosinophilic syndrome (Löffler’s endocarditis)
Carcinoid syndrome
Radiation
Drugs: e.g., serotonin, ergotamine
Overlap with Other Cardiomyopathies
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy/“pseudohypertrophic”a
“Minimally dilated” cardiomyopathy
  Early-stage dilated cardiomyopathy
  Partial recovery from dilated cardiomyopathy
Sarcoidosis
Idiopathica
aCan be familial.
FIGURE 254-12  Restrictive cardiomyopathy—amyloidosis. Gross specimen of a 
heart with amyloidosis. The heart is firm and rubbery with a waxy cut surface. The 
atria are markedly dilated, and the left atrial endocardium, normally smooth, has 
yellow-brown amyloid deposits that give texture to the surface. (Image courtesy of 
Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston.)
LV
LA
Septum
RA
RV
Pacing
lead in
RV
Lateral
wall of
LV
Pericardial
effusion
FIGURE 254-13  Restrictive cardiomyopathy—amyloidosis. Echocardiogram 
showing thickened walls of both ventricles without major chamber dilation. The 
atria are markedly dilated, consistent with chronically elevated ventricular filling 
pressures. In this example, there is a characteristic hyperrefractile “glittering” of 
the myocardium typical of amyloid infiltration, which is a non-specific finding with 
contemporary echocardiography. The mitral and tricuspid valves are thickened. 
A pacing lead is visible in the right ventricle (RV), and a pericardial effusion is 
evident. Note that the echocardiographic and pathologic images are vertically 
opposite, such that the left ventricle (LV) is by convention on the top right in 
the echocardiographic image and bottom right in the pathologic images. LA, left 
atrium; RA, right atrium. (Image courtesy of Justina Wu, MD, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston.)
Most restrictive cardiomyopathies are due to infiltration of abnormal 
substances between myocytes, storage of abnormal metabolic products 
within myocytes, or fibrotic injury (Table 254-5). The differential diag-
nosis should include constrictive pericardial disease, which may also 
be dominated by right-sided heart failure.
■
■INFILTRATIVE DISEASE
Amyloidosis is the major cause of restrictive cardiomyopathy 
(Figs. 254-12, 254-13, and 254-14). Several proteins can self-assemble to 
form the beta-sheets of amyloid proteins, which deposit with different 
consequences depending on the type of protein. The systemic amyloi-
doses are discussed in Chap. 108. In addition to cardiac infiltration, 
neurologic involvement occurs commonly with primary amyloidosis 
(immunoglobulin light chains) and with familial amyloidosis (genetic 
abnormalities of transthyretin). There are >100 identified mutations in 
transthyretin on chromosome 13, among which the V122I transthyretin 
mutation has been identified in ~4% of African Americans in whom it 
is associated with a 50% increased risk of heart failure. However, pene-
trance of the V122I mutation is incomplete with most mutation carriers 
free of heart failure at 70 years of age.
Organ dysfunction in amyloidosis was once attributed solely to 
physical disruption from the infiltrating amyloid fibrils, but newer 
information suggests additional direct toxicity from the immuno-
globulin light chain and abnormal transthyretin protein aggregates 
themselves. In senile amyloidosis, there is abnormal accumulation of 
normal transthyretin or natriuretic peptide folding, detected in 10% of 
people aged >80 years and half of those aged >90 years but often with-
out apparent clinical disease. Men show a greater burden of amyloid 
deposition and twentyfold greater likelihood of clinical disease with 
senile amyloidosis. The aging of the population will soon render senile 
amyloidosis the most common of the amyloidoses.
Cardiac amyloid is classically suspected from thickened ventricular 
walls with an ECG that shows low voltage. However, low voltage is 
not always present and is less common in familial or senile amyloidosis 
CHAPTER 254 Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
1793
FIGURE 254-14  Amyloidosis—microscopic images of amyloid involving the myocardium. The left 
panel (hematoxylin and eosin stain) shows glassy, grey-pink amorphous material infiltrating between 
cardiomyocytes, which stain a darker pink. The right panel shows a sulfated blue stain that highlights the 
amyloid green and stains the cardiac myocytes yellow. (The Congo red stain can also be used to highlight 
amyloid; under polarized light, amyloid will have an apple-green birefringence when stained with Congo 
red.) Images at 100× original magnification. (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of 
Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
than in primary AL amyloidosis. A characteristic refractile brightness 
in the septum on echocardiography is suggestive of the diagnosis, but 
neither sensitive nor specific. Both atria are dilated, often dramatically, 
and diastolic dysfunction may be more obvious than in left ventric-
ular hypertrophy from other causes. Amyloid infiltration can also be 
detected with gadolinium enhancement in MRI. Technetium pyrophos-
phate imaging is sensitive and specific for TTR amyloidosis as opposed 
to AL amyloidosis. The diagnosis of primary or familial amyloidosis 
can sometimes be made from biopsies of an abdominal fat pad or 
the rectum, but cardiac amyloidosis is most reliably identified from a 
biopsy of the heart, in which amyloid fibrils infiltrate the myocardium 
diffusely, particularly around the conduction system and coronary 
vessels (Fig. 254-14). Diagnosis of the type of amyloid protein requires 
immunohistochemistry of biopsied tissue rather than serum or urine 
electrophoresis, which can lead to incorrect classification.
Therapy for all types of amyloid is predominantly for symptoms 
of fluid retention, which often requires high doses of loop diuretics. 
Digoxin bound to the amyloid fibrils can reach toxic levels, and should 
therefore be used only in very low doses, if at all. There is no evidence 
regarding use of neurohormonal antagonists in amyloid heart disease, 
where the possible theoretical benefit has to be balanced against the 
possibility of aggravating postural hypotension and diminishing the 
crucial heart rate reserve. The risk of intracardiac thrombi may warrant 
chronic anticoagulation.
The prognosis is worst for primary amyloid, with a median survival 
of 6–12 months after presentation, but that has improved substan-
tially with the use of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. If present, 
multiple myeloma is treated with chemotherapy, the extent of which 
is often limited by the potential of worsening cardiac dysfunction. 
Immunoglobulin-associated amyloid has occasionally been treated 
with sequential heart transplantation and delayed bone marrow trans-
plant, with frequent recurrence of amyloid in the transplanted heart. 
Abnormal transthyretin-associated cardiac amyloid has a somewhat 
better prognosis and can be treated in selected patients with heart 
and liver transplantation. Senile cardiac amyloid has the slowest pro-
gression and best overall prognosis. Novel therapies including RNA 
interference and small molecules are being studied in TTR amyloidosis.
■
■FIBROTIC RESTRICTIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY
Progressive fibrosis can cause restrictive myocardial disease without 
ventricular dilation. Thoracic radiation, common for breast and lung 
cancer or mediastinal lymphoma, can produce early or late restrictive 
cardiomyopathy. Patients with radiation cardiomyopathy may present 
with a possible diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis, as the two con-
ditions often coexist. Careful hemodynamic evaluation and, often, 
endomyocardial biopsy should be performed if considering pericardial 
stripping surgery, which is unlikely to be successful 
in the presence of underlying restrictive cardiomy-
opathy. Scleroderma causes small vessel spasm and 
ischemia that can lead to a small, stiff heart with 
reduced ejection fraction without dilation. The 
pulmonary hypertension associated with sclero-
derma may lead to more clinical right heart failure 
because of concomitant fibrotic disease of the right 
ventricle.
■
■ENDOMYOCARDIAL DISEASE
The physiologic picture of elevated filling pressures 
with atrial enlargement and preserved ventricular 
contractility with normal or reduced ventricular 
volumes can result from extensive fibrosis of the 
endocardium, without transmural myocardial dis-
ease. For patients who have not lived in the equa-
torial regions, this picture is rare, and when seen is 
often associated with a history of chronic hypereo-
sinophilic syndrome (Löffler’s endocarditis), which is 
more common in men than women. In this disease, 
persistent hypereosinophilia of >1500 eos/μL for at 
least 6 months can cause an acute phase of eosino-
philic injury in the endocardium (see earlier discussion of eosinophilic 
myocarditis), with systemic illness and injury to other organs. There is 
usually no obvious cause, but the hypereosinophilia can occasionally 
be explained by allergic, parasitic, or malignant disease. It is postulated 
to be followed by a period in which cardiac inflammation is replaced 
by evidence of fibrosis with superimposed thrombosis. In severe dis-
ease, the dense fibrotic layer can obliterate the ventricular apices and 
extend to thicken and tether the AV valve leaflets. The clinical disease 
may present with heart failure, embolic events, and atrial arrhythmias. 
While plausible, the sequence of transition from eosinophilic myocar-
ditis or Löffler’s endocarditis to endomyocardial fibrosis has not been 
clearly demonstrated.
In tropical countries, up to one-quarter of heart failure may be due 
to endomyocardial fibrosis, affecting either or both ventricles. This condi-
tion shares with the previous condition the partial obliteration of the 
ventricular apex with fibrosis extending into the valvular inflow tract 
and leaflets; however, it is not clear that the etiologies are the same for 
all cases. Pericardial effusions frequently accompany endomyocardial 
fibrosis but are not common in Löffler’s endocarditis. For endomyocar-
dial fibrosis, there is no gender difference, but a higher prevalence in 
African-American populations. While tropical endomyocardial fibrosis 
could represent the end-stage of previous hypereosinophilic disease 
triggered by endemic parasites, neither prior parasitic infection nor 
hypereosinophilia is usually documented. Geographic nutritional defi-
ciencies have also been proposed as an etiology.
Medical treatment focuses on glucocorticoids and chemotherapy to 
suppress hypereosinophilia when present. Fluid retention may become 
increasingly resistant to diuretic therapy. Anticoagulation is recom-
mended. Atrial fibrillation is associated with worse symptoms and 
prognosis, but may be difficult to suppress. Surgical resection of the 
apices and replacement of the fibrotic valves can improve symptoms, 
but surgical morbidity and mortality and later recurrence rates are high.
The serotonin secreted by carcinoid tumors can produce fibrous 
plaques in the endocardium and right-sided cardiac valves, occasion-
ally affecting left-sided valves, as well. Valvular lesions may be stenotic 
or regurgitant. Systemic symptoms include flushing and diarrhea. 
Liver disease from hepatic metastases may play a role by limiting 
hepatic function and thereby allowing more serotonin to reach the 
venous circulation.
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is defined as left ventricular hypertro-
phy that develops in the absence of causative hemodynamic factors, 
such as hypertension, aortic valve disease, or systemic infiltrative 
or storage diseases (Figs. 254-15 and 254-16). It has previously been 
termed hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM), asymmetric 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1794
LV Chamber
LV free
wall
IVS
RV Chamber
RV free
wall
Mitral valve
Tricuspid valve
FIGURE 254-15  Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Gross specimen of a heart with 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy removed at the time of transplantation, showing 
asymmetric septal hypertrophy (septum much thicker than left ventricular free 
wall) with the septum bulging into the left ventricular outflow tract causing 
obstruction. The forceps are retracting the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve, 
demonstrating the characteristic plaque of systolic anterior motion, manifest as 
endocardial fibrosis on the interventricular septum in a mirror-image pattern to 
the valve leaflet. There is patchy replacement fibrosis, and small thick-walled 
arterioles can be appreciated grossly, especially in the interventricular septum. 
IVS, interventricular septum; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (Image courtesy 
of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston.)
LV
LA
MV
Septum
FIGURE 254-16  Hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. 
This 
echocardiogram 
of 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy shows asymmetric hypertrophy of the septum 
compared to the lateral wall of the left ventricle (LV). The mitral valve (MV) is 
moving anteriorly toward the hypertrophied septum in systole. The left atrium 
(LA) is enlarged. Note that the echocardiographic and pathologic images are 
vertically opposite, such that the LV is by convention on the top right in the 
echocardiographic image and bottom right in the pathologic images. (Image 
courtesy of Justina Wu, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
FIGURE 254-17  Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Microscopic image of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy showing the characteristic disarrayed myocyte architecture with 
swirling and branching rather than the usual parallel arrangement of myocyte 
fibers. Myocyte nuclei vary markedly in size and interstitial fibrosis is present. 
(Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
septal hypertrophy (ASH), and idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis 
(IHSS). However, the accepted terminology is now hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy with or without obstruction. Prevalence in North 
America, Africa, and Asia is about 1:500. It is the leading cause of 
sudden death in the young and is an important cause of heart failure. 
Although pediatric presentation is associated with increased early mor-
bidity and mortality, the prognosis for patients diagnosed as adults is 
generally favorable.
The clustering of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy within families 
has been appreciated since recognition of the disease ~55 years ago. 
Echocardiographic screening of families revealed an autosomal domi-
nant pattern of inheritance. Initial genetic studies using linkage analy-
sis in large families identified disease-causing mutations in sarcomeric 
genes. A sarcomere mutation is present in ~60% of patients with hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy and is more common in those with familial 
disease and characteristic asymmetric septal hypertrophy. More than 
nine different sarcomere genes with >1400 mutations have been impli-
cated, although ~80% of patients have a mutation in either MYH7 or 
MYBPC3 (Table 254-3).
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized by age-dependent 
and incomplete penetrance. The defining phenotype of left ventricular 
hypertrophy is rarely present at birth and usually develops later in life. 
Accordingly, screening of family members should begin in adolescence 
and extend through adulthood. In MYBPC3 mutation carriers, the aver-
age age of disease development is 40 years, while 30% remain free from 
hypertrophy after 70 years. Related individuals who carry the same 
mutation may have a different extent and pattern of hypertrophy (e.g., 
asymmetric versus concentric), occurrence of outflow tract obstruction, 
and associated clinical outcomes (e.g., sudden death, atrial fibrillation).
At the level of the sarcomere, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy muta-
tions lead to enhanced calcium sensitivity, maximal force generation, 
and ATPase activity. Calcium handling is affected through modification 
of regulatory proteins. Sarcomere mutations lead to abnormal energet-
ics and impaired relaxation, both directly and as a result of hypertrophy. 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized by misalignment and 
disarray of the enlarged myofibrils and myocytes (Fig. 254-17), which 
can also occur to a lesser extent in other cardiac diseases. Although 
hypertrophy is the defining feature of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
fibrosis and microvascular disease are also present. Interstitial fibrosis 
is detectable before overt hypertrophy develops and likely results from 
early activation of profibrotic pathways. In the majority of patients 
with overt cardiomyopathy, focal areas of replacement fibrosis can 
be readily detected with MRI. These areas of “scar” may represent 
substrate for the development of ventricular arrhythmias. Increased 
CHAPTER 254 Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
1795
thickness and decreased luminal area of the intramural vessels in 
hypertrophied myocardium contribute to microvascular ischemia and 
angina. Microinfarction of hypertrophied myocardium is a hypothe-
sized mechanism for replacement scar formation.
Macroscopically, hypertrophy is typically manifest as nonuniform 
ventricular thickening (Fig. 254-15). The interventricular septum is 
the typical location of maximal hypertrophy, although other patterns 
of hypertrophic remodeling include concentric and midventricular. 
Hypertrophy confined to the ventricular apex (apical hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy) is less often familial and has a different genetic 
substrate, with sarcomere mutations present in only ~15%. Left ven-
tricular outflow tract obstruction represents the most common focus of 
diagnosis and intervention, although diastolic dysfunction, myocardial 
fibrosis, and microvascular ischemia also contribute to contractile dys-
function and elevated intracardiac pressures. Obstruction is present in 
~30% of patients at rest and can be provoked by exercise in another 
~30%. Systolic obstruction is initiated by drag forces, which push an 
anteriorly displaced and enlarged anterior mitral leaflet into contact 
with the hypertrophied ventricular septum. Mitral leaflet coaptation 
may ensue, leading to posteriorly directed mitral regurgitation. In 
order to maintain stroke volume across outflow tract obstruction, 
the ventricle generates higher pressures, leading to higher wall stress 
and myocardial oxygen demand. Smaller chamber size and increased 
contractility exacerbate the severity of obstruction. Conditions of low 
preload, such as dehydration, and low afterload, such as arterial vaso-
dilation, may lead to transient hypotension and near-syncope. The 
systolic ejection murmur of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction 
is harsh and late peaking and can be enhanced by bedside maneuvers 
that diminish ventricular volume and transiently worsen obstruction, 
such as standing from a squatting position or the Valsalva maneuver.
DIAGNOSIS
The substantial variability of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy pathology 
is reflected in the diversity of clinical presentations. Patients may be 
diagnosed after undergoing evaluations triggered by the abnormal 
physical findings (murmur) or symptoms of exertional dyspnea, 
angina, or syncope. Alternatively, diagnosis may follow evaluations 
prompted by the detection of disease in family members. Cardiac 
imaging (Fig. 254-16) is central to diagnosis due to the insensitivity of 
examination and ECG and the need to exclude other causes for hyper-
trophy. The identification of a disease-causing mutation in a proband 
can focus family evaluations on mutation carriers, but this strategy 
requires a high degree of certainty that the mutation is truly patho-
genic and not a benign DNA variant. Biopsy is not needed to diagnose 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy but can be used to exclude infiltrative 
and metabolic diseases. Rigorous athletic training (athlete’s heart) may 
cause intermediate degrees of physiologic hypertrophy difficult to 
differentiate from mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Unlike hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, hypertrophy in the athlete’s heart regresses 
with cessation of training, and is accompanied by supernormal exercise 
capacity (VO2max >50 mL/kg per min), mild ventricular dilation, and 
normal diastolic function.
TREATMENT
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Management focuses on treatment of symptoms and prevention of 
sudden death and stroke (Fig. 254-18). Left ventricular outflow tract 
obstruction can be controlled medically in the majority of patients. 
β-Adrenergic blocking agents and L-type calcium channel blockers 
Use diuretics with caution
to avoid hypovolemia,
particularly in presence of
outflow gradient
Evidence of
fluid retention?
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Septal ablation
Mitral surgery
In all pts, evaluate
risk for sudden death
Symptomatic?
If low follow with
serial evaluation
Reevaluate cause
of symptoms
Rarely, consider
cardiac transplantation
Refractory
severe symptoms
Consider procedure
Evidence of severe
progressive LV dysfunction?
Titrate beta blocker
and/or calcium
channel blocker
If high,
consider ICD
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Persistent
symptoms
Outflow
gradient?
Try disopyramide
FIGURE 254-18  Treatment algorithm for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy depending on the presence and severity of symptoms and the presence of an intraventricular 
gradient with obstruction to outflow. Note that all patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should be evaluated for atrial fibrillation and risk of sudden death, whether 
or not they require treatment for symptoms. ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; LV, left ventricular.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1796
TABLE 254-6  Risk Factors for Sudden Death in Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy
MAJOR RISK FACTOR
 
SCREENING 
TECHNIQUE
History of cardiac 
arrest or spontaneous 
sustained ventricular 
tachycardiaa
 
History
Syncope
Nonvagal, often with or 
after exertion
History
Family history of sudden 
cardiac death
 
Family history
Spontaneous 
nonsustained ventricular 
tachycardiab
>3 beats at rate >120
Exercise or 24- to 48-h 
ambulatory recording
LV thickness >30 mm
Present in <10% of 
patients
Echocardiography
Abnormal blood 
pressure response to 
exerciseb
Systolic blood pressure 
fall or failure to increase 
at peak exercise
Maximal upright exercise 
testing
aImplantable cardioverter-defibrillator advised for patients with prior arrest or 
sustained ventricular tachycardia regardless of other risk factors. b Prognostic 
value most applicable to patients <40 years old.
Abbreviation: LV, left ventricle.
(e.g., verapamil) are first-line agents that reduce the severity of 
obstruction by slowing heart rate, enhancing diastolic filling, and 
decreasing contractility. Persistent symptoms of exertional dyspnea 
or chest pain can sometimes be controlled with the addition of 
disopyramide, an antiarrhythmic agent with potent negative ino-
tropic properties.
Patients with or without obstruction may develop heart failure 
symptoms due to fluid retention and require diuretic therapies for 
venous congestion. Severe medically refractory symptoms develop 
in ~5% of patients, for whom surgical myectomy or alcohol septal 
ablation may be effective. Developed over 50 years ago, surgical 
myectomy effectively relieves outflow tract obstruction by excising 
part of the septal myocardium involved in the dynamic obstruction. 
In selected patients, perioperative mortality is extremely low with 
excellent long-term survival free from recurrent obstruction and 
symptoms. Mitral valve repair or replacement is usually unnec-
essary as associated eccentric mitral regurgitation resolves with 
myectomy alone. Alcohol septal ablation in patients with suitable 
coronary anatomy can relieve outflow tract obstruction via a con-
trolled infarction of the proximal septum, which produces simi-
lar periprocedural outcomes and gradient reduction as surgical 
myomectomy. Until long-term outcomes are demonstrated for this 
procedure, it is relegated primarily to patients who wish to avoid 
surgery or who have limiting comorbidities. Neither procedure has 
been shown to improve outcomes other than symptoms. With both 
procedures, the most common complication is the development of 
complete heart block necessitating permanent pacing. However, 
ventricular pacing as a primary therapy for outflow tract obstruction 
is ineffective and not generally advised.
Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy have an increased 
risk of sudden cardiac death from ventricular tachyarrhythmias. 
Vigorous physical activity and competitive sport are prohibited. 
Factors that increase the risk of sudden death from a baseline of  
0.5% per year are presented in Table 254-6. As sudden death 
has not been reduced by medical or procedural interventions, an 
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator is advised for patients with 
two or more risk factors and is advised on a selected basis for patient 
with one risk factor. Nevertheless, the positive predictive value of 
most risk factors is low, and many patients receiving a defibrillator 
never receive an appropriate therapy. Long-term use of a defibril-
lator may be associated with serious device-related complications, 
particularly in young active patients. Refinement of sudden death 
risk through the application of contemporary technologies such as 
cardiac MRI is ongoing.
Atrial fibrillation is common in patients with hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy and may lead to hemodynamic deterioration and 
embolic stroke. Rapid ventricular response is poorly tolerated and 
may worsen outflow tract obstruction. β-Adrenergic blocking agents 
and L-type calcium channel blockers slow AV nodal conduction 
and improve symptoms; cardiac glycosides should be avoided, as 
they may increase contractility and worsen obstruction. Symptoms 
exacerbated by atrial fibrillation may persist despite adequate rate 
control due to loss of AV synchrony and may require restoration 
of sinus rhythm. Disopyramide and amiodarone are the preferred 
antiarrhythmic agents, with radiofrequency ablation considered 
for medically refractory cases. Anticoagulation to prevent embolic 
stroke in atrial fibrillation is recommended.
PROGNOSIS
The general prognosis for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is better than 
in early studies of referral populations. For patients diagnosed as 
adults, survival is comparable to an age-matched population without 
cardiomyopathy. The sudden death risk is <1% per year; however, up 
to 1 in 20 patients will progress to overt systolic dysfunction with a 
reduced ejection fraction with or without dilated remodeling (“burned 
out” or end-stage hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). These patients suf-
fer from low cardiac output and have a high risk of death from pro-
gressive heart failure and sudden death unless they undergo cardiac 
transplantation.
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
Comparison of myocardial diseases across eras and countries 
is complicated by differences in techniques for diagnosis, such 
as endomyocardial biopsy, testing for viral genomes, and spe-
cific antibodies. Deaths attributed to cardiomyopathy/myocarditis in 
the Global Burden of Disease study have increased by 51% between 
1990 and 2013 while the age-adjusted mortality rates have declined by 
12.6% and the disability-adjusted life years lost have declined by 
almost 4%. For comparison, the current mortality rates are comparable 
to those of rheumatic heart disease, which has declined overall by 26.5 
and by 55% after adjustment for age. Deaths from Chagas’ cardiomyo-
pathy worldwide have declined from 12.7 thousand to 10.6 thousand, 
with a reduction of 51.7% in the age-adjusted rates per 100,000 popula-
tion to 0.2, attributable in major part to improved health conditions in 
rural areas of South and Central America. By contrast, there has been 
an increase in the prevalence of Chagas’ disease to an estimated 300,000 
in the United States, detected largely through blood donation. It is no 
longer limited to patients from known endemic areas as de novo infec-
tion is increasingly recognized in warmer regions of the country.
Health care for other diseases affects myocarditis and cardiomyopa-
thy. Developed nations will see a higher prevalence of cardiomyopathy 
due to chemotherapy. However, vaccination has reduced deaths from 
diphtheria myocarditis to <50 per 100 million population, currently 
most common in Russia. World regions providing highly active anti-
viral therapy for HIV have decreased not only transmission but also 
the rate of associated cardiomyopathy by several-fold. Increasing 
availability of clinical genetic testing is expected to shift the apparent 
epidemiology of cardiomyopathy away from acquired causes toward 
causative and facilitating genetic factors. For instance, heart failure 
with preserved ejection fraction attributed to hypertension and diabe-
tes is increasingly recognized to represent amyloidosis from mutant 
transthyretin, with distinct recognized mutations in Portugal, Japan, 
and the African-Caribbean population.
■
■FURTHER READING
Arbustini E et al: The MOGE(S) classification for a phenotype- 
genotype nomenclature of cardiomyopathy: Endorsed by the World 
Heart Federation. J Am Coll Cardiol 62:2046, 2013.
Bozkurt BJ et al: Current diagnostic and treatment strategies for 
specific dilated cardiomyopathies: A scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation 134:e579, 2016.
Cooper LT et al: The role of endomyocardial biopsy in the management 
of cardiovascular disease. Circulation 116:2216, 2007.
CHAPTER 255 Cardiac Transplantation and Prolonged Assisted Circulation
1797
Gilmore JD et al: Nonbiopsy diagnosis of cardiac transthyretin amyloi-
dosis. Circulation 133:2404, 2016.
Ho CY: Genetic considerations in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Prog 
Cardiovasc Dis 54:456, 2012.
Morillo CA et al: Randomized trial of benznidazole for chronic 
Chagas’ cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 373:1295, 2015.
Sagar S et al: Myocarditis. Lancet 379:738, 2011.
Ware JS et al: Shared genetic predisposition in peripartum and dilated 
cardiomyopathies. N Engl J Med 374:233, 2016.
Zamorano JL et al: 2016 ESC Position Paper on cancer treatments and 
cardiovascular toxicity developed under the auspices of the ESC 
Committee for Practice Guidelines. Eur Heart J 37:2768, 2016.
Advanced heart failure, a distinct syndrome, is characterized by 
refractoriness to conventional therapy and represents a vexing clin-
ical dilemma that is associated with an increased symptom burden, 
frequent hospitalization, a poor quality of life and high risk of death. 
Such individuals do not tolerate neurohormonal antagonists at rec-
ommended doses, exhibit cardiorenal syndrome, maintain markedly 
poor cardiac reserve on cardiopulmonary stress testing, and typically 
display a low cardiac output state with elevated pulmonary pressures. 
In general, therapeutic targets shift away from disease modifying 
neurohormonal therapy to surgical options that attend directly to the 
myocardial stress and strain relationship. Most often, prolonged circu-
latory assistance using mechanical pumps or cardiac transplantation 
is required to reliably improve quality of life and long-term survival.
CARDIAC TRANSPLANTATION
A decade after Norman Shumway had accomplished the tech-
nique of a successful heart transplant in canines, Christiaan 
Barnard successfully performed the first human to human 
transplant on December 3, 1967. Now, 5 decades later, this surgery has 
become entrenched in the standard armamentarium for treating 
patients with advanced heart failure who are otherwise healthy enough 
to receive such a life altering treatment. Globally, >150,000 patients 
have undergone cardiac transplantation with a 1 year survival >80% 
and median survival of nearly 11 years. These gains have been ushered 
in due to advances in immunosuppression and identification and man-
agement of allograft rejection, as well as a comprehensive appreciation 
for late complications including accelerated coronary artery disease, 
malignancy, and renal failure.
■
■CANDIDATES FOR CARDIAC TRANSPLANTATION
The demand for cardiac transplantation outstrips the availability of 
organ donors. Hence, attention to the optimal utility, equitable allocation, 
and patient autonomy must dominate the decisions to identify and list 
candidates for transplantation. Simultaneously, attempts at expanding 
the donor pool have surfaced. However, vigilance to evaluating can-
didates most likely to have a successful outcome from transplantation 
takes pre-eminence. In 2006, the International Society for Heart and Lung 
Transplantation identified a set of criteria to guide listing of patients. 
These criteria were updated in 2016 and include additional attention to 
the growing epidemiology of candidates suffering from congenital heart 
disease, restrictive and infiltrative cardiomyopathy (such as amyloido-
sis), and chronic infections in recipients (such as Chagas’ disease, tuber-
culosis and hepatitides). Selected general principles for listing candidates 
for cardiac transplantation are enumerated in Table 255-1.
Cardiac Transplantation 
and Prolonged Assisted 
Circulation
Mandeep R. Mehra 
255
TABLE 255-1  Principles for Listing Candidates for Cardiac 
Transplantation
PRINCIPLE
COMMENT
Advanced Disease 
Severity
Refractory heart failure with a VO2 of <14 mL/kg/
min (<12, if on beta blockers) or percent predicted 
VO2 <50%; combination of intolerance to disease 
modifying therapy, cardiorenal syndrome, use of 
inotropic therapy to maintain stability or need for a 
left ventricular assist system.
Co-Morbidity
Age is not an absolute contraindication, but frailty 
should be considered a relative contraindication; a 
BMI > 35 kg/m2 should require weight loss; cancer 
should be dealt with on an individual basis (e.g., low-
grade prostate cancer may not be a contraindication); 
poorly controlled diabetes mellitus or end-organ 
damage may be a contraindication; eGFR <30 mL/
min/1.73 m2 is a relative contraindication; severe 
cerebrovascular disease or peripheral vascular 
disease (which will limit rehabilitation or function) is 
also a relative contraindication.
Donor-Recipient 
Matching
Sensitized individuals with circulating antibodies 
should have a prospective or virtual cross match; 
pulmonary vascular resistance with a transpulmonary 
gradient >15, PVR >3 Wood Units and absolute PA 
systolic pressure >50 mmHg provided the systolic 
BP is >85 mmHg is a relative contraindication unless 
reactive.
Psychosocial Issues
Tobacco use in any form limits posttransplant 
survival and should be stopped for at least 
6-months; substance abuse, including marijuana, 
should be a contraindication if the individual cannot 
demonstrate control and cessation; patients with 
severe cognitive-behavioral disabilities or dementia 
(inability to ever understand and cooperate with 
medical care) have the potential for self-harm and 
should not receive a transplant.
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; 
PA, pulmonary artery; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; VO2, peak oxygen 
consumption.
■
■PRINCIPLES OF DONOR RECOVERY AND 
ALLOCATION
Although listing criteria for candidates are typically adjudicated at a 
center level, organ allocation is handled by national regulatory pro-
cesses in most countries. The allocation of donor hearts is based on 
(a) the urgency of the clinical situation, (b) the time spent on the 
waiting list, and (c) the distance from the recipient center. Thus, candi-
dates who are hospitalized and require temporary mechanical cardiac 
support devices or daily invasive hemodynamic evaluation and intra-
venous inotropic therapy to maintain stability are given the highest 
urgency status, while those able to ambulate and live at home receive 
a lower urgency status. The geographical regional reach for allocation 
is based not only on territorial considerations but also on the time that 
a donor heart would be in transit and therefore in out of body “cold 
ischemia time,” which is typically limited to 4 h. The final key feature 
that is included in the allocation offer relates to the ABO blood group. 
Donor organs are offered based on these initial characteristics and then 
a more detailed donor assessment ensues, resulting in acceptance or 
decline for any given donor heart. It is important to note that the time 
constraints imposed on the retrieval process make it difficult to invoke 
HLA matching of the donor and recipient. In cases where there is a 
high likelihood of sensitization in the recipient (preformed circulat-
ing antibodies against donor antigens), a prospective or virtual cross 
match is entertained prior to acceptance. Other clinical criteria that are 
employed in the decision on accepting an offered donor include the 
donor-recipient size match, the age of the donor (typically restricted to 
under 55 years) and presence or absence of concomitant pathology such 
as coronary artery disease, left ventricular hypertrophy or severe injury 
to the allograft manifest by excess leak of injury markers (troponins) or 
poor contractile performance. In many cases, the prospective cardiac 
allograft can be reconditioned by use of hormonal therapy (including 
thyroid hormone supplementation) and used for transplantation even 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1798 if the initial evaluation suggests poor function. In efforts to enhance 
the donor pool, systems that allow ex-vivo normothermic perfusion 
to evaluate and reanimate organs with a prolonged out of body time 
are being developed. The classic heart donor is derived from a donor 
with brain death; however, donors with circulatory death are being 
increasingly evaluated as candidates for cardiac reanimation using a 
variety of techniques including ex-vivo reanimation and subsequent 
transplantation.
■
■SURGERY FOR CARDIAC TRANSPLANTATION
The most common contemporary operation is referred to as a “bi-
caval” orthotopic cardiac transplant that mimics the natural anatomic 
position. In this operation, the donor and recipient superior and infe-
rior vena cava are connected as are the aortic and pulmonary great 
vessels. The left atrium of the recipient retains its roof including the 
draining pulmonary veins and the donor left atrium is then sutured 
to the retained atrial tissue. This technique maintains function of the 
donor right atrium, important for governing early postoperative right 
heart output, and may prevent atrial arrhythmias. The recipient is left 
with a surgical denervation and the allograft is not responsive to any 
direct sympathetic or parasympathetic stimuli. Therefore, early in the 
adaptive postoperative phase, high-dose catecholamines are required 
to maintain adequate function. Due to denervation, bradycardia in a 
cardiac allograft cannot be treated with atropine and the drug of choice 
is isoproterenol. Once the cardiac allograft adapts to its host circulation, 
the function is usually adequate at rest and with exercise to provide 
normal physical activity.
■
■CARDIAC ALLOGRAFT REJECTION AND 
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
The ability to perform endomyocardial biopsies, evaluate rejection 
pathologically and the introduction of the immunosuppression agent 
cyclosporine heralded cardiac transplantation as a viable clinical ther-
apy. Triple drug immunosuppression, which includes a calcineurin 
inhibitor (cyclosporine or tacrolimus), corticosteroids and anti- 
proliferative immunosuppression (azathioprine, mycophenolate 
mofetil, sirolimus or everolimus) is now the standard cocktail used. 
The combination that is most commonly used and achieves the best 
standard outcomes includes the combination of tacrolimus, myco-
phenolate mofetil, and prednisone. In those at high risk for rejection 
(multiparous women, sensitized individuals) or in situations where 
use of calcineurin inhibitors is delayed (renal dysfunction), induction 
therapy using monoclonal (basiliximab) or polyclonal antibodies (anti- 
thymocyte globulin) to provide augmented immunosuppression is 
used. The typical management strategy includes gradual weaning of 
steroids over time as surveillance endomyocardial biopsies are per-
formed and clinical as well as sub-clinical pathological quiescence is 
established. Table 255-2 describes the immunosuppression drugs in 
common use.
Acute cellular rejection (ACR) and antibody-mediated rejection 
(AMR) are two separate forms of cardiac allograft rejection that are 
recognized and can sometimes coexist. ACR occurs early after trans-
plantation and then declines in incidence after 6 months. This occurs 
due to a T cell–mediated assault on the donor allograft tissue and 
histologically is characterized by lymphocytic infiltrates. In mild cases 
these infiltrates are localized to the peri-venular regions, and in severe 
cases progresses diffusely into the cardiac interstitium. In late stages 
of severe ACR, most often associated with hemodynamic compromise, 
multi-clonal cells such as macrophages, neutrophils, and eosinophils 
are observed with intramyocardial hemorrhage, myocyte injury and 
myocyte necrosis. Subclinical ACR is typically treated with high 
doses of corticosteroid pulses although some centers choose to simply 
observe mild forms of infiltration since it is known that these recover 
longitudinally. If hemodynamic compromise occurs, rescue polyclonal 
antibodies are used in tandem with corticosteroids. Conversely, AMR 
is immunologically described as a non-cellular antibody-driven phe-
nomenon associated with a pattern of immunopathologic findings 
of immunoglobulin deposition and complement fixation on immu-
nofluorescence, along with histopathologic findings of endothelial 
swelling and interstitial edema and cardiac allograft arteriolar vascu-
litis. AMR is characterized by the emergence of circulating donor-spe-
cific antibodies that are thought to fix, complement, and bind to the 
allograft. Commonly, AMR leads to acute allograft dysfunction and 
increases the risk for cardiac allograft vasculopathy, and results in 
worsened cardiac allograft survival compared with ACR. In this form 
of rejection, therapy is directed towards suppression and removal 
of circulating antibodies using plasmapheresis and drugs such as 
rituximab (chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against the CD20 
antigen) or in refractory cases, bortezomib (a proteasome inhibitor) 
or eculizumab (a terminal complement inhibitor). The treatment with 
immunosuppression requires prophylaxis for opportunistic infections 
and ongoing surveillance and expertise in recognizing the more com-
mon clinical presentations of infections caused by cytomegalovirus 
(CMV), aspergillus, and other opportunistic agents such as nocardia 
and toxoplasmosis.
TABLE 255-2  Immunoprophylaxis Drugs in Cardiac Transplantation
DRUG CLASS
GENERIC DRUG
CELLULAR TARGET
MAJOR SIDE EFFECTS
Calcineurin Inhibitors
Cyclosporine
Binds to cyclophilin which then inhibits calcineurin
Hypertension, dyslipidemia, gum hypertrophy, 
hypertrichosis
 
Tacrolimus
Binds to immunophilin FK506 binding protein which inhibits 
calcineurin
Hypertension, dyslipidemia, alopecia, diabetes 
mellitus
Anti-Thymocyte 
Globulin (ATG)
Rabbit ATG
T-cell depletion in blood and peripheral lymphoid tissues  
through complement-dependent lysis and T-cell activation  
and apoptosis
Cytokine release syndrome, leukopenia, 
thrombocytopenia, serum sickness
 
Horse ATG
Same as above
Same as above
Interleukin-2  
receptor antagonists
Basiliximab
Inhibition of CD-25 of IL-2 receptor
Well tolerated; rare hypersensitivity; increased 
infection risk
Anti-metabolites
Azathioprine
Imidazolyl derivative and prodrug of 6-mercaptopurine (cell cycle 
inhibitor)
Bone marrow suppression, pancreatitis, hepatitis
 
Mycophenolate 
Mofetil
Inhibits inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase, which controls 
guanine monophosphate in the de novo pathway of purine 
synthesis (inhibits T and B cell proliferation)
Leukopenia, gastrointestinal toxicity
Proliferation-Signal 
Inhibitors
Sirolimus
Binds with FKBP12 and complex inhibits the mechanistic  
Target of Rapamycin (mTOR)
Delayed wound healing, non-specific 
pneumonia, pericardial effusion, hyperlipidemia 
(hypertriglyceridemia)
 
Everolimus
Binds to FKBP12, which inhibits mTORC1 (and not mTORC2)
Dyslipidemia, stomatitis, pericardial effusions and 
pancytopenia
CHAPTER 255 Cardiac Transplantation and Prolonged Assisted Circulation
1799
■
■LATE COMPLICATIONS AFTER CARDIAC 
TRANSPLANTATION
The long-term consequences of exposure to chronic immunosuppres-
sion result in a variety of non-immunological cardio-metabolic effects 
such as hypertension and hyperlipidemia as well as systemic disorders 
of bone loss and renal dysfunction. One aggressive complication that 
limits late survival of cardiac allografts includes the development of an 
accelerated form of coronary artery disease, referred to as cardiac allog-
raft vasculopathy (CAV). This is characterized by a proliferative thicken-
ing of the vascular intima of the vasculature that is initiated as a diffuse 
endothelialitis in the setting of the confluence of the consequences 
of brain death, ischemia reperfusion injury during the transplant 
process and early immunological insults. Chronically, the metabolic 
consequences of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and disordered glucose 
regulation result in a further worsening of vascular lesions that are 
diffuse and noted throughout the coronary tree. Early diagnosis and 
preventative therapy are critical since it is commonly silent in genesis. 
Statins, antihypertensive agents, and anti-CMV agents all have demon-
strated benefits in reducing CAV. Anti-proliferative immunosuppressive 
therapy such as mycophenolate mofetil and sirolimus or everolimus 
prevent vascular intimal thickening compared with azathioprine-based 
regimens. However, retransplantation is the only definitive form of 
therapy for advanced allograft CAV (Fig. 255-1).
Another consternation in cardiac transplantation is the development 
of malignancy with a greater frequency than in the normal population, 
suggesting that immunosuppression plays a sentinel role in its gener-
ation. Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders, typically driven 
by Epstein-Barr virus, occur most frequently and require a reduction 
in immunosuppression, administration of antiviral agents, and tra-
ditional chemo- and radiotherapy. Specific antilymphocyte (targeted 
against CD20) therapy has also shown promise. Solid cancers most 
often manifest as skin malignancies (both basal cell and squamous 
cell carcinomas), and use of sun-screens is advised. Future research 
is required to define strategies for immune modulation, immune sup-
pression, and malignancy prevention, however the impact of decreas-
ing immunosuppression in the treatment of these cancers is unclear.
PROLONGED ASSISTED CIRCULATION
The quest for a prolonged implantable mechanical circulatory support 
device has led to the development of continuous flow left ventricular 
assist systems (LVAS). Initially designed for short-term support as a 
bridge to recovery or to cardiac transplantation, the most frequent use 
today entails permanent support for lifetime therapy (“destination ther-
apy”). The decision to implant LVAS dichotomously as either a bridge 
to transplantation or for destination therapy is not always clear and in 
several instances, these devices are used as a “bridge to decision” (in 
those with potentially reversible underlying relative contraindications 
such as renal insufficiency or pulmonary hypertension, who may 
become future candidates for transplantation).
■
■LEFT VENTRICULAR ASSIST SYSTEMS AND CLINICAL 
TRIALS
A pivotal trial, REMATCH, published in 2001, was the first study to 
reliably demonstrate that survival of transplant ineligible refractory, 
predominantly inotropic therapy supported heart failure is improved 
by implantation of a LVAS. This study used an early generation pul-
satile flow device and demonstrated a 48% reduction in risk of death. 
However, the LVAS used was of limited durability and median mean-
ingful “out of hospital” survival was prolonged by only 5 months. 
Furthermore, complications of strokes, multisystem organ failure, and 
infections reduced enthusiasm for widespread adoption. Over time, 
continuous flow systems that were small turbo-pumps with mini-
mal moving parts and no valves were introduced, leading to a more 
generalized world-wide adoption. A landmark trial compared the 
older bulky pulsatile LVAS to the newer generation axial continuous 
flow LVAS, the HeartMate II, and demonstrated a marked improve-
ment in short- and long-term survival, along with an improvement 
in functional capacity and meaningful quality of life enhancement. A 
centrifugal continuous flow LVAS, the HeartWare HVAD, is also in 
common use. A newer centrifugal device, with a fully magnetically 
levitated system, the HeartMate 3 LVAS is now available. Unlike the 
HeartMate II LVAS, which requires an abdominal pump pocket, 
this smaller device is fully implanted in the pericardial space in 
CARDIAC ALLOGRAFT VASCULOPATHY
Severe, diffuse, mid to distal luminal loss
Angiogram
Pathology
Severe fibrotic intimal proliferation leading to luminal loss
IMMUNOLOGICAL
FACTORS
IMMUNE ACTIVATION
RELATED
INFLAMMATION
NON-IMMUNOLOGICAL
FACTORS
VASCULOPATHY
IVUS
FIGURE 255-1  Cardiac allograft vasculopathy is initiated and propagated by the combined influence of immunological and non-immunological insults on the allograft 
vasculature. An inflammatory milieu determines the development of diffuse, aggressive luminal blockages that in early forms exhibit intimal thickening and fibrosis. 
IVUS, Intravascular Ultrasound (can be used to diagnose early forms of intimal thickening).
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1800
the thoracic cavity (Fig. 255-2). Real world experience from registry 
analyses has pointed to a >70% 2-year survival with currently available 
LVAS, nearly approaching the outcomes achieved with transplantation, 
however long-term durability beyond 5–10 years remains a question. 
The patients for whom LVAS should ideally be employed include 
those with severe persistent systolic heart failure symptoms who have 
failed to respond to optimal medical management. Commonly, these 
patients have marked functional limitation indicated by a peak oxygen 
consumption of <12 mL/kg/min; or the patient is bound to continuous 
intravenous inotropic therapy owing to symptomatic hypotension, 
decreasing renal function, or worsening congestion. Currently, the role 
of LVAS in “less sick” patients (those with moderate symptoms) is not 
advocated since sufficient equipoise does not exist due to the adverse 
risk benefit ratio from device-related complications.
■
■MANAGEMENT OF LVAS AND THEIR 
COMPLICATIONS
Continuous flow LVAS rely on pressure gradients between the left 
ventricular cavity and the aorta. As such, forward flow is critically 
dependent on management of systemic blood pressure. Due to the 
non-pulsatile nature of the blood flow, blood pressure is measured by 
using a Doppler ultrasound (mean or opening blood pressure, which is 
less than the systolic blood pressure) since a peripheral pulse is usually 
not detectable. The ideal mean arterial blood pressure should be kept 
to <90 mmHg and antihypertensive drug therapy prescribed using 
RAAS drugs or other vasodilators. A common complication encoun-
tered in patients is that of an anemia, often due to iron deficiency. The 
blood flow path through current devices results in increased shear 
stress which is manifested in the form of low grade hemolysis and the 
development of an acquired von Willebrand disease due to loss of high 
molecular weight multimers. This hematological aberration has been 
associated with a risk of gastrointestinal bleeding, particularly result-
ing from arteriovenous malformations in the intestines.
The unsupported right ventricle often demonstrates failure and 
results in congestion requiring diuretic therapy. While unloading of 
the left ventricle decreases right-sided afterload, increased device flow 
results in a greater right heart preload and effects of the LVAS on the 
septum reduce right ventricular contractile efficiency, leading to devel-
opment of right ventricular dilatation and maladaptation between the 
right ventricle and pulmonary circuit. Cardiac arrhythmias are com-
mon in patients supported with LVAS and often require antiarrhythmic 
therapy for quiescence since such events can trigger low flow through 
the device.
Hemocompatibility-related adverse outcomes include neurological 
events (ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes), device-related thrombosis 
leading to pump malfunction, and non-surgical bleeding complications 
(Fig. 255-3). Antiplatelet therapy using aspirin in doses of 81–325 mg 
daily along with warfarin targeted to an INR of 2–3 are required for 
current LVAS to avoid the morbidity of hemocompatibility-related 
adverse events. On one hand, this therapy is protective for thrombotic 
complications while on another it predisposes the patient to bleeding 
complications. Strokes occur with a frequency ranging from 8% with 
the HeartMate II LVAS to as much as 29% with the HeartWare HVAD 
device, by 2 years of treatment. Optimal control of blood pressure is 
associated with improved rates of strokes; however, this complication 
is a critical reason for lack of adoption of device therapy to the less sick 
population. Another cause of morbidity is pump thrombosis requir-
ing reoperation for device malfunction. This complication is noted in 
6–12% of LVAS implants, occurs early (in the first 6 months), and is 
more common with the HeartMate II device than with other LVAS. The 
subclinical phase of LVAS thrombosis is characterized by increasing 
hemolysis and elevation in the device power. Progressively, inability to 
“unload” the left ventricle is manifest leading to decompensated heart 
failure and possibly hemodynamic compromise. Lactate dehydroge-
nase (LDH) is an excellent (although non-specific) biomarker of hemo-
lysis and hence impending or established pump thrombosis. Patients 
who have suspected left ventricular assist device (LVAD) thrombosis 
and do not undergo LVAD exchange or cardiac transplantation have a 
6-month mortality rate of 48%, inferring that medical therapy for VAD 
thrombosis may be inadequate (or cause harm in the case of thrombo-
lytic use). Reoperation (pump exchange) carries a modest 6.5% periop-
erative mortality risk and a 65% 2-year survival following exchange.
Infection is common, most often involving the driveline (the con-
duit connecting the device to the external controller and batteries) and 
occurs in 1 in 5 patients following LVAS implant. Such an infection is 
treated with local internal exploration and requires long-term suppres-
sive antibiotics unless the patient undergoes cardiac transplantation 
or the device is exchanged. Infection and its inflammatory sequelae 
CONTINUOUS FLOW LEFT VENTRICULAR ASSIST SYSTEMS
LOW PULSE PRESSURE 
Axial Flow
Centrifugal Flow 
Magnetically Levitated
Intra-thoracic
Wide Blood paths
Intrinsic Pulse @30 bpm
HeartMate 3
HeartMate II
Mechanical Bearing
Intra-thoracic and Abdominal
Restrictive Blood Paths
No Intrinsic Pulse
Incremental device durability
Absence of pump thrombosis
Current
New
CLINICAL IMPROVEMENT
FIGURE 255-2  Continuous flow left ventricular assist systems (LVAS), their types and mechanisms. The mechanical bearing axial flow HeartMate II pump is prone to 
thrombosis, while the frictionless magnetically levitated centrifugal flow HeartMate 3 does not induce hemolysis or pump thrombosis.
CHAPTER 255 Cardiac Transplantation and Prolonged Assisted Circulation
1801
predispose to thrombosis and heighten the risk of neurological compli-
cations, leading to a worsening milieu in hemocompatibility.
■
■NOVEL DEVICES
The HeartMate 3 is a centrifugal, continuous flow pump that is placed 
in the thorax and is engineered to be a more hemocompatible LVAS. 
This device is constructed with a fully magnetically levitated motor, 
offers wider blood flow paths, and even exhibits a fixed intrinsic pulse 
(by the motor ramping its speed up and down at 2 s intervals). This 
pump has been tested in the large MOMENTUM 3 trial, the early 
6 month results for which suggest that this LVAS incrementally 
improves outcome compared with the HeartMate II device. Impor-
tantly, this pump does not exhibit hemolysis or shear high molecular 
weight multimers of von Willebrand antigen as with other devices 
and is not associated with pump thrombosis. Long-term experience 
with this LVAS will be important in discerning whether these early 
short-term findings result in a reduction in hemocompatibility-related 
adverse events, improved quality of life, and survival.
■
■TOTAL ARTIFICIAL HEART
Not all patients are candidates for a LVAS, particularly those with 
severe right-sided heart failure or conditions that do not allow place-
ment of an LVAS (restrictive cardiomyopathy, massive anterior myo-
cardial infarction, complex congenital heart disease). In such patients, 
either a biventricular assist device approach or a total artificial heart 
pump can be considered. The SynCardia total artificial heart is a pul-
satile, implantable pump that consists of two polyurethane ventricles 
with pneumatically driven diaphragms, and four tilting disc valves. 
This requires excision of the native ventricles and thus cannot be 
employed as a myocardial recovery strategy. There are specific clinical 
issues that are unique to the total artificial heart management. This 
device operates on a steep physiological curve and has little adaptabil-
ity to tolerate either systemic blood pressure changes or large shifts 
in blood volume. As the ventricles are excised, most patients exhibit 
a sharp decline in renal function due to the loss of natriuretic peptide 
expression by the myocardium. Severe hemolysis is common due to 
the presence of four mechanical valves and aberrant erythropoiesis 
is noted leading to a severe refractory anemia. Newer artificial hearts 
using biocompatible surfaces are under development, as well as those 
that use continuous flow technology.
■
■GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
While LVAS are available worldwide, their use and indica-
tions vary from country to country. In the United States, pay-
ers require discrete discrimination of indication into either a 
bridge to transplant or destination therapy, whereas in most European 
countries this artificial segregation is not used. Cost effectiveness stud-
ies suggest improvement with newer devices, yet some countries only 
allow use of this technology as a bridge to transplantation (UK), await-
ing more definitive long-term studies for lifetime use. Now, the use in 
moderately symptomatic ambulatory patients with chronic systolic 
heart failure is equally discouraged throughout the world, awaiting the 
availability of a more hemocompatible LVAS.
■
■FURTHER READING
Mehra MR: Contemporary concepts in prevention and treatment of 
cardiac allograft vasculopathy. Am J Transplant 6:1248, 2006.
Mehra MR et al: International Society for Heart and Lung Transplanta-
tion working formulation of a standardized nomenclature for cardiac 
allograft vasculopathy-2010. J Heart Lung Transplant 29:717, 2010.
Mehra MR et al: The 2016 International Society for Heart Lung Trans-
plantation listing criteria for heart transplantation: A 10-year update. 
J Heart Lung Transplant 35:1, 2016.
Mehra MR et al: MOMENTUM 3 Investigators. A fully magnetically 
levitated circulatory pump for advanced heart failure. N Engl J Med 
376:440, 2017.
Nair N et al: Current and future challenges in therapy for antibody-
mediated rejection. J Heart Lung Transplant 30:612, 2011.
Nair N et al: Long-term immunosuppression and malignancy in tho-
racic transplantation: Where is the balance? J Heart Lung Transplant 
33:461, 2014.
Rogers JG et al: Intrapericardial left ventricular assist device for 
advanced heart failure. N Engl J Med 376:451, 2017.
Shah SP, Mehra MR: Durable left ventricular assist device therapy 
in advanced heart failure: Patient selection and clinical outcomes. 
Indian Heart J 68:S45, 2016.
Stehlik J et al: Organ allocation around the world: Insights from the 
ISHLT International Registry for Heart and Lung Transplantation. J 
Heart Lung Transplant 33:975, 2014.
Stewart GC, Mehra MR: A history of devices as an alternative to heart 
transplantation. Heart Fail Clin 10:S1, 2014.
02
03
01
LEFT VENTRICULAR ASSIST SYSTEMS
HEMOCOMPATIBILITY RELATED ADVERSE EVENTS
PUMP
THROMBOSIS
01
GASTROINTESTINAL
BLEEDING
02
CEREBROVASCULAR
DISEASE
03
PUMP THROMBOSIS results in need for reoperation and
occurs with a high rate with the HeartMate II (10–14%) and
HeartWare HVAD (6–8%) LVAS; No Hemolysis or Pump
Thrombosis is seen with the HeartMate 3 LVAS
GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING is associated with
diminished pulsatility, defects in von Willebrand factor,
development of AV Malformations and anti-platelet and
anticoagulation intensity
CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE includes strokes
(ischemic and bleeds), TIA and seizures; occurrence
correlated with blood pressure control and antiplatelet
therapy
FIGURE 255-3  Hemocompatibility-related adverse events with LVAS are often interrelated and typically result in cerebrovascular, gastrointestinal, or pump malfunction 
events.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1802
as 12–13% of adults aged >75 years (Fig. 256-2). Severe aortic stenosis 
(AS) is estimated to affect 3.5% of the population aged >75 years. In 
the United States, there were 85,000 hospital discharges with valvular 
heart disease in 2010, and the vast majority of these were related to 
surgical procedures for heart valve disease (mostly involving the aortic 
and mitral valves).
The incidence of infective endocarditis (Chap. 123) has increased 
with the aging of the population, the more widespread prevalence of 
vascular grafts and intracardiac devices, the emergence of more viru-
lent multidrug-resistant microorganisms, and the growing epidemic 
of diabetes. The more restricted use of antibiotic prophylaxis since 
2007 has thus far not been convincingly associated with an increase in 
incidence rates for infective endocarditis cases attributable to orophar-
yngeal pathogens. Infective endocarditis has become a relatively more 
frequent cause of acute valvular regurgitation. Rates of valve surgery 
during the acute phase of infective endocarditis increased significantly 
in U.S. hospitals over the decade from 2000 to 2010.
Aortic Valve Disease
Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo 
256
GLOBAL BURDEN OF VALVULAR HEART 
DISEASE
Primary valvular heart disease ranks well below coronary 
heart disease, stroke, hypertension, obesity, and diabetes as a 
major threat to the public health. Nevertheless, it can cause 
significant morbidity and lead to premature death. Rheumatic fever 
(Chap. 352) is the dominant cause of valvular heart disease in develop-
ing and low-income countries. Its prevalence has been estimated to 
range from as low as 1 per 100,000 school-age children in Costa Rica to 
as high as 150 per 100,000 in China (Fig. 256-1). Rheumatic heart disease 
accounts for 12–65% of hospital admissions related to cardiovascular 
disease and 2–10% of hospital discharges in some developing countries. 
Prevalence and mortality rates vary among communities even within 
the same country as a function of overcrowding and the availability of 
medical resources and population-wide programs for detection and 
treatment of group A streptococcal pharyngitis. In economically 
deprived areas, tropical and subtropical climates (particularly on the 
Indian subcontinent and in Southeast Asia), Central America, and the 
Middle East, rheumatic valvular disease progresses more rapidly than 
in more-developed nations and frequently causes serious symptoms in 
patients aged <20 years. This accelerated natural history may be due to 
repeated infections with more virulent strains of rheumatogenic strep-
tococci. Approximately 15–20 million people live with rheumatic heart 
disease worldwide, an estimated prevalence characterized by 300,000 
new cases and 233,000 case fatalities per year, with the highest mortality 
rates reported from Southeast Asia (~7.6 per 100,000). In the United 
States, rheumatic heart disease accounted for 20,000 hospital admis-
sions in 2010 and 3281 deaths in 2014.
Although there have been recent reports of isolated outbreaks of 
streptococcal infection in North America, valve disease in high-income 
countries is dominated by degenerative or inflammatory processes that 
lead to valve thickening, calcification, and dysfunction. The prevalence 
of valvular heart disease increases significantly with age for both men 
and women. Important left-sided valve disease may affect as many 
Change in age-
standardized prevalence
(1990–2013)
>20% decrease
<50,000
<100,000
<500,000
<1,000,000
<2,500,000
<5,000,000
<8,000,000
<8,000,000
>20% increase
No data available
<5% decrease
<5% increase
11–20% decrease
5–10% decrease
5–10% increase
5–20% increase
Number of prevalent
case (2013)
FIGURE 256-1  The global burden of rheumatic heart disease. This world map provides a snapshot of both the change in prevalence of rheumatic heart disease cases 
between 1990 and 2013 (upper right legend) and the estimated number of rheumatic heart disease cases per country (lower right legend). Regions in which the 
disease is highly prevalent include sub-Saharan Africa, India, China, and Southeast Asia. (From JR Carapetis et al: Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:15084, 2016.)
All valve disease
Mitral valve disease
Aertic valve disease
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
FIGURE 256-2  The burden of moderate or severe mitral and aortic valve disease 
in the United States. Prevalence estimates are derived from three population-
based studies comprising a total of 11,911 individuals: The Coronary Artery Risk 
Development in Young Adults (CARDIA), the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities 
(ARIC), and the Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS). (From VT Nkomo et al: Lancet 
368:1005, 2006.)
CHAPTER 256 Aortic Valve Disease
1803
Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) disease affects as many as 0.5–1.4% of 
the general population, with an associated incidence of aortopathy 
involving root or ascending aortic aneurysm disease or coarctation. An 
increasing number of childhood survivors of congenital heart disease 
present later in life with valvular dysfunction. The global burden of 
valvular heart disease is expected to progress.
As is true for many other chronic health conditions, disparities in 
access to and quality of care for patients with valvular heart disease 
have been well documented, especially for those patients with rheu-
matic heart disease in low- and middle-income countries. Management 
decisions and outcome differences based on age, gender, race, and 
geography require educational efforts across all levels of providers and 
prioritization of resources.
The role of the physical examination in the evaluation of patients 
with valvular heart disease is also considered in Chaps. 38 and 234; 
of electrocardiography (ECG) in Chap. 235; of echocardiography and 
other noninvasive imaging techniques in Chap. 236; and of cardiac 
catheterization and angiography in Chap. 237.
AORTIC STENOSIS
Aortic stenosis (AS) occurs in about one-fourth of all patients with 
chronic valvular heart disease; ~80% of adult patients with symptom-
atic, valvular AS are male.
■
■ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
(Table 256-1) AS in adults is due to degenerative calcification of the 
aortic cusps and occurs most commonly on a substrate of congenital 
disease (BAV), chronic (trileaflet) deterioration, or previous rheumatic 
inflammation. A pathologic study of specimens removed at the time of 
aortic valve replacement for AS in adults showed that 53% were bicus-
pid and 4% unicuspid. The process of aortic valve deterioration and 
calcification is not a passive one, but rather one that shares many fea-
tures with vascular atherosclerosis, including endothelial dysfunction, 
lipid accumulation, inflammatory cell activation, cytokine release, and 
upregulation of several signaling pathways (Fig. 256-3). Eventually, a 
fibrocalcific response is established wherein collagen is deposited and 
valvular myofibroblasts differentiate phenotypically into osteoblasts 
and actively produce bone matrix proteins that allow for the deposition 
of calcium hydroxyapatite crystals. Genetic polymorphisms involv-
ing the vitamin D receptor, the estrogen receptor in postmenopausal 
women, interleukin 10, and apolipoprotein E4 have been linked to the 
development of calcific AS, and a strong familial clustering of cases 
has been reported from western France. Several traditional atheroscle-
rotic risk factors have also been associated with the development and 
progression of calcific AS, including low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
cholesterol, lipoprotein a (Lp[a]), diabetes mellitus, smoking, chronic 
kidney disease, and the metabolic syndrome. The presence of aortic 
valve sclerosis (focal thickening and calcification of the leaflets not 
severe enough to cause obstruction) is associated with an excess risk 
of cardiovascular death and myocardial infarction (MI) among persons 
aged >65. Approximately 30% of persons aged >65 years exhibit some 
degree of aortic valve sclerosis. Rate and extent of progression to valve 
obstruction (stenosis) vary among individual patients.
Rheumatic disease of the aortic leaflets produces commissural fusion, 
sometimes resulting in a bicuspid-appearing valve. This condition, in 
turn, makes the leaflets more susceptible to trauma and ultimately leads 
to fibrosis, calcification, and further narrowing. By the time obstruction 
to left ventricular (LV) outflow causes serious clinical disability, the 
valve is usually a rigid calcified mass, and careful examination may 
make it difficult or even impossible to determine the etiology of the 
underlying process. Rheumatic AS is almost always associated with 
involvement of the mitral valve and with aortic regurgitation (AR). 
Mediastinal radiation can also result in late scarring, fibrosis, and calci-
fication of the leaflets with AS.
■
■BICUSPID AORTIC VALVE DISEASE
A bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common congenital heart 
valve defect and occurs in 0.5–1.4% of the population with a 2–4:1 
male-to-female predominance. The inheritance pattern appears to be 
autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance, although some have 
questioned an X-linked component as suggested by the prevalence of 
BAV disease among patients with Turner’s syndrome. The prevalence 
of BAV disease among first-degree relatives of an affected individual 
is ~10%. A single gene defect to explain the majority of cases has not 
been identified, although a mutation in the NOTCH1 gene has been 
described in some families. Abnormalities in endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase and NKX2.5 have been implicated as well. Medial degen-
eration with ascending aortic aneurysm formation occurs commonly 
among patients with BAV disease; aortic coarctation is less frequently 
encountered. Patients with BAV disease have larger aortas than patients 
with comparable tricuspid aortic valve disease. The aortopathy devel-
ops independently of the hemodynamic severity of the valve lesion, 
but directional shear forces dictated by the anatomic configuration of 
the valve may influence its expression. For example, enlargement of 
the ascending aorta along its greater curvature is most often associated 
with right-left cusp fusion, the most common bicuspid variant. Patients 
with BAV disease are at risk for aneurysm formation and/or dissection. 
A BAV can be a component of more complex congenital heart disease 
with or without other left heart obstructing lesions, as seen in Shone’s 
complex.
■
■OTHER FORMS OF OBSTRUCTION TO LEFT 
VENTRICULAR OUTFLOW
In addition to valvular AS, three other lesions may be responsible 
for obstruction to LV outflow: hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy 
(Chap. 254), discrete fibromuscular/membranous subaortic stenosis, and 
supravalvular AS (Chap. 264). The causes of LV outflow obstruction can 
be differentiated on the basis of the cardiac examination and Doppler 
echocardiographic findings.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The obstruction to LV outflow produces a systolic pressure gradient 
between the LV and aorta. When severe obstruction is suddenly pro-
duced experimentally, the LV responds by dilation and reduction of 
stroke volume. However, in some patients, the obstruction may be 
present at birth and/or increase gradually over the course of many 
years, and LV contractile performance is maintained by the presence of 
concentric LV hypertrophy. Initially, this serves as an adaptive mecha-
nism because it reduces toward normal the systolic stress developed by 
the myocardium, as predicted by the Laplace relation (S = Pr/h, where 
S = systolic wall stress, P = pressure, r = radius, and h = wall thickness). 
A large transaortic valve pressure gradient may exist for many years 
without a reduction in cardiac output (CO) or the development of LV 
dilation. Ultimately, however, excessive hypertrophy becomes mal-
adaptive, LV systolic function declines because of afterload mismatch, 
abnormalities of diastolic function progress, and irreversible myocar-
dial fibrosis develops.
A mean systolic pressure gradient >40 mmHg with a normal CO or 
an effective aortic orifice area of ~<1 cm2 (or ~<0.6 cm2/m2 body surface 
area in a normal-sized adult)—i.e., less than approximately one-third 
of the normal orifice area—is generally considered to represent severe 
obstruction to LV outflow. The elevated LV end-diastolic pressure 
observed in many patients with severe AS and preserved ejection 
fraction (EF) signifies the presence of diminished compliance of the 
hypertrophied LV. Although the CO at rest is within normal limits in 
most patients with severe AS, it usually fails to rise normally during 
exercise. Loss of an appropriately timed, vigorous atrial contraction, 
TABLE 256-1  Major Causes of Aortic Stenosis
VALVE LESION
ETIOLOGIES
Aortic stenosis
Congenital (bicuspid, unicuspid)
 
Degenerative calcific
 
Rheumatic fever
 
Radiation
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1804
as occurs in atrial fibrillation (AF) or atrioventricular dissociation, may 
cause rapid progression of symptoms. Late in the course, contractile 
function deteriorates because of afterload excess, the CO and LV–aortic 
pressure gradient decline, and the mean left atrial (LA), pulmonary 
artery (PA), and right ventricular (RV) pressures rise. LV performance 
can be further compromised by superimposed epicardial coronary 
artery disease (CAD). Stroke volume (and thus CO) can also be reduced 
in patients with significant hypertrophy and a small LV cavity despite a 
normal EF. Low-flow, low-gradient AS (with either reduced or normal 
LV systolic function) is both a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge.
The hypertrophied LV causes an increase in myocardial oxygen 
requirements. In addition, even in the absence of obstructive CAD, 
coronary blood flow is impaired to the extent that ischemia can be 
precipitated under conditions of excess demand. Capillary density is 
reduced relative to wall thickness, compressive forces are increased, 
and the elevated LV end-diastolic pressure reduces the coronary driv-
ing pressure. The subendocardium is especially vulnerable to ischemia 
by this mechanism.
■
■SYMPTOMS
AS is rarely of clinical importance until the valve orifice has narrowed to 
~1 cm2. Even severe AS may exist for many years without producing any 
symptoms because of the ability of the hypertrophied LV to generate the 
elevated intraventricular pressures required to maintain a normal stroke 
volume. Once symptoms occur, valve replacement is indicated.
Most patients with pure or predominant AS have gradually increas-
ing obstruction over years but do not become symptomatic until the 
sixth to eighth decades. Adult patients with BAV disease, however, 
develop significant valve dysfunction and symptoms one to two 
decades sooner. Exertional dyspnea, angina pectoris, and syncope are 
the three cardinal symptoms. Often, there is a history of insidious pro-
gression of fatigue and dyspnea associated with gradual curtailment of 
activities and reduced effort tolerance. Dyspnea results primarily from 
elevation of the pulmonary capillary pressure caused by elevations of 
LV diastolic pressures secondary to impaired relaxation and reduced 
LV compliance. Angina pectoris usually develops somewhat later and 
reflects an imbalance between the augmented myocardial oxygen 
requirements and reduced oxygen availability. CAD may or may not 
be present, although its coexistence is common among AS patients age 
>65. Exertional syncope may result from a decline in arterial pressure 
caused by vasodilation in the exercising muscles and inadequate vaso-
constriction in nonexercising muscles in the face of a fixed CO, or from 
a sudden fall in CO produced by an arrhythmia.
Because the CO at rest is usually well maintained until late in the 
course, marked fatigability, weakness, peripheral cyanosis, cachexia, 
and other clinical manifestations of a low CO are usually not prom-
inent until this stage is reached. Orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal 
dyspnea, and pulmonary edema, i.e., symptoms of LV failure, also 
occur only in the advanced stages of the disease. Severe pulmonary 
hypertension leading to RV failure and systemic venous hypertension, 
Lipid infiltration
Radiation
Mechanical stress
Lipid-derived species
Cytokines
Inflammation
Fibro-calcific response
Lipids
Calcium
hydroxyapatite
Blood
vessel
Osteoprogenitor
cell
Apoptosis
Osteogenic transition
Monocyte
Collagen
Fibrosis
Mineralization
Prostaglandins
Leukotrienes
VIC
AA
LPAR
ATX
ATX
sPLA2
Ox-LDL
Ox-PL Lp-PLA2
IysoPC
IysoPA
MMPs
VEGF
TNF
IL-1β
TGFβ
IL-6
WNT3a
BMP2
COX2
5-LO
A2AR
NT5E
ENPP1
ATP
ALP
Pi
Adenosine
+Pi
AMP
+PPi
RUNX2
MSX2
Time
Mastocyte
T cell
Macrophage
Calcifying
microvesicles
VEGF
LDL
LDL
Lp(a)
NOS
uncoupling
ROS
ACE
RANKL
TNF
Chymase
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
inflammation
FIGURE 256-3  Pathogenesis of calcific aortic stenosis. Lipid and inflammatory cell infiltration occurs across damaged endothelium. A cascade of events follows that 
leads eventually to formation of disorganized collagen (fibrosis) and calcium hydroxyapatite (bone) deposition. Valvular interstitial cells (VIC) are critical participants in 
this active process. AA, arachidonic acid; ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ApoB, apolipoprotein B; AMP, adenosine monophosphate; 
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ATX, autotaxin; A2AR, adenosine A2A receptor; BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; COX2, cyclo-oxygenase2; ENPP, ectonucleotide 
pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase; IL, interleukin; 5-LO, 5-lipoxygenase; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; Lp(a), lipoprotein(a); LPAR, lysophosphatidic acid receptor; 
Lp-PLA2, lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2; lysoPA, lysophosphatidic acid; lysoPC, lysophosphatidylcholine; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; NOS, nitric oxide 
synthase; Ox-PL, oxidized phospholipid; Ox-LDL, oxidized LDL; RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand; ROS, reactive oxygen species; RUNX2, runt-related 
transcription factor 2; sPLA2, secreted PLA2; TGFβ, transforming growth factor-β; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; VIC, valvular 
interstitial cell. (From B Lindman et al: Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:16006, 2016.)
CHAPTER 256 Aortic Valve Disease
1805
hepatomegaly, AF, and tricuspid regurgitation (TR) are usually late 
findings in patients with isolated severe AS.
When AS and mitral stenosis (MS) coexist, the reduction in flow 
(CO) induced by MS lowers the pressure gradient across the aortic 
valve and, thereby, masks many of the clinical findings produced by 
AS. The transaortic pressure gradient can be increased in patients with 
concomitant AR due to higher aortic valve flow rates.
■
■PHYSICAL FINDINGS
The rhythm is generally regular until late in the course; at other times, 
AF should suggest the possibility of associated mitral valve disease. 
Hypertension occurs commonly among older adults with AS. In 
the late stages, however, when stroke volume declines, the systolic 
pressure may fall and the pulse pressure narrow. The carotid arterial 
pulse rises slowly to a delayed peak (pulsus parvus et tardus). A thrill 
or anacrotic “shudder” may be palpable over the carotid arteries, more 
commonly the left. In the elderly, the stiffening of the arterial wall may 
mask this important physical sign. In many patients, the a wave in the 
jugular venous pulse is accentuated. This results from the diminished 
distensibility of the RV cavity caused by the bulging, hypertrophied 
interventricular septum.
The LV impulse is sometimes displaced laterally in the later stages 
of the disease. A double apical impulse (with a palpable S4) may be 
recognized, particularly with the patient in the left lateral recumbent 
position. A systolic thrill may be present at the base of the heart to 
the right of the sternum when leaning forward or in the suprasternal 
notch.
Auscultation  An early systolic ejection sound is frequently audible 
in children, adolescents, and young adults with congenital BAV disease. 
This sound usually disappears when the valve becomes calcified and 
rigid. As AS increases in severity, LV systole may become prolonged 
so that the aortic valve closure sound no longer precedes the pulmonic 
valve closure sound, and the two components may become synchro-
nous, or aortic valve closure may even follow pulmonic valve closure, 
causing paradoxical splitting of S2 (Chap. 234). The sound of aortic 
valve closure can be heard most frequently in patients with AS who 
have pliable valves, and calcification diminishes the intensity of this 
sound. Frequently, an S4 is audible at the apex and reflects the presence 
of LV hypertrophy and an elevated LV end-diastolic pressure; an S3 
generally occurs late in the course, when the LV dilates and its systolic 
function becomes severely compromised.
The murmur of AS is characteristically an ejection (mid) systolic 
murmur that commences shortly after the S1, increases in intensity to 
reach a peak toward the middle of ejection, and ends just before aortic 
valve closure. It is characteristically low-pitched, rough and rasping 
in character, and loudest at the base of the heart, most commonly in 
the second right intercostal space. It is transmitted upward along the 
carotid arteries. Occasionally it is transmitted downward and to the 
apex, where it may be confused with the systolic murmur of mitral 
regurgitation (MR) (Gallavardin effect). In almost all patients with 
severe obstruction and preserved CO, the murmur is at least grade III/
VI. In patients with mild degrees of obstruction or in those with severe 
stenosis with heart failure and low CO in whom the stroke volume and, 
therefore, the transvalvular flow rate are reduced, the murmur may be 
relatively soft and brief.
■
■LABORATORY EXAMINATION
ECG  In most patients with severe AS, there is LV hypertrophy. In 
advanced cases, ST-segment depression and T-wave inversion (LV 
“strain”) in standard leads I and aVL and in the left precordial leads are 
evident. However, there is no close correlation between the ECG and the 
hemodynamic severity of obstruction, and the absence of ECG signs of 
LV hypertrophy does not exclude severe obstruction. Systemic hyperten-
sion can coexist and also contribute to the development of hypertrophy.
Echocardiogram  The key findings on TTE are thickening, cal-
cification, and reduced systolic opening of the valve leaflets and LV 
hypertrophy. Eccentric closure of the aortic valve cusps is character-
istic of congenitally bicuspid valves. TEE imaging can display the 
obstructed orifice extremely well, but it is not routinely required for 
accurate characterization of AS. The valve gradient and aortic valve 
area can be estimated by Doppler measurement of the transaortic 
velocity. Severe AS is defined by a valve area <1 cm2, whereas moder-
ate AS is defined by a valve area of 1–1.5 cm2 and mild AS by a valve 
area of 1.5–2 cm2. Aortic valve sclerosis, conversely, is accompanied by 
a jet velocity of <2.5 m/s (peak gradient <25 mmHg). LV dilation and 
reduced systolic shortening reflect impairment of LV function. There 
is increasing experience with the use of longitudinal strain and strain 
rate to characterize earlier changes in LV systolic function, well before a 
decline in EF can be appreciated. Doppler indices of impaired diastolic 
function are frequently seen.
Echocardiography is useful for identifying coexisting valvular 
abnormalities, differentiating valvular AS from other forms of LV 
outflow obstruction, and measuring the aortic root and proximal 
ascending aortic dimensions. These aortic measurements are partic-
ularly important for patients with BAV disease. Dobutamine stress 
echocardiography is useful for the evaluation of patients with AS and 
severe LV systolic dysfunction (low-flow, low-gradient, severe AS with 
reduced EF), in whom the severity of the AS can often be difficult to 
judge. Patients with severe AS (i.e., valve area <1 cm2) with a rela-
tively low mean gradient (<40 mmHg) despite a normal EF (low-flow, 
low-gradient, severe AS with normal EF) are often hypertensive, and 
efforts to control their systemic blood pressure should be optimized 
before Doppler echocardiography is repeated. The use of dobutamine 
stress echocardiography in this setting is under investigation. When 
there is continued uncertainty regarding the severity of AS in patients 
with reduced CO, quantitative analysis of the amount of aortic valve 
calcium with chest computed tomography (CT) may be helpful. There 
is increasing use of chest CT to assess aortic valve morphology and 
function. It has become the imaging method of choice to plan for tran-
scatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR).
Chest X-Ray  The chest x-ray may show no or little overall car-
diac enlargement for many years. Hypertrophy without dilation may 
produce some rounding of the cardiac apex in the frontal projection 
and slight backward displacement in the lateral view. A dilated prox-
imal ascending aorta may be seen along the upper right heart border 
in the frontal view. Aortic valve calcification may be discernible in 
the lateral view, but it is usually readily apparent on fluoroscopic 
examination or by echocardiography; the absence of valvular calci-
fication on fluoroscopy in an adult suggests that severe valvular AS 
is not present. In later stages of the disease, as the LV dilates, there is 
increasing roentgenographic evidence of LV enlargement, pulmonary 
congestion, and enlargement of the LA, PA, and right-sided heart 
chambers.
Catheterization  Right- and left-sided heart catheterization for 
invasive assessment of AS is performed infrequently but can be use-
ful when there is a discrepancy between the clinical and noninvasive 
findings. Concern has been raised that attempts to cross the aortic 
valve for measurement of LV pressures are associated with a risk of 
cerebral embolization. Catheterization is also useful in three distinct 
categories of patients: (1) patients with multivalvular disease, in whom the 
role played by each valvular deformity should be defined to aid in the 
planning of operative treatment; (2) young, asymptomatic patients with 
noncalcific congenital AS, to define the severity of obstruction to LV out-
flow, because operation or percutaneous aortic balloon valvuloplasty 
(PABV) may be indicated in these patients if severe AS is present, even 
in the absence of symptoms; and (3) patients in whom it is suspected that 
the obstruction to LV outflow may not be at the level of the aortic valve but 
rather at the sub- or supravalvular level.
Coronary angiography is indicated to screen for CAD in appropri-
ate patients with severe AS who are being considered for surgical or 
transcatheter valve replacement. The incidence of significant CAD for 
which bypass grafting is indicated at the time of surgical aortic valve 
replacement (SAVR) exceeds 50% among adult patients.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1806
TABLE 256-2  Mortality Rates after Aortic Valve Surgerya
OPERATION
NUMBER
UNADJUSTED OPERATIVE 
MORTALITY (%)
AVR (isolated)
21,921
2.2
AVR + CAB
13,000
4.0
AVR + MVR
1349
8.0
aData are for the first three quarters of calendar year 2015 during which 1033 
sites reported a total of 210,421 procedures. Data (accessed March 9, 2017) 
are available from the Society of Thoracic Surgeons at http://www.sts.org/sites/
default/files/documents/2015Harvest4_ExecutiveSummary.pdf.
Abbreviations: AVR, aortic valve replacement; CAB, coronary artery bypass;  
MVR, mitral valve replacement.
■
■NATURAL HISTORY
Death in patients with severe AS occurs most commonly in the seventh 
and eighth decades. Based on data obtained at postmortem exami-
nation in patients before surgical treatment became widely available, 
the average time to death after the onset of various symptoms was as 
follows: angina pectoris, 3 years; syncope, 3 years; dyspnea, 2 years; 
congestive heart failure, 1.5–2 years. Moreover, in >80% of patients 
who died with AS, symptoms had existed for <4 years. Among adults 
dying with valvular AS, sudden death, which presumably resulted 
from an arrhythmia, occurred in 10–20%; however, most sudden 
deaths occurred in patients who had previously been symptomatic. 
Sudden death as the first manifestation of severe AS is very uncommon 
(~1% per year) in asymptomatic adult patients. Calcific AS is a progres-
sive disease, with an annual reduction in valve area averaging 0.1 cm2 
and annual increases in the peak jet velocity and mean valve gradient 
averaging 0.3 m/s and 7 mmHg, respectively (Table 256-2).
TREATMENT
Aortic Stenosis (Fig. 256-4)
MEDICAL TREATMENT
In patients with severe AS (valve area <1 cm2), strenuous physical 
activity and competitive sports should be avoided, even in the 
asymptomatic stage. Care must be taken to avoid dehydration and 
AVA ≤1 cm2
and
LVEF ≥50%
(stage D3*)
DSE with
AVA ≤1 cm2 and
Vmax ≥4 m/s
(stage D2)
As likely cause of
symptoms
AVR
(I)
AVR
(IIa)
AVR
(IIb)
AVR
(IIa)
Symptomatic
Asymptomatic
(stage B)
Other cardiac
surgery
Abnormal Aortic Valve with
Reduced Systolic Opening
Vmax 3 m/s –3.9 m/s
∆Pmean 20–39 mmHg
Class I
Class IIa
Class IIb
LVEF <50%
(stage C2)
Vmax ≥5 m/s
∆Pmean ≥60 mmHg
low surgical risk
∆Vmax >0.3 m/s/y
low surgical risk
Abnormal ETT
LVEF <50%
Severe AS
Vmax ≥4 m/s
∆Pmean ≥40 mmHg
Asymptomatic
(stage C)
Other cardiac surgery
Symptomatic
(stage D1)
Yes
No
FIGURE 256-4  Management strategy for patients with aortic stenosis. Preoperative coronary angiography should be performed routinely as determined by age, 
symptoms, and coronary risk factors. Cardiac catheterization and angiography may also be helpful when there is a discrepancy between clinical and noninvasive 
findings. Patients who do not meet criteria for intervention should be monitored periodically with clinical and echocardiographic follow-up. The class designations 
refer to the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology methodology for treatment recommendations. Class I recommendations should be performed 
or are indicated; Class IIa recommendations are considered reasonable to perform; Class IIb recommendations may be considered. The stages refer to the stages 
of progression of the disease. At disease stage A, risk factors are present for the development of valve dysfunction; stage B refers to progressive, mild-moderate, 
asymptomatic valve disease; stage C disease is severe in nature but clinically asymptomatic; stage C1 characterizes asymptomatic patients with severe valve disease 
but compensated ventricular function; stage C2 refers to asymptomatic, severe disease with ventricular decompensation; stage D refers to severe, symptomatic valve 
disease. With aortic stenosis, stage D1 refers to symptomatic patients with severe aortic stenosis and a high valve gradient (>40 mmHg mean gradient); stage D2 
comprises patients with symptomatic, severe, low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis and low left ventricular ejection fraction; and stage D3 characterizes patients with 
symptomatic, severe, low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis and preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (paradoxical, low-flow, low-gradient severe aortic stenosis). 
AS, aortic stenosis; AVA; aortic valve area; AVR, aortic valve replacement; DSE, dobutamine stress echocardiography; ETT, exercise treadmill test; LVEF, left ventricular 
ejection fraction; ΔPmean, mean pressure gradient; Vmax, maximum velocity. (Adapted from RA Nishimura et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 70:252, 2017.)
CHAPTER 256 Aortic Valve Disease
1807
hypovolemia to protect against a significant reduction in CO. Med-
ications used for the treatment of hypertension or CAD, including 
beta blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibi-
tors, are generally safe for asymptomatic patients with preserved 
LV systolic function. Nitroglycerin is helpful in relieving angina 
pectoris in patients with CAD. Retrospective studies suggested 
that patients with degenerative calcific AS who receive HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors (“statins”) exhibit slower progression of leaflet 
calcification and aortic valve area reduction than those who do not. 
However, randomized prospective studies with either high-dose 
atorvastatin or combination simvastatin/ezetimibe have failed to 
show a measurable effect on valve-related outcomes. The use of 
statin medications should be driven by considerations regarding 
primary and secondary prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease (ASCVD) events. ACE inhibitors have not been studied 
prospectively for AS-related outcomes. The need for endocarditis 
prophylaxis is restricted to AS patients with a prior history of 
endocarditis.
SURGICAL TREATMENT
Asymptomatic patients with calcific AS and severe obstruction 
should be followed carefully for the development of symptoms and 
by serial echocardiograms for evidence of deteriorating LV func-
tion. Operation is indicated in patients with severe AS (valve area  
<1 cm2 or 0.6 cm2/m2 body surface area) who are symptomatic, 
those who exhibit LV systolic dysfunction (EF <50%), and those with 
BAV disease and an aneurysmal root or ascending aorta (maximal 
dimension >5.5 cm). Operation for aneurysm disease is recom-
mended at smaller aortic diameters (4.5–5.0 cm) for patients with a 
family history of an aortic catastrophe and for patients who exhibit 
rapid aneurysm growth (>0.5 cm/year). Patients with asymptomatic 
moderate or severe AS who are referred for coronary artery bypass 
grafting surgery should also have AVR. In patients without heart 
failure, the operative risk of SAVR (including patients with AS or 
AR) is ~2% (Table 256-2) but increases as a function of age and the 
need for concomitant aortic surgery or coronary revascularization 
with bypass grafting. The indications for SAVR in the asymptomatic 
patient have been the subject of intense debate, as surgical outcomes 
in selected patients have continued to improve. Relative indications 
for which surgery can be considered include an abnormal response 
to treadmill exercise; rapid progression of AS, especially when 
urgent access to medical care might be compromised; very severe 
AS, defined by an aortic valve jet velocity >5 m/s or mean gradient 
>60 mmHg and low operative risk; and excessive LV hypertrophy 
in the absence of systemic hypertension. Exercise testing can be 
safely performed in asymptomatic patients, as many as one-third 
of whom will show signs of functional impairment. A randomized 
controlled trial (RCT) of SAVR versus active surveillance in patients 
with asymptomatic severe AS is in the planning stages.
Operation should be carried out promptly (1–3 months) after 
symptom onset. In patients with low-flow, low-gradient severe 
AS with reduced LVEF, the perioperative mortality risk is high 
(15–20%), and evidence of myocardial disease may persist even 
when the operation is technically successful. Long-term postopera-
tive survival correlates with preoperative LV function. Nonetheless, 
in view of the even worse prognosis of such patients when they are 
treated medically, there is usually little choice but to advise valve 
replacement, especially in patients in whom contractile reserve can 
be demonstrated by dobutamine stress echocardiography (defined 
by a ≥20% increase in stroke volume after dobutamine challenge). 
Patients in this high surgical risk group may benefit from TAVR, 
(see below), but data from RCTs in this population are lacking. 
The treatment of patients with low-flow, low-gradient severe AS 
with normal LVEF is also difficult. Outcomes appear to be better 
with surgery compared with conservative medical care for symp-
tomatic patients with this type of “paradoxical” low-flow AS, but 
more research is needed to guide therapeutic decision making. In 
patients in whom severe AS and CAD coexist, relief of the AS and 
revascularization may sometimes result in striking clinical and 
hemodynamic improvement (Table 256-2).
Because many patients with calcific AS are elderly, particular 
attention must be directed to the adequacy of hepatic, renal, and 
pulmonary function before AVR is recommended. Age alone is 
not a contraindication to SAVR for AS. The perioperative mortality 
rate depends to a substantial extent on the patient’s preoperative 
clinical and hemodynamic state. Assessment of frailty is a critical 
component of preprocedural evaluation. Treatment decisions for 
AS patients who are not at low operative risk should be made by 
a multidisciplinary heart team with representation from general 
cardiology, interventional cardiology, imaging, cardiac surgery, and 
other allied specialties as needed, including geriatrics. The 10-year 
survival rate of older adult patients with AVR is ~60%. Recommen-
dations regarding the type of valve prosthesis (tissue or mechanical) 
must weigh the trade-offs between durability and thromboembolism/
bleeding and are heavily influenced by patient age and preferences. 
Bioprostheses are favored for patients age >65 years. Shared deci-
sion making with younger patients must be individualized. Approx-
imately 30% of bioprosthetic valves evidence primary valve failure 
in 10 years, requiring re-replacement, and an approximately equal 
percentage of patients with mechanical prostheses develop hemor-
rhagic complications as a consequence of treatment with vitamin K 
antagonists. Homograft AVR is usually reserved for patients with 
aortic valve endocarditis.
The Ross procedure involves replacement of the diseased aortic 
valve with the autologous pulmonic valve and implantation of a 
homograft in the native pulmonic position. Its use has declined con-
siderably in the United States because of the technical complexity 
of the procedure and the incidence of late postoperative aortic root 
dilation and autograft failure with AR. There is also a low incidence 
of pulmonary homograft stenosis.
PERCUTANEOUS AORTIC BALLOON VALVULOPLASTY (PABV)
This procedure is preferable to operation in many children and 
young adults with congenital, noncalcific AS (Chap. 264). It is not 
commonly used as definitive therapy in adults with severe calcific 
AS because of a very high restenosis rate (80% within 1 year) and 
the risk of procedural complications, but on occasion, it has been 
used successfully as a “bridge to operation” in patients with severe 
LV dysfunction and shock who are too ill to tolerate surgery. It is 
performed routinely as part of the TAVR procedure (see below).
TRANSCATHETER AORTIC VALVE REPLACEMENT
TAVR for treatment of AS has been performed with increasing fre-
quency in prohibitive-, high-, and intermediate surgical-risk adult 
patients worldwide using one of two available systems, a balloon-
expandable valve and a self-expanding valve, both of which incor-
porate a pericardial prosthesis (Fig. 256-5). Newer valve platforms 
are under investigation. Nearly 25,000 U.S. patients underwent 
TAVR in 2015 across more than 415 centers. TAVR is most frequently 
performed via the transfemoral route, although trans-LV apical, 
subclavian, carotid, and ascending aortic routes have been used. 
Aortic balloon valvuloplasty under rapid RV pacing is performed 
as a first step to create an orifice of sufficient size for the prosthesis. 
Procedural success rates exceed 90%. Among elderly patients with 
severe AS who are considered inoperable (i.e., prohibitive surgical 
risk), 1- and 2-year survival rates are significantly higher with TAVR 
compared with medical therapy (including PABV) (Fig. 256-6). One- 
and 2-year survival rates are essentially equal for high-surgical-risk 
patients treated with TAVR or SAVR (Fig. 256-7). Last, the 2-year 
rate of death or disabling stroke is lower in intermediate surgical 
risk patients who undergo transfemoral TAVR compared with SAVR 
(Fig. 256-8). TAVR is associated with an early hazard for stroke and 
a higher incidence of postprocedural, paravalvular AR, a risk factor 
for mortality over the next 2 years. The rate of postprocedural heart 
block requiring permanent pacemaker (~10%) is significantly more 
common after TAVR. Valve performance characteristics are excellent 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1808
FIGURE 256-5  Balloon-expandable (A) and self-expanding (B) valves for transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR). B, inflated balloon; N, nose cone; V, valve. (Part 
A, courtesy of Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA; with permission. NovaFlex+ is a trademark of Edwards Lifesciences Corporation. Part B, © Medtronic, Inc. 2015. Medtronic 
CoreValve Transcatheter Aortic Valve. CoreValve is a registered trademark of Medtronic, Inc.)
A
B
V
N
B
179
179
138
121
124
85
110
62
83
42
0
0
10
20
30
Death from any cause (%)
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
6
12
Months since randomization
TAVR
Standard
therapy
No. at Risk
Standard therapy
68.0
43.3
TAVR
Hazard ratio, 0.56 (95% CI, 0.43–0.73)
P<0.001
18
24
FIGURE 256-6  Twenty-four-month outcomes following transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement (TAVR) for inoperable patients in the PARTNER I trial (cohort B). CI, 
confidence interval. (Adapted from RR Makkar et al: N Engl J Med 366:1696, 
2012; with permission.)
348
351
262
236
228
210
191
174
154
131
61
62
0
0
10
20
30
Probability (%)
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
12
TAVR group
SAVR group
TAVR group
SAVR group
No. at Risk
HR 1–04, 95% CI 0–86–1.24; p = 0.76
36
60
48
24
FIGURE 256-7  Five-year mortality rates following transcatheter (TAVR) or 
surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) for high-surgical-risk patients (cohort 
A) in the PARTNER I trial. Mortality rates in this AS patient cohort are similar for 
TAVR and SAVR. CI, confidence interval. (Adapted from MJ Mack et al: Lancet 
2015; 385:2477–2484.)
over 5 years; longer-term durability assessment is ongoing, but 
results at 5 years are acceptable. Overall outcomes with this trans-
formative technology have been very favorable and have allowed 
the extension of AVR to groups of patients previously considered 
at high or prohibitive risk for conventional surgery. Neverthe-
less, some patients are not candidates for this procedure because 
their comorbidity profile and frailty would make its undertaking 
inappropriate. The heart team is specifically charged with making 
challenging decisions of this nature. The use of these devices for the 
treatment of patients with structural deterioration of bioprosthetic 
aortic valves (“valve-in-valve”), as an alternative to reoperative 
valve replacement, has been approved. Presently, patients with BAV 
are not candidates for TAVR.
CHAPTER 257 Aortic Regurgitation
1809
0
0
10
20
40
40
50
0
10
20
40
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
0
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
Months since procedure
Hazard ratio, 0.79 (95% CI, 0.62–1.00)
P = 0.05
TAVR
Surgery
Death from any cause
or disabling stroke (%)
15.9
12.3
20.4
16.8
FIGURE 256-8  Rates of death from any cause or disabling stroke for intermediate surgical risk as patients undergoing surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) or 
transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR). In this intention-to-treat analysis, transfemoral TAVR proved superior to SAVR. (Adapted from MB Leon 
et al: N Engl J Med 374:1609, 2016.)
■
■FURTHER READING
Carapetis JR et al: Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease. 
Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:15084, 2016.
Lindman B et al: Calcific aortic stenosis. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:16006, 
2016.
Nishimura RA et al: 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for management of 
patients with valvular heart disease: A report of the American College 
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 63:e57, 2014.
Nishimura RA et al: 2017 AHA/ACC Focused Update of the 2014 
AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients with Valvular 
Heart Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guide-
lines. J Am Coll Cardiol 70:252, 2017.
■
■ETIOLOGY
(Table 257-1) Aortic regurgitation (AR) may be caused by primary 
valve disease, aortic root disease or their combination.
Primary Valve Disease  Rheumatic disease results in thicken-
ing, deformity, and shortening of the individual aortic valve cusps, 
changes that prevent their proper opening during systole and closure 
during diastole. A rheumatic origin is much less common in patients 
with isolated AR who do not have associated rheumatic mitral valve 
disease. Patients with congenital bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) disease 
may develop predominant AR, and ~20% of these patients will require 
aortic valve surgery between 10 and 40 years of age. Congenital fenes-
trations of the aortic valve occasionally produce mild AR. Membranous 
subaortic stenosis results in a high velocity systolic jet that often leads 
Aortic Regurgitation
Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo 
257
to thickening and scarring of the aortic valve leaflets and secondary 
AR. Prolapse of an aortic cusp, resulting in progressive chronic AR, 
occurs in ~15% of patients with ventricular septal defect (Chap. 264), 
but may also occur as an isolated phenomenon or as a consequence of 
myxomatous degeneration sometimes associated with mitral and/or 
tricuspid valve involvement.
AR may result from infective endocarditis (IE), which can develop 
on a valve previously affected by rheumatic disease, a congenitally 
deformed valve, or on a normal aortic valve, and may lead to perfo-
ration or erosion of one or more leaflets. The aortic valve leaflets may 
become scarred and retracted during the course of syphilis or ankylos-
ing spondylitis and contribute further to the AR that derives primarily 
from the associated root disease. Although traumatic rupture or avul-
sion of an aortic cusp is an uncommon cause of acute AR, it represents 
the most frequent serious lesion in patients surviving nonpenetrating 
cardiac injuries. The coexistence of hemodynamically significant AS 
with AR usually excludes all the rarer forms of AR because it occurs 
TABLE 257-1  Major Causes of Aortic Valve Disease
VALVE LESION
ETIOLOGIES
Aortic regurgitation
Valvular
  Congenital (bicuspid)
  Endocarditis
  Rheumatic fever
  Myxomatous (prolapse)
  Traumatic
  Syphilis
  Ankylosing spondylitis
Root disease
  Aortic dissection
  Cystic medial degeneration
  Marfan syndrome
  Bicuspid aortic valve
  Nonsyndromic familial aneurysm
  Aortitis
  Hypertension
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1810
arterial pressure is low, thereby reducing coronary perfusion or driving 
pressure. This combination of increased oxygen demand and reduced 
supply may cause myocardial ischemia, particularly of the subendocar-
dium, even in the absence of epicardial coronary artery disease (CAD).
■
■HISTORY
Approximately three-fourths of patients with pure or predominant val-
vular AR are men; women predominate among patients with primary 
valvular AR who have associated rheumatic mitral valve disease. A his-
tory compatible with IE may sometimes be elicited from patients with 
rheumatic or congenital involvement of the aortic valve, and the infec-
tion often precipitates or seriously aggravates preexisting symptoms.
In patients with acute severe AR, as may occur in IE, aortic dissection, 
or trauma, the LV cannot dilate sufficiently to maintain stroke vol-
ume, and LV diastolic pressure rises rapidly with associated marked 
elevations of LA and PA wedge pressures. Pulmonary edema and/or 
cardiogenic shock may develop rapidly.
Chronic severe AR may have a long latent period, and patients may 
remain relatively asymptomatic for as long as 10–15 years. Uncomfort-
able awareness of the heartbeat, especially on lying down, may be an 
early complaint. Sinus tachycardia, during exertion or with emotion, or 
premature ventricular contractions may produce particularly uncom-
fortable palpitations as well as head pounding. These complaints may 
persist for many years before the development of exertional dyspnea, 
usually the first symptom of diminished cardiac reserve. The dyspnea 
is followed by orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and exces-
sive diaphoresis. Anginal chest pain even in the absence of CAD may 
occur in patients with severe AR, even in younger patients. Anginal 
pain may develop at rest as well as during exertion. Nocturnal angina 
may be a particularly troublesome symptom, and it may be accompa-
nied by marked diaphoresis. The anginal episodes can be prolonged 
and often do not respond satisfactorily to sublingual nitroglycerin. 
Systemic fluid accumulation, including congestive hepatomegaly and 
ankle edema, may develop late in the course of the disease.
■
■PHYSICAL FINDINGS
In chronic severe AR, the jarring of the entire body and the bobbing 
motion of the head with each systole can be appreciated, and the 
abrupt distention and collapse of the larger arteries are easily visible. 
The examination should be directed toward the detection of conditions 
predisposing to AR, such as bicuspid valve, IE, Marfan syndrome, or 
ankylosing spondylitis.
Arterial Pulse  A rapidly rising “water-hammer” pulse, which 
collapses suddenly as arterial pressure falls rapidly during late systole 
and diastole (Corrigan’s pulse), and capillary pulsations, an alternate 
flushing and paling of the skin at the root of the nail while pressure 
is applied to the tip of the nail (Quincke’s pulse), are characteristic 
of chronic severe AR. A booming “pistol-shot” sound can be heard 
over the femoral arteries (Traube’s sign), and a to-and-fro murmur 
(Duroziez’s sign) is audible if the femoral artery is lightly compressed 
with a stethoscope.
The arterial pulse pressure is widened as a result of both systolic 
hypertension and a lowering of the diastolic pressure. The measure-
ment of arterial diastolic pressure with a sphygmomanometer may be 
complicated by the fact that systolic sounds are frequently heard with 
the cuff completely deflated. However, the level of cuff pressure at the 
time of muffling of the Korotkoff sounds (phase IV) generally corre-
sponds fairly closely to the true intraarterial diastolic pressure. As the 
disease progresses and the LV end-diastolic pressure rises, the arterial 
diastolic pressure may actually rise as well, because the aortic diastolic 
pressure cannot fall below the LV end-diastolic pressure. For the same 
reason, acute severe AR may also be accompanied by only a slight wid-
ening of the pulse pressure. Such patients are invariably tachycardic as 
the heart rate increases in an attempt to preserve the CO.
Palpation  In patients with chronic severe AR, the LV impulse is 
heaving and displaced laterally and inferiorly. The systolic expansion 
and diastolic retraction of the apex are prominent. A diastolic thrill may 
be palpable along the left sternal border in thin-chested individuals, 
almost exclusively in patients with rheumatic or congenital AR. In 
patients with AR due to primary valvular disease, dilation of the aortic 
annulus may occur secondarily and lead to worsening regurgitation.
Primary Aortic Root Disease  AR also may be due entirely to 
marked aortic annular dilation, i.e., aortic root disease, without pri-
mary involvement of the valve leaflets; widening of the aortic annulus 
and lack of diastolic coaptation of the aortic leaflets are responsible 
for the AR (Chap. 274). Medial degeneration of the ascending aorta, 
which may or may not be associated with other manifestations of 
Marfan syndrome; idiopathic dilation of the aorta; annuloaortic ecta-
sia; osteogenesis imperfecta; and severe, chronic hypertension may 
all widen the aortic annulus and lead to progressive AR. Occasionally 
AR is caused by retrograde dissection of the aorta involving the aortic 
annulus. Syphilis and ankylosing spondylitis, both of which may also 
affect the aortic leaflets, may be associated with cellular infiltration and 
scarring of the media of the thoracic aorta, leading to aortic dilation, 
aneurysm formation, and severe regurgitation. In syphilis of the aorta 
(Chap. 177), now a very rare condition, the involvement of the intima 
may narrow the coronary ostia, which in turn may be responsible for 
myocardial ischemia. Takayasu’s aortitis and giant cell aortitis can also 
result in aneurysm formation and secondary AR.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The total stroke volume ejected by the left ventricle (LV) (i.e., the sum 
of the effective forward stroke volume and the volume of blood that 
regurgitates back into the LV) is increased in patients with AR. In 
patients with severe AR, the volume of regurgitant flow may equal the 
effective forward stroke volume. In contrast to MR, in which a portion 
of the LV stroke volume is delivered into the low-pressure left atrium 
(LA), in AR the entire LV stroke volume is ejected into a high-pressure 
zone, the aorta. An increase in the LV end-diastolic volume (increased 
preload) constitutes the major hemodynamic compensation for AR. 
The dilation and eccentric hypertrophy of the LV allow this chamber to 
eject a larger stroke volume without requiring any increase in the rela-
tive shortening of each myofibril. Therefore, severe AR may occur with 
a normal effective forward stroke volume and a normal LV ejection 
fraction (LVEF, total [forward plus regurgitant] stroke volume/end- 
diastolic volume), together with an elevated LV end-diastolic pressure 
and volume. However, through the operation of Laplace’s law, LV dilation 
increases the LV systolic tension required to develop any given level 
of systolic pressure. Chronic AR is, thus, a state in which LV preload 
and afterload are both increased. Ultimately, these adaptive measures 
fail. As LV function deteriorates, the end-diastolic volume rises further 
and the forward stroke volume and EF decline. Deterioration of LV 
function often precedes the development of symptoms. Considerable 
thickening of the LV wall also occurs with chronic AR, and at autopsy, 
the hearts of these patients may be among the largest encountered, 
sometimes weighing >1000 g.
The reverse pressure gradient from aorta to LV, which drives the 
AR flow, falls progressively during diastole, accounting for the decre-
scendo nature of the diastolic murmur. Equilibration between aortic 
and LV pressures may occur toward the end of diastole in patients with 
chronic severe AR, particularly when the heart rate is slow. In patients 
with acute severe AR, the LV is unprepared for the regurgitant volume 
load. LV compliance is normal or reduced, and LV diastolic pressures 
rise rapidly, occasionally to levels >40 mmHg. The LV pressure may 
exceed the LA pressure toward the end of diastole, and this reversed 
pressure gradient closes the mitral valve prematurely.
In patients with chronic severe AR, the effective forward cardiac 
output (CO) usually is normal or only slightly reduced at rest, but often 
it fails to rise normally during exercise. An early sign of LV dysfunction 
is a reduction in the EF. In advanced stages, there may be considerable 
elevation of the LA, pulmonary artery (PA) wedge, PA, and right ven-
tricular (RV) pressures and lowering of the forward CO at rest.
Myocardial ischemia may occur in patients with AR because myocardial 
oxygen requirements are elevated by LV dilation, hypertrophy, and ele-
vated LV systolic tension, and coronary blood flow may be compromised. 
A large fraction of coronary blood flow occurs during diastole, when 
CHAPTER 257 Aortic Regurgitation
1811
and a prominent systolic thrill may be palpable in the suprasternal 
notch and transmitted upward along the carotid arteries. This systolic 
thrill and the accompanying murmur do not necessarily signify the 
coexistence of aortic stenosis (AS). In some patients with AR or with 
combined AS and AR, the carotid arterial pulse may be bisferiens, i.e., 
with two systolic waves separated by a trough (see Fig. 234-2D).
Auscultation  In patients with severe AR, the aortic valve closure 
sound (A2) is usually absent. A systolic ejection sound is audible in 
patients with BAV disease, and occasionally an S4 also may be heard. 
The murmur of chronic AR is typically a high-pitched, blowing, decre-
scendo diastolic murmur, heard best in the third intercostal space along 
the left sternal border (see Fig. 234-5B). In patients with mild AR, this 
murmur is brief, but as the severity increases, it generally becomes 
louder and longer, indeed holodiastolic. When the murmur is soft, it 
can be heard best with the diaphragm of the stethoscope and with the 
patient sitting up, leaning forward, and with the breath held in forced 
expiration. In patients in whom the AR is caused by primary valvular 
disease, the diastolic murmur is usually louder along the left than the 
right sternal border. However, when the murmur is louder along the 
right sternal border, it suggests that the AR is caused by aneurysmal 
dilation of the aortic root. “Cooing” or musical diastolic murmurs 
suggest eversion of an aortic cusp vibrating in the regurgitant stream.
A mid-systolic ejection murmur is frequently audible in isolated 
AR. It is generally heard best at the base of the heart and is transmitted 
along the carotid arteries. This murmur may be quite loud without sig-
nifying aortic obstruction. A third murmur sometimes heard in patients 
with severe AR is the Austin Flint murmur, a soft, low-pitched, rumbling 
mid-to-late diastolic murmur. It is probably produced by the diastolic 
displacement of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve by the AR stream 
and is not associated with hemodynamically significant mitral obstruc-
tion. The auscultatory features of AR are intensified by strenuous and 
sustained handgrip, which augments systemic vascular resistance.
In acute severe AR, the elevation of LV end-diastolic pressure may 
lead to early closure of the mitral valve, a soft S1, a pulse pressure that 
is not particularly wide, and a soft, short, early diastolic murmur of AR.
■
■LABORATORY EXAMINATION
ECG  In patients with chronic severe AR, the ECG signs of LV hyper-
trophy are common (Chap. 235). In addition, these patients frequently 
exhibit ST-segment depression and T-wave inversion in leads I, aVL, 
V5, and V6 (“LV strain”). Left-axis deviation and/or QRS prolongation 
denote diffuse myocardial disease, generally associated with patchy 
fibrosis, and usually signify a poor prognosis.
Echocardiogram  LV size is increased in chronic AR and systolic 
function is normal or even supernormal until myocardial contractility 
declines, as signaled by a decrease in ejection fraction (EF) or increase in 
the end-systolic dimension. A rapid, high-frequency diastolic fluttering of 
the anterior mitral leaflet produced by the impact of the regurgitant jet is 
a characteristic finding. The echocardiogram is also useful in determining 
the cause of AR, by detecting dilation of the aortic annulus and root, aor-
tic dissection (see Fig. 236-5, or primary leaflet pathology). With severe 
AR, the central jet width assessed by color flow Doppler imaging exceeds 
65% of the LV outflow tract, the regurgitant volume is ≥60 mL/beat, 
the regurgitant fraction is ≥50%, and there is diastolic flow reversal in 
the proximal descending thoracic aorta. The continuous-wave Doppler 
profile of the AR jet shows a rapid deceleration time in patients with 
acute severe AR, due to the rapid increase in LV diastolic pressure. Sur-
veillance transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) forms the cornerstone 
of longitudinal follow-up and allows for the early detection of changes 
in LV size and/or function. For patients in whom TTE is limited by 
poor acoustical windows or inadequate characterization of LV function 
or the severity of the regurgitation, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) 
imaging can be performed. This modality also allows for accurate 
assessment of aortic size and contour. Transesophageal echocardiogra-
phy (TEE) can also provide detailed anatomic assessment of the valve, 
root, and portions of the aorta. There is increasing experience with the 
use of 3D echocardiography to measure LV volumes.
Chest X-Ray  In chronic severe AR, the apex is displaced down-
ward and to the left in the frontal projection. In the left anterior oblique 
and lateral projections, the LV is displaced posteriorly and encroaches 
on the spine. When AR is caused by primary disease of the aortic root, 
aneurysmal dilation of the aorta may be noted, and the aorta may fill 
the retrosternal space in the lateral view. Echocardiography, cardiac 
MRI, and chest CT angiography are more sensitive than the chest x-ray 
for the detection of root and ascending aortic enlargement.
Cardiac Catheterization and Angiography  When needed, 
right and left heart catheterization with contrast aortography can pro-
vide confirmation of the magnitude of regurgitation and the status of 
LV function. Coronary angiography is performed routinely in appro-
priate patients prior to surgery.
TREATMENT
Aortic Regurgitation
ACUTE AORTIC REGURGITATION (FIG. 257-1)
Patients with acute severe AR may respond to intravenous diuretics 
and vasodilators (such as sodium nitroprusside), but stabilization is 
usually short-lived and operation is indicated urgently. Intraaortic 
balloon counterpulsation is contraindicated. Beta blockers are also 
best avoided so as not to reduce the CO further or slow the heart rate, 
thus allowing more time for diastolic filling of the LV. Surgery is the 
treatment of choice and is usually necessary within 24 h of diagnosis.
CHRONIC AORTIC REGURGITATION
Early symptoms of dyspnea and effort intolerance respond to treat-
ment with diuretics; vasodilators (Angiotensin converting enzyme 
[ACE] inhibitors, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, or 
hydralazine) may be useful as well. Surgery can then be performed 
in a more controlled setting. The use of vasodilators to extend 
the compensated phase of chronic severe AR before the onset of 
symptoms or the development of LV dysfunction is more contro-
versial and less well established. Systolic blood pressure should 
be controlled (goal <140 mmHg) in patients with chronic AR, 
and vasodilators are an excellent first choice as antihypertensive 
agents. It is often difficult to achieve adequate control because of 
the increased stroke volume that accompanies severe AR. Cardiac 
arrhythmias and systemic infections are poorly tolerated in patients 
with severe AR and must be treated promptly and vigorously. 
Although nitroglycerin and long-acting nitrates are not as helpful 
in relieving anginal pain as they are in patients with ischemic heart 
disease, they are worth a trial. Patients with syphilitic aortitis should 
receive a full course of penicillin therapy (Chap. 177). Beta blockers 
and the angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) losartan may be use-
ful to retard the rate of aortic root enlargement in young patients 
with Marfan syndrome and aortic root dilation. A randomized 
controlled trial showed no difference in efficacy between atenolol 
and losartan for this indication. Whether beta blockers or ARBs  
is useful in retarding the rate of growth of aortic aneurysms in 
other patient subsets (e.g., BAV disease with aortopathy, Takaysu’s 
disease) have not been demonstrated. Beta blockers in patients with 
valvular AR were previously considered relatively contraindicated 
due to concerns that the resulting slowing of the heart rate would 
allow more time for diastolic regurgitation. Observational reports, 
however, have suggested that beta blockers may provide functional 
benefit in some patients with chronic AR. Beta blockers can some-
times provide incremental blood pressure lowering in patients with 
chronic AR and hypertension. They can also lessen the sense of 
forceful heart action that many patients find uncomfortable. Patients 
with severe AR, particularly those with an associated aortopathy, 
should avoid isometric exercises.
SURGICAL TREATMENT
In deciding on the advisability and proper timing of surgical treat-
ment, two points should be kept in mind: (1) patients with chronic 
severe AR usually do not become symptomatic until after the 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1812
Yes
No
LVEF <50%
(stage C2)
Asymptomatic
(stage C)
Other cardiac
surgery
Aortic regurgitation
Progressive AR
(stages B)
vena contracta >0.6 cm
Rvol ≥60% mL/beat
RF ≥50%
ERO ≥0.3 cm2
Symptomatic
(stage D)
AVR
(I)
AVR
(IIa)
AVR
(IIa)
Class I
Class IIa
Class IIb
AVR
(IIb)
LVEF ≥50%
LVESD >50 mm
(stage C2)
LVEF ≥50%
LVESD >65 mm
low surgical risk
LVEF ≥50%
LVESD ≤50 mm
LVEDD ≤65 mm
Other cardiac
surgery
LVEF <50%
(stage C2)
Asymptomatic
(stage C)
Other cardiac
surgery
Aortic Regurgitation
Progressive AR
(stage B)
Vena contracta ≤0.6 cm
RVol <60 mL/beat
RF <50%
ERO <0.3 cm2
Symptomatic
(stage D)
AVR
(I)
AVR
(IIa)
AVR
(IIa)
Class I
Class IIa
Class IIb
AVR
(IIb)
LVEF ≥50%
LVESD >50 mm
(stage C2)
LVEF ≥50%
LVEDD >65 mm
low surgical risk
LVEF ≥50%
LVESD ≤50 mm
LVEDD ≤65 mm
Other cardiac
surgery
Severe AR
(stages C and D)
Vena contracta >0.6 cm
Holodiastolic aortic flow reversal
Rvol ≥60 mL/beat
RF ≥50%
ERO ≥0.3 cm2
LV dilation
Periodic Monitoring
FIGURE 257-1  Management of patients with aortic regurgitation. See legend for Fig. 256-4 for explanation of treatment recommendations (Class I, IIa, and IIb) and 
disease stages (B, C1, C2, and D). Preoperative coronary angiography should be performed routinely as determined by age, symptoms, and coronary risk factors. 
Cardiac catheterization and angiography may also be helpful when there is a discrepancy between clinical and noninvasive findings. Patients who do not meet criteria 
for intervention should be monitored periodically with clinical and echocardiographic follow-up. AR, aortic regurgitation; AVR, aortic valve replacement (valve repair may 
be appropriate in selected patients); ERO, effective regurgitant orifice; LV, left ventricular; LVEDD, left ventricular end-diastolic dimension; LVEF, left ventricular ejection 
fraction; LVESD, left ventricular end-systolic dimension; RF, regurgitant fraction; RVol, regurgitant volume. (Adapted from RA Nishimura et al: 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline 
for the Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 63:e57-185, 2014, with permission.)
development of myocardial dysfunction; and (2) when delayed too 
long (defined as >1 year from onset of symptoms or LV dysfunction), 
surgical treatment often does not restore normal LV size and func-
tion. Therefore, in patients with chronic severe AR, careful clinical 
follow-up and noninvasive testing with echocardiography at ~6- to 
12-month intervals are necessary if operation is to be undertaken at 
the optimal time, i.e., after the onset of LV dysfunction but prior to the 
development of severe symptoms. Exercise testing may be helpful to 
assess effort tolerance more objectively. Operation can be deferred as 
long as the patient both remains asymptomatic and retains normal 
LV function without severe or progressive chamber dilation.
Aortic valve replacement (AVR) is indicated for the treatment 
of severe AR in symptomatic patients irrespective of LV function. 
In general, the operation should be carried out in asymptomatic 
patients with severe AR and progressive LV dysfunction defined 
by an LVEF <50%, an LV end-systolic dimension >50 mm, or an LV 
diastolic dimension >65 mm. Smaller dimensions may be appro-
priate thresholds in individuals of smaller stature or when there is 
evidence of progressively decreasing LV function or increasing LV 
size on serial studies. Patients with severe AR without indications 
for operation should be followed by clinical and echocardiographic 
examination every 6–12 months.
Surgical options for management of aortic valve and root dis-
ease have expanded considerably over the past decade. AVR with 
a suitable mechanical or tissue prosthesis is generally necessary in 
patients with rheumatic AR and in many patients with other forms 
of regurgitation. Rarely, when a leaflet has been perforated during 
IE or torn from its attachments to the aortic annulus by thoracic 
trauma, primary surgical repair may be possible. When AR is due 
to aneurysmal dilation of the root or proximal ascending aorta 
rather than to primary valve involvement, it may be possible to 
reduce or eliminate the regurgitation by narrowing the annulus or 
by excising a portion of the aortic root without replacing the valve. 
Elective, valve-sparing aortic root reconstruction generally involves 
reimplantation of the valve in a contoured graft with reattachment 
of the coronary artery buttons into the side of the graft and is best 
undertaken in specialized surgical centers (Fig. 257-2). Resuspension 
of the native aortic valve leaflets is possible in ~50% of patients 
with acute AR in the setting of type A aortic dissection. In other 
conditions, however, regurgitation can be effectively eliminated only 
by replacing the aortic valve, the dilated or aneurysmal ascending 
aorta responsible for the regurgitation, and implanting a composite 
valve-graft conduit. This formidable procedure entails a higher risk 
than isolated AVR.
As in patients with other valvular abnormalities, both the oper-
ative risk and the late mortality rate are largely dependent on 
the stage of the disease and myocardial function at the time of 
operation. The overall operative mortality rate for isolated AVR 
CHAPTER 258 Mitral Stenosis
1813
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 257-2  Valve-sparing aortic root reconstruction (David procedure). Aortic root and proximal ascending aorta (A) are resected (B) with sinuses of Valsalva and 
mobilized coronary artery buttons remaining. Subannular sutures (C) are placed, commissural posts are drawn up inside the valve and the annular sutures are passed 
through the proximal end of the graft. The annular sutures are tied (D), the valve is re-implanted inside the graft, aortic continuity is re-established with another graft of 
appropriate size and the coronary buttons are attached to the side of the graft. (From P Steltzer et al [eds]: Valvular Heart Disease: A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart 
Disease, 3rd ed, Fig 12-27, p. 200.)
(performed for either or both AS or AR) is ~2% (Table 257-2). How-
ever, patients with AR, marked cardiac enlargement, and prolonged 
LV dysfunction experience an operative mortality rate of ~10% and 
a late mortality rate of ~5% per year due to LV failure despite a tech-
nically satisfactory operation. Nonetheless, because of the very poor 
prognosis with medical management, even patients with advanced 
LV systolic dysfunction should be considered for operation.
Patients with acute severe AR require prompt (24–48 h) surgical 
treatment, which may be lifesaving.
TABLE 257-2  Mortality Rates After Aortic Valve Surgerya
OPERATION
NUMBER
UNADJUSTED OPERATIVE 
MORTALITY (%)
AVR (isolated)
14,795
2.3
AVR + CAB
9158
4.2
AVR + MVR
876
8.8
Abbreviations: AVR, aortic valve replacement; CAB, coronary artery bypass; MVR, 
mitral valve replacement.
aData are for the first two quarters of calendar year 2013, during which 
1004 sites reported a total of 135,666 procedures. Data are available from 
the Society of Thoracic Surgeons at http://www.sts.org/sites/default/files/
documents/2013_3rdHarvestExecutiveSummary.pdf.
■
■FURTHER READING
Lacro RV et al: Atenolol versus losartan in children and young adults 
with Marfan’s syndrome. N Engl J Med 371:2061, 2014.
Malaisrie SC, McCarthy PM: Surgical approach to disease of the 
aortic valve and the aortic root, in Valvular Heart Disease: A Compan-
ion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 4th ed. CM Otto, RO Bonow (eds). 
Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2014, pp 199–218.
Nishimura RA et al: 2014 AHA/ACC guidelines for management of 
patients with valvular heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 63:e57, 2014.
The role of the physical examination in the evaluation of patients with 
valvular heart disease is also considered in Chaps. 38 and 234; of elec-
trocardiography (ECG) in Chap. 235; of echocardiography and other 
noninvasive imaging techniques in Chap. 236; and of cardiac catheter-
ization and angiography in Chap. 237.
258 Mitral Stenosis
Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1814
a gradual pressure decline after the v wave and mitral valve opening 
(y descent). In severe MS and whenever pulmonary vascular resistance 
is significantly increased, the PA pressure (PAP) is elevated at rest and 
rises further during exercise, often causing secondary elevations of 
right ventricular (RV) end-diastolic pressure and volume.
Cardiac Output  In patients with severe MS (mitral valve orifice 
1–1.5 cm2), the CO is normal or almost so at rest, but rises subnormally 
during exertion. In patients with very severe MS (valve area <1 cm2), 
particularly those in whom pulmonary vascular resistance is markedly 
elevated, the CO is subnormal at rest and may fail to rise or may even 
decline during activity.
Pulmonary Hypertension  The clinical and hemodynamic 
features of MS are influenced importantly by the level of the PAP. 
Pulmonary hypertension results from: (1) passive backward transmis-
sion of the elevated LA pressure; (2) pulmonary arteriolar constriction 
(the so-called “second stenosis”), which presumably is triggered by LA 
and pulmonary venous hypertension (reactive pulmonary hyperten-
sion); (3) interstitial edema in the walls of the small pulmonary vessels; 
and (4) at end stage, organic obliterative changes in the pulmonary vas-
cular bed. Severe pulmonary hypertension results in RV enlargement, 
secondary tricuspid regurgitation (TR), and pulmonic regurgitation 
(PR), as well as right-sided heart failure.
■
■SYMPTOMS
In temperate climates, the latent period between the initial attack of 
rheumatic carditis (in the increasingly rare circumstances in which a 
history of one can be elicited) and the development of symptoms due to 
MS is generally about two decades; most patients begin to experience 
disability in the fourth decade of life. Studies carried out before the 
development of surgical mitral valvotomy revealed that once a patient 
with MS became seriously symptomatic, the disease progressed inexo-
rably to death within 2–5 years.
In patients whose mitral orifices are large enough to accommodate 
a normal blood flow with only mild elevations of LA pressure, marked 
elevations of this pressure leading to dyspnea and cough may be pre-
cipitated by sudden changes in the heart rate, volume status, or CO, 
as, for example, with severe exertion, excitement, fever, severe anemia, 
paroxysmal AF and other tachycardias, sexual intercourse, pregnancy, 
and thyrotoxicosis. As MS progresses, lesser degrees of stress pre-
cipitate dyspnea, the patient becomes limited in daily activities, and 
orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea develop. The devel-
opment of persistent AF often marks a turning point in the patient’s 
course and is generally associated with acceleration of the rate at 
which symptoms progress. Hemoptysis (Chap. 35) results from rupture 
of pulmonary-bronchial venous connections secondary to pulmonary 
venous hypertension. It occurs most frequently in patients who have 
elevated LA pressures without markedly elevated pulmonary vascular 
resistances and is rarely fatal. Recurrent pulmonary emboli (Chap. 273), 
sometimes with infarction, are an important cause of morbidity and 
mortality late in the course of MS. Pulmonary infections, i.e., bronchitis, 
bronchopneumonia, and lobar pneumonia, commonly complicate 
untreated MS, especially during the winter months.
Pulmonary Changes  In addition to the aforementioned changes 
in the pulmonary vascular bed, fibrous thickening of the walls of the 
alveoli and pulmonary capillaries occurs commonly in MS. The vital 
capacity, total lung capacity, maximal breathing capacity, and oxygen 
uptake per unit of ventilation are reduced (Chap. 279). Pulmonary 
compliance falls further as pulmonary capillary pressure rises during 
exercise.
Thrombi and Emboli  Thrombi may form in the left atria, par-
ticularly within the enlarged atrial appendages of patients with MS. 
Systemic embolization, the incidence of which is 10–20%, occurs more 
frequently in patients with AF, in patients >65 years of age, and in 
those with a reduced CO. However, systemic embolization may be 
the presenting feature in otherwise asymptomatic patients with only 
mild MS.
TABLE 258-1  Major Causes of Mitral Stenosis
Etiologies
Rheumatic fever
Congenital (parachute valve, cor triatriatum)
Severe mitral annular calcification with leaflet involvement
SLE, RA
Myxoma
IE with large vegetations
Abbreviations: IE, infective endocarditis; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SLE, systemic 
lupus erythematosus.
MITRAL STENOSIS
■
■ETIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY
Rheumatic fever is the leading cause of mitral stenosis (MS) (Table 258-1; 
see also Chap. 352). Other less common etiologies of obstruction to left 
ventricular inflow include congenital mitral valve stenosis, cor triatriatum, 
mitral annular calcification with extension onto the leaflets, systemic 
lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, left atrial myxoma, and 
infective endocarditis with large vegetations. Pure or predominant 
MS occurs in ~40% of all patients with rheumatic heart disease and a 
history of rheumatic fever (Chap. 352). In other patients with rheumatic 
heart disease, lesser degrees of MS may accompany mitral regurgita-
tion (MR) and aortic valve disease. With reductions in the incidence 
of acute rheumatic fever, particularly in temperate climates and devel-
oped countries, the incidence of MS has declined considerably over the 
past several decades. However, it remains a major problem in develop-
ing nations, especially in tropical and semitropical climates.
In rheumatic MS, chronic inflammation leads to diffuse thickening 
of the valve leaflets with formation of fibrous tissue often with calcific 
deposits. The mitral commissures fuse, the chordae tendineae fuse 
and shorten, the valvular cusps become rigid, and the pathologic pro-
cess eventually leads to narrowing at the apex of the funnel-shaped 
(“fish-mouth”) valve. Although the initial insult to the mitral valve is 
rheumatic, later changes may be exacerbated by a nonspecific process 
resulting from trauma to the valve due to altered flow patterns. Calcifi-
cation of the stenotic mitral valve immobilizes the leaflets and narrows 
the orifice further. Thrombus formation and arterial embolization may 
arise from the calcific valve itself, but in patients with atrial fibrillation 
(AF), thrombi arise more frequently from the dilated left atrium (LA), 
particularly from within the LA appendage.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
In normal adults, the area of the mitral valve orifice is 4–6 cm2. In 
the presence of significant obstruction, i.e., when the orifice area is 
reduced to <~2 cm2, blood can flow from the LA to the left ventricle 
(LV) only if propelled by an abnormally elevated left atrioventricular 
pressure gradient, the hemodynamic hallmark of MS. When the mitral 
valve opening is reduced to <1.5 cm2, referred to as “severe” MS, an 
LA pressure of ~25 mmHg is required to maintain a normal cardiac 
output (CO). The elevated pulmonary venous and pulmonary arterial 
(PA) wedge pressures reduce pulmonary compliance, contributing to 
exertional dyspnea. The first bouts of dyspnea are usually precipitated 
by clinical events that increase the rate of blood flow across the mitral 
orifice, resulting in further elevation of the LA pressure (see below).
To assess the severity of obstruction hemodynamically, both the 
transvalvular pressure gradient and the flow rate must be measured 
(Chap. 237). The latter depends not only on the CO but on the heart 
rate, as well. An increase in heart rate shortens diastole proportionately 
more than systole and diminishes the time available for flow across the 
mitral valve. Therefore, at any given level of CO, tachycardia, including 
that associated with rapid AF, augments the transvalvular pressure 
gradient and elevates further the LA pressure. Similar considerations 
apply to the pathophysiology of tricuspid stenosis (TS).
The LV diastolic pressure and ejection fraction (EF) are normal in 
isolated MS. In MS and sinus rhythm, the elevated LA and PA wedge 
pressures exhibit a prominent atrial contraction pattern (a wave) and 
CHAPTER 258 Mitral Stenosis
1815
■
■PHYSICAL FINDINGS
(See also Chaps. 38 and 234)
Inspection and Palpation  In patients with severe MS, there 
may be a malar flush with pinched and blue facies. In patients with 
sinus rhythm and severe pulmonary hypertension or associated TS, 
the jugular venous pulse reveals prominent a waves due to vigorous 
right atrial systole. The systemic arterial pressure is usually normal or 
slightly low. A parasternal lift signifies an enlarged RV. A diastolic thrill 
may rarely be present at the cardiac apex, with the patient in the left 
lateral recumbent position.
Auscultation  The first heart sound (S1) is usually accentuated in 
the early stages of the disease and slightly delayed. The pulmonic 
component of the second heart sound (P2) also is often accentuated 
with elevated PAPs, and the two components of the second heart sound 
(S2) are closely split. The opening snap (OS) of the mitral valve is most 
readily audible in expiration at, or just medial to, the cardiac apex. 
This sound generally follows the sound of aortic valve closure (A2) by 
0.05–0.12 s. The time interval between A2 and OS varies inversely with 
the severity of the MS. The OS is followed by a low-pitched, rumbling, 
diastolic murmur, heard best at the apex with the patient in the left 
lateral recumbent position (see Fig. 234-5); it is accentuated by mild 
exercise (e.g., a few rapid sit-ups) carried out just before auscultation. 
In general, the duration of this murmur correlates with the severity 
of the stenosis in patients with preserved CO. In patients with sinus 
rhythm, the murmur often reappears or becomes louder during atrial 
systole (presystolic accentuation). Soft, grade I or II/VI systolic mur-
murs may be heard at or medial to the apex and may signify mixed 
mitral valve disease with regurgitation. Hepatomegaly, ankle edema, 
ascites, and pleural effusion, particularly in the right pleural cavity, 
may occur in patients with MS and RV failure.
Associated Lesions 
With severe pulmonary hypertension, a 
pansystolic murmur produced by functional TR may be audible along 
the left sternal border. This murmur is usually louder during inspira-
tion and diminishes during forced expiration (Carvallo’s sign). When 
the CO is markedly reduced in MS, the typical auscultatory findings, 
including the diastolic rumbling murmur, may not be detectable (silent 
MS), but they may reappear as compensation is restored. The Graham 
Steell murmur of PR, a high-pitched, diastolic, decrescendo blowing 
murmur along the left sternal border, results from dilation of the pul-
monary valve ring and occurs in patients with mitral valve disease and 
severe pulmonary hypertension. This murmur may be indistinguish-
able from the more common murmur produced by aortic regurgitation 
(AR), although it may increase in intensity with inspiration and is 
accompanied by a loud and often palpable P2.
■
■LABORATORY EXAMINATION
ECG  In MS and sinus rhythm, the P wave usually suggests LA 
enlargement (see Fig. 235-8). It may become tall and peaked in lead II 
and upright in lead V1 when severe pulmonary hypertension or TS 
complicates MS and right atrial (RA) enlargement occurs. The QRS 
complex is usually normal. However, with severe pulmonary hyper-
tension, right axis deviation and RV hypertrophy are often present.
Echocardiogram (See also Chap. 236)  Transthoracic echocar-
diography (TTE) with color flow and spectral Doppler imaging pro-
vides critical information, including measurements of mitral inflow 
velocity during early (E wave) and late (A wave in patients in sinus 
rhythm) diastolic filling, estimates of the transvalvular peak and mean 
gradients and mitral orifice area, the presence and severity of any 
associated MR, the extent of leaflet calcification and restriction, the 
degree of distortion of the subvalvular apparatus, and the anatomic 
suitability for percutaneous mitral balloon valvotomy (PMBV; see 
below). In addition, TTE provides an assessment of LV and RV func-
tion, chamber sizes, an estimation of the PA systolic pressure based on 
the tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity, and an indication of the presence 
and severity of any associated valvular lesions, such as aortic stenosis 
(AS) and/or regurgitation. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 
provides superior images and should be used when TTE is inadequate 
for guiding management decisions. TEE is especially indicated to 
exclude the presence of LA thrombus prior to PMBV. The performance 
of TTE with exercise to evaluate the mean mitral diastolic gradient and 
PAPs can be very helpful in the evaluation of patients with MS when 
there is a discrepancy between the clinical findings and the resting 
hemodynamics.
Chest X-Ray  The earliest changes are straightening of the upper 
left border of the cardiac silhouette, prominence of the main PAs, dila-
tion of the upper lobe pulmonary veins, and posterior displacement 
of the esophagus by an enlarged LA. Kerley B lines are fine, dense, 
opaque, horizontal lines that are most prominent in the lower and 
mid-lung fields that result from distention of interlobular septae and 
lymphatics with edema when the resting mean LA pressure exceeds 
~20 mmHg.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Like MS, significant MR may also be associated with a prominent dia-
stolic murmur at the apex due to increased antegrade transmitral flow, 
but in patients with isolated MR, this diastolic murmur commences 
slightly later than in patients with MS, and there is often clear-cut 
evidence of LV enlargement. An OS and increased P2 are absent, and S1 
is soft or absent. An apical pansystolic murmur of at least grade III/VI 
intensity as well as an S3 suggests significant MR. Similarly, the apical 
mid-diastolic murmur associated with severe AR (Austin Flint murmur) 
may be mistaken for MS, but can be differentiated from it because it is 
not intensified in presystole and becomes softer with administration of 
amyl nitrite or other arterial vasodilators. TS, which occurs rarely in the 
absence of MS, may mask many of the clinical features of MS or be clin-
ically silent; when present, the diastolic murmur of TS increases with 
inspiration and the y descent in the jugular venous pulse is delayed.
Atrial septal defect (Chap. 264) may be mistaken for MS; in both 
conditions, there is often clinical, ECG, and chest x-ray evidence of RV 
enlargement and accentuation of pulmonary vascularity. However, the 
absence of LA enlargement and of Kerley B lines and the demonstra-
tion of fixed splitting of S2 with a grade II or III mid-systolic murmur 
at the mid to upper left sternal border all favor atrial septal defect over 
MS. Atrial septal defects with large left-to-right shunts may result in 
functional TS because of the enhanced diastolic flow.
Left atrial myxoma (Chap. 266) may obstruct LA emptying, causing 
dyspnea, a diastolic murmur, and hemodynamic changes resembling 
those of MS. However, patients with an LA myxoma often have fea-
tures suggestive of a systemic disease, such as weight loss, fever, ane-
mia, systemic emboli, and elevated serum IgG and interleukin 6 (IL-6) 
concentrations. The auscultatory findings may change markedly with 
body position. The diagnosis can be established by the demonstration 
of a characteristic echo-producing mass in the LA with TTE.
■
■CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION
Left and right heart catheterization can be useful when there is a 
discrepancy between the clinical and noninvasive findings, including 
those from TEE and exercise echocardiographic testing when appropri-
ate. Catheterization is helpful in assessing associated lesions, such as 
AS and AR. Catheterization and coronary angiography are not usually 
necessary to aid in decision-making about surgery in patients <65 years 
of age with typical findings of severe mitral obstruction on physical 
examination and TTE. In men >40 years of age, women >45 years of 
age, and younger patients with coronary risk factors, especially those 
with positive noninvasive stress tests for myocardial ischemia, coro-
nary angiography is advisable preoperatively to identify patients with 
critical coronary obstructions that should be bypassed at the time of 
operation. Computed tomographic coronary angiography (CTCA) is 
often used to screen preoperatively for the presence of coronary artery 
disease (CAD) in appropriate patients with valvular heart disease and 
low pretest likelihood of CAD. Catheterization and left ventriculogra-
phy may be useful in patients who have undergone PMBV or previous 
mitral valve surgery for MS, and who have redeveloped limiting 
symptoms, especially if questions regarding the severity of the valve 
lesion(s) remain after noninvasive study.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1816
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Rheumatic MS
Very severe MS
MVA ≤1 cm2
T½ ≥220 ms
Severe MS
MVA ≤1.5 cm2
T½ ≥150 ms
Progressive MS
MVA >1.5 cm2
T½ <150 ms
Asymptomatic
(stage C)
Periodic
monitoring
Periodic
monitoring
PBMC
(IIa)
PBMC
(IIb)
PBMC
(IIb)
Periodic
monitoring
PBMC
(I)
MVR
(I)
Favorable valve
morphology
No LA clot
No or mild MR
Favorable valve
morphology
No LA clot
No or mild MR
Asymptomatic
(stage C)
New-onset AF
PCWP >25 mmHg
with exercise
Symptomatic
(stage D)
Symptomatic with
no other cause
NYHA class III-IV
symptoms with
high surgical risk
Favorable valve
morphology
No LA clot
No or mild MR
Class I
Class IIa
Class IIb
Yes
No
FIGURE 258-1  Management of rheumatic mitral stenosis. See legend for Fig. 256-4 for explanation of treatment recommendations (class I, IIa, IIb) and disease 
stages (C, D). Preoperative coronary angiography should be performed routinely as determined by age, symptoms, and coronary risk factors. Cardiac catheterization 
and angiography may also be helpful when there is a discrepancy between clinical and noninvasive findings. AF, atrial fibrillation; LA, left atrial; MR, mitral regurgitation; 
MS, mitral stenosis; MVA, mitral valve area; MVR, mitral valve surgery (repair or replacement); NYHA, New York Heart Association; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge 
pressure; PMBC, percutaneous mitral balloon commissurotomy; and T ½, pressure half-time. (Adapted from RA Nishimura et al: 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the 
Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 63:e57-185, 2014, with permission.)
TREATMENT
Mitral Stenosis (Fig. 258-1)
Penicillin prophylaxis of group A β-hemolytic streptococcal infec-
tions (Chap. 352) for secondary prevention of rheumatic fever is 
important for at-risk patients with rheumatic MS. Recommendations 
for infective endocarditis prophylaxis are similar to those for other 
valve lesions and are restricted to patients at high risk for complica-
tions from infection, including patients with a history of endocardi-
tis. In symptomatic patients, some improvement usually occurs with 
restriction of sodium intake and small doses of oral diuretics. Beta 
blockers, nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g., vera-
pamil or diltiazem), and digitalis glycosides are useful in slowing 
the ventricular rate of patients with AF. Warfarin therapy targeted 
to an international normalized ratio (INR) of 2–3 should be admin-
istered indefinitely to patients with MS who have AF or a history of 
thromboembolism. The routine use of warfarin in patients in sinus 
rhythm with LA enlargement (maximal dimension >5.5 cm) with or 
without spontaneous echo contrast is more controversial. As of this 
writing, direct oral anticoagulants (e.g., apixaban, rivaroxaban) are 
not approved for use in patients with rheumatic MS.
If AF is of relatively recent onset in a patient whose MS is not 
severe enough to warrant PMBV or surgical intervention, rever-
sion to sinus rhythm pharmacologically or by means of electri-
cal countershock is indicated. Usually, cardioversion should be 
undertaken after the patient has had at least 3 consecutive weeks 
of anticoagulant treatment to a therapeutic INR. If cardioversion is 
indicated more urgently, then intravenous heparin should be pro-
vided and TEE performed to exclude the presence of LA thrombus 
before the procedure. Conversion to sinus rhythm is rarely success-
ful or sustained in patients with severe MS, particularly those in 
whom the LA is especially enlarged or in whom AF has been present 
for more than 1 year.
MITRAL VALVOTOMY
Unless there is a contraindication, mitral valvotomy is indicated 
in symptomatic (New York Heart Association [NYHA] Functional 
Class II–IV) patients with isolated severe MS, whose effective orifice 
(valve area) is < ~1 cm2/m2 body surface area, or <1.5 cm2 in normal-
sized adults. Mitral valvotomy can be carried out either percutane-
ously or surgically. In PMBV (Figs. 258-2 and 258-3), a catheter is 
directed into the LA after transseptal puncture, and a single balloon 
is directed across the valve and inflated in the valvular orifice. Ideal 
patients have relatively pliable leaflets with little or no commissural 
calcium. In addition, the subvalvular structures should not be sig-
nificantly scarred or thickened, and there should be no LA thrombus. 
The short- and long-term results of this procedure in appropriate 
patients are similar to those of surgical valvotomy, but with less mor-
bidity and a lower periprocedural mortality rate. Event-free survival 
in younger (<45 years) patients with pliable valves is excellent, with 
rates as high as 80–90% over 3–7 years. Therefore, PMBV has become 
the procedure of choice for such patients when it can be performed 
by a skilled operator in a high-volume center.
CHAPTER 258 Mitral Stenosis
1817
D
C
B
A
Guide
wire
Stiffening
cannula
FIGURE 258-2  Inoue balloon technique for percutaneous mitral balloon 
valvotomy. A. After transseptal puncture, the deflated balloon catheter is 
advanced across the interatrial septum, then across the mitral valve and into 
the left ventricle. B–D. The balloon is inflated stepwise within the mitral orifice.
ECG
PREDILATATION
40
LV
LA
20
Pressure (mmHg)
0
Mean mitral gradient 15 mmHg
Cardiac output 3 L/min
Mitral valve area 0.6 cm2
ECG
POSTDILATATION
40
20
0
Mean mitral gradient 3 mmHg
Cardiac output 3.8 L/min
Mitral valve area 1.8 cm2
LV
LA
FIGURE 258-3  Simultaneous left atrial (LA) and left ventricular (LV) pressure 
before and after percutaneous mitral balloon valvotomy (PMBV) in a patient 
with severe mitral stenosis. ECG, electrocardiogram. (Courtesy of Raymond G. 
McKay, MD; with permission.)
TABLE 258-2  Mortality Rates after Mitral Valve Surgerya
OPERATION
NUMBER
UNADJUSTED OPERATIVE 
MORTALITY (%)
MVR (isolated)
3448
4.6
MVR + CAB
1321
10.0
MVRp
4284
1.2
MVRp + CAB
2051
4.8
aData are for the first two quarters of calendar year 2015, during which 
1013 sites reported a total of 141,225 procedures. Data are available from 
the Society of Thoracic Surgeons at http://www.sts.org/sites/default/files/
documents/2015Harvest3_ExecutiveSummary.pdf.
Abbreviations: CAB, coronary artery bypass; MVR, mitral valve replacement;  
MVRp, mitral valve repair.
TTE is helpful in identifying patients for the percutaneous pro-
cedure; TEE is performed routinely to exclude LA thrombus and to 
assess the degree of MR at the time of the scheduled procedure. An 
“echo score” has been developed to help guide decision-making. 
The score accounts for the degree of leaflet thickening, calcification, 
and mobility, and for the extent of subvalvular thickening. A lower 
score predicts a higher likelihood of successful PMBV.
In patients in whom PMBV is not possible or unsuccessful, or 
in many patients with restenosis after previous surgery, an “open” 
surgical valvotomy using cardiopulmonary bypass is necessary. In 
addition to opening the valve commissures, it is important to loosen 
any subvalvular fusion of papillary muscles and chordae tendineae; 
to remove large deposits of calcium, thereby improving valvular 
function; and to remove atrial thrombi. The perioperative mortality 
rate is ~2%.
Successful valvotomy is defined by a 50% reduction in the mean 
mitral valve gradient and a doubling of the mitral valve area. Suc-
cessful valvotomy, whether balloon or surgical, usually results in 
striking symptomatic and hemodynamic improvement and pro-
longs survival. However, there is no evidence that the procedure 
improves the prognosis of patients with slight or no functional 
impairment. Therefore, unless recurrent systemic embolization or 
severe pulmonary hypertension has occurred (PA systolic pressures 
>50 mmHg at rest or >60 mmHg with exercise), valvotomy is not rec-
ommended for patients who are entirely asymptomatic and/or who 
have mild or moderate stenosis (mitral valve area >1.5 cm2). When 
there is little symptomatic improvement after valvotomy, it is likely 
that the procedure was ineffective, that it induced MR, or that asso-
ciated valvular or myocardial disease was present. About half of all 
patients undergoing surgical mitral valvotomy require reoperation 
by 10 years. In the pregnant patient with MS, valvotomy should be 
carried out if pulmonary congestion occurs despite intensive med-
ical treatment. PMBV is the preferred strategy in this setting and is 
performed with TEE and no or minimal x-ray exposure.
Mitral valve replacement (MVR) is necessary in patients with MS 
and significant associated MR, those in whom the valve has been 
severely distorted by previous transcatheter or operative manip-
ulation, or those in whom the surgeon does not find it possible to 
improve valve function significantly with valvotomy. MVR is now 
routinely performed with preservation of the chordal attachments 
to optimize LV functional recovery. Perioperative mortality rates 
with MVR vary with age, LV function, the presence of CAD, and 
associated comorbidities. They average 5% overall but are lower in 
young patients and may be twice as high in patients >65 years of age 
with significant comorbidities (Table 258-2). Because there are also 
long-term complications of valve replacement, patients in whom 
preoperative evaluation suggests the possibility that MVR may be 
required should be operated on only if they have severe MS—i.e., an 
orifice area ≤1.5 cm2—and are in NYHA Class III, i.e., symptomatic 
with ordinary activity despite optimal medical therapy. The overall 
10-year survival of surgical survivors is ~70%. Long-term prognosis 
is worse in patients >65 years of age and those with marked disabil-
ity and marked depression of the CO preoperatively. Pulmonary 
hypertension and RV dysfunction are additional risk factors for 
poor outcome.
■
■FURTHER READING
Nishimura RA et al: 2014 AHA/ACC guidelines for management of 
patients with valvular heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 63:357, 2014.
Nishimura RA et al: Mitral valve disease–Current management and 
future challenges. Lancet 387:1324, 2016.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1818
and commissural fusion, as well as shortening, contraction, and fusion 
of the chordae tendineae. MR can persist after resolution of the acute 
phase of infection and inflammation. MR may occur as a congenital 
anomaly (Chap. 264), most commonly as a defect of the endocardial 
cushions (atrioventricular cushion defects). A cleft anterior mitral valve 
leaflet accompanies ostium primum atrial septal defect. Radiation can 
result in leaflet thickening, retraction, and calcification, often in associ-
ation with annular and chordal involvement. Chronic MR is frequently 
secondary to ischemia and may occur as a consequence of ventricular 
remodeling, papillary muscle displacement, and leaflet tethering, or 
with fibrosis of a papillary muscle, in patients with healed MI(s) and 
ischemic cardiomyopathy. Similar mechanisms of annular dilation 
and ventricular remodeling contribute to the MR that occurs among 
patients with nonischemic forms of dilated cardiomyopathy once the 
LV end-diastolic dimension reaches 6 cm. The MR associated with 
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) is usually dynamic 
in nature and dependent on systolic anterior motion of the anterior 
mitral valve leaflet into a narrowed LV outflow tract. Patients with 
long-standing, chronic atrial fibrillation (AF) develop atrial remodeling 
and annular dilatation that can result in MR. Annular calcification can 
result in MR when it encroaches on the leaflets or results in decreased 
sphincteric function and is especially prevalent among patients with 
advanced renal disease and is commonly observed in women >65 years 
of age with hypertension and diabetes. Irrespective of cause, chronic 
severe MR is often progressive, because enlargement of the left atrial 
(LA) places tension on the posterior mitral leaflet, pulling it away 
from the mitral orifice and thereby aggravating the valvular dysfunc-
tion. Similarly, LV dilation increases the regurgitation, which, in turn, 
enlarges the LA and LV further, resulting in a vicious circle; hence the 
aphorism, “MR begets MR.”
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The resistance to LV emptying (LV afterload) is reduced in patients 
with MR. As a consequence, the LV is decompressed into the LA 
during ejection, and with the reduction in LV size during systole, 
there is a rapid decline in LV tension. The initial compensation to 
MR is more complete LV emptying. However, LV volume increases 
progressively with time as the severity of the regurgitation increases 
and as LV contractile function deteriorates. This increase in LV volume 
is often accompanied by a reduced forward cardiac output (CO). LV 
compliance is often increased, and thus, LV diastolic pressure does not 
increase until late in the course. The regurgitant volume varies directly 
with the LV systolic pressure and the size of the regurgitant orifice; the 
latter, in turn, is influenced by the extent of LV and mitral annular dila-
tion. Because ejection fraction (EF) rises in severe MR in the presence of 
normal LV function, even a modest reduction in this parameter (<60%) 
reflects significant contractile dysfunction.
During early diastole, as the distended LA empties, there is a par-
ticularly rapid y descent in the absence of accompanying MS. A brief, 
early diastolic LA-LV pressure gradient (often generating a rapid filling 
sound [S3] and mid-diastolic murmur masquerading as MS) may occur 
in patients with pure, severe MR as a result of the very rapid flow of 
blood across a normal-sized mitral orifice.
Measurements of LV ejection fraction (LVEF), CO, pulmonary arte-
rial (PA) systolic pressure, regurgitant volume, regurgitant fraction 
(RF), and the effective regurgitant orifice area can be obtained during a 
careful Doppler echocardiographic examination. These measurements 
can also be obtained accurately with cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) 
imaging, although this technology is not widely available. Left and 
right heart catheterization with contrast ventriculography is used less 
frequently. Chronic, severe MR is defined by a regurgitant volume 
≥60 mL/beat, RF ≥50%, and effective regurgitant orifice area ≥0.40 cm2. 
In patients with secondary MR, in whom the severity of MR can be 
underappreciated, lesser degrees of regurgitation carry relatively 
greater prognostic weight.
LA Compliance  In acute severe MR, the regurgitant volume is 
delivered into a normal-sized LA having normal or reduced compliance. 
As a result, LA pressures rise markedly for any increase in LA volume. 
The role of the physical examination in the evaluation of patients with 
valvular heart disease is also considered in Chaps. 38 and 234; of elec-
trocardiography (ECG) in Chap. 235; of echocardiography and other 
noninvasive imaging techniques in Chap. 236; and of cardiac catheter-
ization and angiography in Chap. 237.
■
■ETIOLOGY
Mitral regurgitation (MR) may result from an abnormality or disease 
process that affects any one or more of the five functional components 
of the mitral valve apparatus (leaflets, annulus, chordae tendineae, 
papillary muscles, and subjacent myocardium) (Table 259-1). Acute 
MR can occur in the setting of acute myocardial infarction (MI) with 
papillary muscle rupture (Chap. 269), following blunt chest wall 
trauma, or during the course of infective endocarditis (IE) owing to 
leaflet perforation or destruction. With acute MI, the posteromedial 
papillary muscle is involved much more frequently than the anterolat-
eral papillary muscle because of its singular blood supply. Transient, 
acute MR can occur during periods of active ischemia and bouts of 
angina pectoris. Rupture of chordae tendineae can result in “acute-on-
chronic MR” in patients with myxomatous degeneration of the valve 
apparatus.
Chronic MR can result from several disease processes (Table 259-1). 
Distinction should be drawn between primary MR, in which the leaf-
lets and/or chordae tendineae are primarily responsible for abnormal 
valve function, and secondary (functional) MR, in which the leaflets 
and chordae tendineae are usually normal but the regurgitation is 
caused by left ventricular (LV) remodeling with annular enlargement, 
papillary muscle displacement, leaflet tethering, or their combination. 
Patient assessment, treatment approach, and long-term prognosis dif-
fer significantly between primary and secondary MR. Mitral valve pro-
lapse (MVP) is discussed more extensively in Chap. 260. The rheumatic 
process produces rigidity, deformity, and retraction of the valve cusps 
259 Mitral Regurgitation
Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo 
TABLE 259-1  Major Causes of Mitral Regurgitation
Etiologies
Acute
  IE
  Papillary muscle rupture (post-MI)
  Chordal rupture/leaflet flail (MVP, IE)
  Blunt trauma
Chronic
  Primary (affecting leaflets, chordae)
    Myxomatous (MVP, Barlow’s, forme fruste)
    Rheumatic fever
  IE (healed)
  Congenital (cleft, AV canal)
  Radiation
  Secondary (leaflets, chordae are “innocent bystanders”)
    Ischemic cardiomyopathy
    Dilated cardiomyopathy
    HOCM (with SAM)
    Chronic AF with LA enlargement and annular dilatation
  Mitral annular calcificationa
aMitral annular calcification may include elements of both primary and secondary 
MR as the disease process may encroach on the leaflets, impair the normal 
sphincteric function of the annulus, or both.
Abbreviations: AF, atrial fibrillation; AV, atrioventricular; IE, infective endocarditis; 
HOCM, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy; LA, left atrial; LV, left ventricular; 
MI, myocardial infarction; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; SAM, systolic anterior 
motion.
CHAPTER 259 Mitral Regurgitation
1819
The systolic murmur of chronic MR not due to MVP is intensified by 
isometric exercise (handgrip) but is reduced during the strain phase 
of the Valsalva maneuver because of the associated decrease in LV 
preload.
■
■LABORATORY EXAMINATION
ECG  In patients with sinus rhythm, there is evidence of LA enlarge-
ment, but right atrial (RA) enlargement also may be present when 
pulmonary hypertension is significant and affects RV function and size. 
Chronic severe MR is frequently associated with AF. In many patients, 
there is no clear-cut ECG evidence of enlargement of either ventricle. In 
others, the signs of eccentric LV hypertrophy are present.
Echocardiogram  Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is indi-
cated to assess the mechanism of the MR and its hemodynamic sever-
ity. LV function can be assessed from LV end-diastolic and end-systolic 
volumes and EF. Observations can be made regarding leaflet structure 
and function, chordal integrity, LA and LV size, annular calcification, 
and regional and global LV systolic function. Doppler imaging should 
demonstrate the width or area of the color flow MR jet within the LA, 
the duration and intensity of the continuous wave Doppler signal, the 
pulmonary venous flow contour, the early peak mitral inflow velocity, 
and quantitative measures of regurgitant volume, RF, and effective 
regurgitant orifice area. In addition, the PA pressures (PAPs) can be 
estimated from the TR jet velocity. TTE is also indicated to follow the 
course of patients with chronic MR and to provide rapid assessment for 
any clinical change. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) provides 
greater anatomic detail than TTE (see Fig. 236-5). Exercise testing with 
TTE can be useful to assess exercise capacity as well as any dynamic 
change in MR severity, PA systolic pressures, and biventricular func-
tion, for patients in whom there is a discrepancy between clinical find-
ings and the results of other noninvasive testing.
Chest X-Ray  The LA and LV are the dominant chambers in chronic 
MR. Late in the course of the disease, the LA may be massively enlarged 
and forms the right border of the cardiac silhouette. Pulmonary venous 
congestion, interstitial edema, and Kerley B lines are sometimes noted. 
Marked calcification of the mitral leaflets occurs commonly in patients 
with long-standing, combined rheumatic MR and MS. Calcification of 
the mitral annulus may be visualized, particularly on the lateral view 
of the chest. Patients with acute severe MR may have asymmetric pul-
monary edema if the regurgitant jet is directed predominantly to the 
orifice of an upper lobe pulmonary vein.
TREATMENT
Mitral Regurgitation
MEDICAL TREATMENT (FIG. 259-1)
The management of chronic severe MR depends to some degree on 
its cause. Anticoagulation with either warfarin or a direct oral agent 
(e.g., apixaban, rivaroxaban) should be provided if AF intervenes, as 
guided by the CHA2DS2-VASc risk score. The direct oral anticoagu-
lants should not be used if rheumatic mitral stenosis is also present; 
they are also not approved for use in patients with mechanical pros-
thetic heart valves. Cardioversion should be considered depending 
on the clinical context, AF chronicity, LA size. In contrast to the 
acute setting, there are no large, long-term prospective studies to 
substantiate the use of vasodilators for the treatment of chronic, iso-
lated severe MR with preserved LV systolic function in the absence of 
systemic hypertension. The severity of MR in the setting of an ischemic 
or dilated cardiomyopathy may diminish with aggressive guideline-
directed treatment of heart failure including the use of diuretics, beta 
blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, digitalis, 
and biventricular pacing (cardiac resynchronization therapy [CRT]) 
when otherwise indicated. Antibiotic prophylaxis for prevention of 
IE is indicated for MR patients with a prior history of IE. Asymp-
tomatic patients with severe MR in sinus rhythm with normal LV 
size and systolic function should avoid isometric forms of exercise.
The v wave in the LA pressure pulse is usually prominent, LA and 
pulmonary venous pressures are markedly elevated, and pulmonary 
edema is common. Because of the rapid rise in LA pressures during 
ventricular systole, the murmur of acute MR is early in timing and 
decrescendo in configuration ending well before S2, as a reflection of 
the progressive diminution in the LV-LA pressure gradient. LV sys-
tolic function in acute MR may be normal, hyperdynamic, or reduced, 
depending on the clinical context.
Patients with chronic severe MR, on the other hand, develop marked 
LA enlargement and increased LA compliance with little if any increase 
in LA and pulmonary venous pressures for any increase in LA volume. 
The LA v wave is relatively less prominent. The murmur of chronic MR 
is classically holosystolic in timing and plateau in configuration, as a 
reflection of the near-constant LV-LA pressure gradient. These patients 
usually complain of severe fatigue and exhaustion secondary to a low 
forward CO, whereas symptoms resulting from pulmonary congestion 
are less prominent initially; AF is almost invariably present once the 
LA dilates significantly.
■
■SYMPTOMS
Patients with chronic mild-to-moderate, isolated MR are usually 
asymptomatic. This form of LV volume overload is well tolerated. 
Fatigue, exertional dyspnea, and orthopnea are the most prominent 
complaints in patients with chronic severe MR. Palpitations are com-
mon and may signify the onset of AF. Right-sided heart failure, with 
painful hepatic congestion, ankle edema, distended neck veins, ascites, 
and secondary tricuspid regurgitation (TR), occurs in patients with 
MR who have associated pulmonary vascular disease and pulmonary 
hypertension. Acute pulmonary edema is common in patients with 
acute severe MR.
■
■PHYSICAL FINDINGS
In patients with chronic severe MR, the arterial pressure is usually nor-
mal, although the carotid arterial pulse may show a sharp, low-volume 
upstroke owing to the reduced forward CO. A systolic thrill is often 
palpable at the cardiac apex, the LV is hyperdynamic with a brisk sys-
tolic impulse and a palpable rapid-filling wave (S3), and the apex beat 
is often displaced laterally.
In patients with acute severe MR, the arterial pressure may be 
reduced with a narrow pulse pressure, the jugular venous pressure 
and waveforms may be normal or increased and exaggerated, the 
apical impulse is not displaced, and signs of pulmonary congestion 
are prominent.
Auscultation  S1 is generally absent, soft, or buried in the holosys-
tolic murmur of chronic, severe MR. In patients with severe MR, the 
aortic valve may close prematurely, resulting in wide but physiologic 
splitting of S2. A low-pitched S3 occurring 0.12–0.17 s after the aortic 
valve closure sound, i.e., at the completion of the rapid-filling phase of 
the LV, is believed to be caused by the sudden tensing of the papillary 
muscles, chordae tendineae, and valve leaflets. It may be followed 
by a short, rumbling, mid-diastolic murmur, even in the absence of 
structural MS. In patients with ischemic or dilated cardiomyopathy, 
however, a third sound (S3) may also signify ventricular dysfunction. 
A fourth heart sound is often audible in patients with acute severe MR 
who are in sinus rhythm. A presystolic murmur is not ordinarily heard 
with isolated MR.
A systolic murmur of at least grade III/VI intensity is the most 
characteristic auscultatory finding in chronic severe MR. It is usually 
holosystolic (see Fig. 234-5A), but as previously noted, it is decrescendo 
and ceases in mid-to-late systole in patients with acute severe MR. The 
systolic murmur of chronic MR is usually most prominent at the apex 
and radiates to the axilla. However, in patients with ruptured chordae 
tendineae or primary involvement of the posterior mitral leaflet with 
prolapse or flail, the regurgitant jet is eccentric, directed anteriorly, and 
strikes the LA wall adjacent to the aortic root. In this situation, the sys-
tolic murmur is transmitted to the base of the heart and, therefore, may 
be confused with the murmur of AS. In patients with ruptured chordae 
tendineae, the systolic murmur may have a cooing or “seagull” quality, 
whereas a flail leaflet may produce a murmur with a musical quality. 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1820
Patients with acute severe MR require urgent stabilization and 
preparation for surgery. Diuretics, intravenous vasodilators (partic-
ularly sodium nitroprusside), and even mechanical support may be 
needed for patients with post-MI papillary muscle rupture or other 
forms of acute severe MR.
SURGICAL TREATMENT
In the selection of patients with chronic, severe, primary MR for sur-
gical treatment, the often slowly progressive nature of the condition 
must be balanced against the immediate and long-term risks associ-
ated with operation. These risks are significantly lower for primary 
valve repair than for valve replacement (Table 259-2). Repair usually 
consists of valve reconstruction using a variety of valvuloplasty 
techniques and insertion of an annuloplasty ring. Repair spares the 
patient the long-term adverse consequences of valve replacement, 
including thromboembolic and hemorrhagic complications in the 
case of mechanical prostheses and late valve failure necessitating 
repeat valve replacement in the case of bioprostheses. In addition, 
by preserving the integrity of the papillary muscles, subvalvular 
apparatus, and chordae tendineae, mitral repair and valvuloplasty 
maintain LV function to a relatively greater degree than does valve 
replacement.
Surgery for chronic severe primary MR is indicated once symp-
toms occur, especially if valve repair is feasible (Fig. 259-1). Surgery 
should also be recommended for asymptomatic patients with LV 
dysfunction characterized by an EF <60% or an LV end-systolic 
dimension (LV ESD) >40 mm. Other indications for early consid-
eration of mitral valve repair in asymptomatic patients include (1) 
recent-onset AF (duration <3 months); (2) pulmonary hypertension 
(defined as a systolic PA pressure ≥50 mmHg at rest or ≥60 mmHg 
with exercise); and (3) a progressive decrease in LV EF or increase 
in LV ESD on serial imaging. These aggressive recommendations for 
surgery are predicated on the adverse long-term consequences of 
Yes
No
Yes
No
Symptomatic
(stage D)
Asymptomatic
(stage C)
Symptomatic
severe MR
(stage D)
Asymptomatic
severe MR
(stage C)
Progressive
MR
(stage B)
Class I
Class IIa
Class IIb
Mitral Regurgitation
Symptomatic
(stage D)
LVEF >30%
MV surgery*
(IIb)
MV repair
(IIa)
MV surgery*
(I)
MV surgery
(IIa)
MV surgery*
(IIb)
Periodic monitoring
Periodic monitoring
Asymptomatic
(stage C)
LVEF 30 to ≤60%
LVESD ≥40 mm
(stage C2)
Progressive increase
in LVESD or
decrease in EF
LVEF >60% and
LVESD <40 mm
(stage C1)
New onset AF or
PASP >50 mmHg
(stage C1)
Likelihood of successful
repair >95% and
expected mortality <1%
Symptomatic
severe MR
(stage D)
Persistent NYHA
class III-IV
symptoms
Asymptomatic
severe MR
(stage C)
Progressive
MR
(stage B)
Progressive MR
(stage B)
Vena contracta <0.7 cm
RVol <60 mL
RF <50%
ERO <0.4 cm2
Secondary MR
CAD Rx
HF Rx
Consider CRT
Class I
Class IIa
Class IIb
Primary MR
Severe MR
Vena contracta ≥0.7 cm
RVol ≥60% mL
RF ≥50%
ERO ≥0.4 cm2
LV dilation
*MV repair is preferred over MV replacement when possible.
FIGURE 259-1  Management of mitral regurgitation. See legend for Fig. 256-4 for explanation of treatment recommendations (class I, IIa, IIb) and disease stages 
(B, C1, C2, D). Preoperative coronary angiography should be performed routinely as determined by age, symptoms, and coronary risk factors. Cardiac catheterization 
and angiography may also be helpful when there is a discrepancy between clinical and noninvasive findings. AF, atrial fibrillation; CAD, coronary artery disease; CRT, 
cardiac resynchronization therapy; EF, ejection fraction; ERO, effective regurgitant orifice; HF, heart failure; LV, left ventricular; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; 
LVESD, left ventricular end-systolic dimension; MR, mitral regurgitation, MV, mitral valve; MVR, mitral valve replacement; NYHA, New York Heart Association; PASP, 
pulmonary artery systolic pressure; RF, regurgitant fraction; RVol, regurgitant volume; and Rx, therapy. (Adapted from RA Nishimura et al: 2017 Focused Update of 
the 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. Available at www.onlinejacc.org/lookup/doi/10.1016/j.
jacc.2017.03.011.)
TABLE 259-2  Mortality Rates after Mitral Valve Surgerya
OPERATION
NUMBER
UNADJUSTED OPERATIVE 
MORTALITY (%)
MVR (isolated)
3448
4.6
MVR + CAB
1321
10.0
MVRp
4284
1.2
MVRp + CAB
2051
4.8
aData are for the first two quarters of calendar year 2015, during which 
1013 sites reported a total of 141,225 procedures. Data are available from 
the Society of Thoracic Surgeons at http://www.sts.org/sites/default/files/
documents/2015Harvest3_ExecutiveSummary.pdf.
Abbreviations: CAB, coronary artery bypass; MVR, mitral valve replacement; MVRp, 
mitral valve repair.
CHAPTER 260 Mitral Valve Prolapse
1821
FIGURE 259-2  Clip used to grasp the free edges of the anterior and posterior 
leaflets in their midsections during transcatheter repair of selected patients 
with mitral regurgitation. (Courtesy of Abbott Vascular. © 2014 Abbott Laboratories. 
All rights reserved.)
waiting for LV function to decline further as well as the outstanding 
results achievable with mitral valve repair by reference surgeons at 
high-volume centers. Indeed, repair of myxomatous MR (e.g., pro-
lapse, flail) in patients <75 years with normal LV systolic function 
and no coronary artery disease (CAD) can now be performed by 
experienced surgeons with <1% perioperative mortality risk. The 
risk of stroke, however, is also ~1%. Repair is feasible in up to 95% 
of patients with myxomatous disease operated on by a high-volume 
surgeon in a referral center of excellence. Repair techniques include 
chordal transfer, creation of neochords, limited leaflet resection, and 
insertion of an annuloplasty band. Long-term durability is excellent; 
the incidence of reoperative surgery for failed primary repair is 
~1% per year for the first 10 years after surgery. For patients with 
AF, left or biatrial maze surgery, or radiofrequency isolation of the 
pulmonary veins is often performed to reduce the risk of recurrent 
postoperative AF.
The surgical management of patients with secondary MR is more 
complicated. Surgery for patients with ischemic MR most often 
involves simultaneous coronary artery revascularization. Current 
surgical practice includes annuloplasty repair with an undersized, 
rigid ring or chord-sparing valve replacement for patients with 
moderate or greater degrees of MR. Valve repair for ischemic MR 
is associated with lower perioperative mortality rates than valve 
replacement but significantly higher rates of recurrent MR over 
time. In patients with ischemic MR and significantly impaired LV 
systolic function (EF <30%), the risk of surgery is higher, recovery 
of LV performance is incomplete, and long-term survival is reduced. 
Referral for surgery must be individualized and made only after 
aggressive attempts to improve symptoms with guideline-directed 
medical therapy and CRT, when indicated. The routine performance 
of valve repair in patients with significant secondary MR due to a 
dilated cardiomyopathy has not been shown to improve long-term 
survival compared with optimal medical therapy. Patients with 
acute severe MR can often be stabilized temporarily with appro-
priate medical therapy, but surgical correction will be necessary 
emergently in the case of papillary muscle rupture and within days 
to weeks in most other settings.
When surgical treatment is contemplated, left and right heart 
catheterization and left ventriculography may be helpful in confirm-
ing the presence of severe MR in patients in whom there is a discrep-
ancy between the clinical and TTE findings that cannot be resolved 
with TEE or CMR. Coronary angiography identifies patients who 
require concomitant coronary revascularization.
TRANSCATHETER MITRAL VALVE REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT
A transcatheter approach to the treatment of either primary or 
functional MR may be feasible in selected patients with appropriate 
anatomy. The proper role of currently available techniques remains 
under active investigation. One approach involves the deployment 
of a clip delivered via transseptal puncture that grasps the leading 
edges of the mitral leaflets in their mid-portion (anterior scallop 
to posterior scallop or A2-P2; Fig. 259-2). The length and width of 
the gap between these leading edges dictate patient eligibility. The 
device is commercially available. In the United States only for the 
treatment of prohibitive- or high-surgical risk, symptomatic patients 
with severe, primary (myxomatous) MR. The edge-to-edge clip 
technique is undergoing study in the United States for treatment of 
patients with symptomatic heart failure, reduced LVEF, and severe, 
secondary MR despite guideline-directed medical therapy. Other 
approaches include the deployment of a device within the coronary 
sinus that can be adjusted to reduce mitral annular circumference 
and the effective orifice area of the valve much like a surgically 
implanted ring. Variations in the anatomic relationship of the cor-
onary sinus to the mitral annulus and circumflex coronary artery 
have limited the applicability of this technique. Attempts to reduce 
the septal-lateral dimension of a dilated annulus using adjustable 
cords placed across the LV in a subvalvular location have also been 
investigated. Construction of neochords to the mitral leaflets under 
TEE guidance using a system delivered via the cardiac apex is also 
under study. Investigational experience to date with transcatheter 
mitral valve replacement systems is in early clinical stages, although 
the field is evolving rapidly.
■
■FURTHER READING
Carabello BA: The myocardium in mitral regurgitation. A tale of two 
ventricles. Circulation 127:1567, 2013.
Maisano F et al: The future of transcatheter mitral valve interventions: 
Competitive or complementary role of repair vs. replacement. Eur 
Heart J 36:1651, 2015.
Nishimura RA et al: Mitral valve disease. Current management and 
future challenges. Lancet 387:1324, 2016.
Nishimura RA et al: 2017 Focused Update of the 2014 AHA/ACC 
Guideline for the Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Dis-
ease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017. Available at www.onlinejacc.org/lookup/
doi/ 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.03.011.
Otto CM, Verrier ED: Mitral regurgitation—What is best for my 
patient? N Engl J Med 364:1462, 2011.
Rugueiro A et al: Transcatheter mitral valve replacement: insights from 
early clinical experience and future challenges. J Am Coll Cardiol 
69:2175, 2017.
The role of the physical examination in the evaluation of patients with 
valvular heart disease is also considered in Chaps. 38 and 234; of elec-
trocardiography (ECG) in Chap. 235; of echocardiography and other 
noninvasive imaging techniques in Chap. 236; and of cardiac catheter-
ization and angiography in Chap. 237.
MITRAL VALVE PROLAPSE
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP), also variously termed the systolic click-
murmur syndrome, Barlow’s syndrome (Fig. 260-1), floppy-valve syndrome, 
and billowing mitral leaflet syndrome, is a relatively common but highly 
260 Mitral Valve Prolapse
Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1822
B 
C 
A 
FIGURE 260-1  Congenital or developmental mitral valve prolapse. Myxomatous thickening and 
prolapse of the mitral valve can occur in isolation in 2–3% of the general population, or may be 
associated with heritable collagen-vascular disorders and aortic root dilatation, such as in Marfan 
syndrome. Myxomatous degeneration of the valve predisposes to severe regurgitation and chordal 
rupture, and is a frequent indication for mitral valve repair or replacement. Prolapse can affect only one 
or both leaflets, to varying degrees. A. Three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiogram showing 
a myxomatous mitral valve from the left atrial en face aspect. There is billowing and prolapse of the 
entire middle scallop of the posterior leaflet. (Figure courtesy of Douglas C. Shook, MD, Department 
of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital). B. The posterior 
leaflet of the mitral valve demonstrates marked prolapse and hooding in all segments and severe 
redundancy in this photograph taken from the vantage point of the left atrium. C. Opening the left 
heart reveals prominent mitral leaflet hooding (arrows). The chordae are focally thickened, but are not 
fused as would be the case in rheumatic valve disease. (Used with permission from JC Wu, RF Padera: 
Clinicopathologic correlates, in Atlas of Echocardiography, 2nd ed, SD Solomon [ed], E Braunwald 
[series ed]. Philadelphia, Current Medicine Group LLC, 2008. p 363.)
variable clinical syndrome resulting from diverse pathologic mech-
anisms of the mitral valve apparatus. Among these are excessive or 
redundant mitral leaflet tissue, which is commonly associated with 
myxomatous degeneration and greatly increased concentrations of 
certain glycosaminoglycans. MVP is the most common abnormality 
leading to primary mitral regurgitation (MR) (see Chap. 259).
In most patients with MVP, the cause is unknown, but in some, it 
appears to be genetically determined. A reduction in the production of 
type III collagen has been incriminated, and electron microscopy has 
revealed fragmentation of collagen fibrils.
MVP is a frequent finding in patients with heritable disorders of 
connective tissue, including Marfan syndrome (Chap. 406), osteogen-
esis imperfecta, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. MVP may be associated 
with thoracic skeletal deformities similar to but not as severe as those 
in Marfan syndrome, such as a high-arched palate and alterations 
of the chest and thoracic spine, including the so-called straight back 
syndrome. Other associated features can include a history of inguinal 
hernias, joint dislocations, meniscal tears, and easy bruisability.
In most patients with MVP, myxomatous degeneration is confined 
to the mitral valve, although the tricuspid and aortic valves may also 
be affected. The posterior mitral leaflet is usually more affected than 
the anterior, and the mitral valve annulus is often dilated. In many 
patients, elongated, redundant, or ruptured chordae tendineae cause 
or contribute to the regurgitation.
MVP also may occur rarely as a sequel to acute rheumatic fever, in 
ischemic heart disease, and in various cardiomyopathies, as well as in 
20% of patients with ostium secundum atrial septal defect.
MVP may lead to excessive stress on the papillary muscles, which, 
in turn, leads to dysfunction and ischemia of the papillary muscles 
and the subjacent ventricular myocardium. Rupture of chordae tend-
ineae and progressive annular dilation and calcification contribute to 
valvular regurgitation, which then places more stress 
on the diseased mitral valve apparatus, thereby cre-
ating a vicious circle. ECG changes (see below) and 
ventricular arrhythmias described in some patients 
with MVP appear to result from regional ventricular 
dysfunction related to the increased stress placed on 
the papillary muscles.
■
■CLINICAL FEATURES
MVP is more common in women and occurs most fre-
quently between the ages of 15 and 30 years; the clinical 
course is most often benign. MVP may also be observed 
in older (>50 years) patients, often men, in whom MR 
is often more severe and requires surgical treatment. 
There is an increased familial incidence for some 
patients, suggesting an autosomal dominant form of 
inheritance with incomplete penetrance. MVP varies 
in its clinical expression, ranging from only a systolic 
click and murmur with mild prolapse of the posterior 
leaflet to severe MR due to chordal rupture and leaflet 
flail. The degree of myxomatous change of the leaflets 
can also vary widely. In many patients, the condition 
progresses over years or decades; in others, it worsens 
rapidly as a result of chordal rupture or endocarditis.
Most patients are asymptomatic and remain 
so for their entire lives. However, in North Amer-
ica, MVP is now the most common cause of isolated 
severe MR requiring surgical treatment. Arrhythmias, 
most commonly ventricular premature contrac-
tions and paroxysmal supraventricular and ventric-
ular tachycardia, as well as atrial fibrillation (AF), 
have been reported and may cause palpitations, light- 
headedness, and syncope. Sudden death is a very rare 
complication and occurs most often in patients with 
severe MR and depressed left ventricle (LV) systolic 
function, although it can occur in individuals with nor-
mal LV size and function. There may be an excess risk of 
sudden death among patients with a flail leaflet. Many 
patients have chest pain that is difficult to evaluate; it is often substernal, 
prolonged, and not related to exertion, but may rarely resemble angina 
pectoris. Transient cerebral ischemic attacks secondary to emboli from the 
mitral valve due to endothelial disruption have been reported. Infective 
endocarditis may occur in patients with MR and/or leaflet thickening.
Auscultation  A frequent finding is the mid- or late- (nonejection) 
systolic click, which occurs 0.14 s or more after S1 and is thought to be 
generated by the sudden tensing of slack, elongated chordae tendineae 
or by the prolapsing mitral leaflet when it reaches its maximal excursion. 
Systolic clicks may be multiple and may be followed by a high-pitched, 
mid-late systolic crescendo–decrescendo murmur, which occasionally 
is “whooping” or “honking” and is heard best at the apex. Radiation of 
the murmur will depend on the involved leaflet. With posterior leaflet 
prolapse, the jet of MR is directed anteriorly and the murmur will radi-
ate to the base of the heart. With anterior leaflet involvement, the jet 
of MR is directed posteriorly and the murmur will radiate to the axilla 
and back. The click and murmur occur earlier with standing, during 
the strain phase of the Valsalva maneuver, and with any intervention 
that decreases LV volume (preload), exaggerating the propensity of 
mitral leaflet prolapse. Conversely, squatting and isometric exercises, 
which increase LV volume, diminish MVP; the click-murmur complex 
is delayed, moves away from S1, and may even disappear. Some patients 
have a mid-systolic click without a murmur; others have a murmur 
without a click. Still others have both sounds at different times.
LABORATORY EXAMINATION
The ECG most commonly is normal but may show biphasic or inverted 
T-waves in leads II, III, and aVF, and occasionally supraventricular or 
ventricular premature beats. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is 
particularly effective in identifying the abnormal position and prolapse 
of the mitral valve leaflets. A useful echocardiographic definition of 
CHAPTER 261 Tricuspid Valve Disease
1823
FIGURE 260-2.  Barlow’s valve with classic mitral valve prolapse, as seen on 
transthoracic echocardiogram in parasternal long-axis windows. Left: parasternal 
long-axis window, showing both myxomatous leaflets billowing into the left atrium 
in late systole. Right: same window with color Doppler showing significant mitral 
regurgitation (yellow jet) in systole. (Courtesy of Justina Wu, MD, PhD.)
MVP is systolic displacement (in the parasternal long axis view) of the 
belly of the mitral valve leaflets by at least 2 mm into the left atrium 
(LA) superior to the plane of the mitral annulus. There can be prolapse 
of one or both leaflets (Fig. 260-2). Color flow and continuous wave 
Doppler imaging is helpful to evaluate the associated MR and provide 
semiquantitative estimates of severity. The jet lesion of MR due to 
MVP is most often eccentric, and assessment of the effective regurgi-
tant orifice area and regurgitant volume can be difficult. Both three- 
dimensional echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance can 
provide more precise determinations of LV volumes. Transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE) is indicated when more accurate anatomic 
information is required and is performed routinely for intraoperative 
guidance during valve repair. Exercise testing can be performed when 
there is uncertainty regarding functional capacity. It is often combined 
with rest and immediate poststress TTE to assess LV and right ventricu-
lar (RV) function, and the dynamic nature of MR and pulmonary artery 
pressures. Invasive left ventriculography done at the time of right and 
left heart catheterization is rarely necessary but can also show prolapse 
of the posterior and sometimes of both mitral valve leaflets.
TREATMENT
Mitral Valve Prolapse
Infective endocarditis prophylaxis is indicated for patients with a 
prior history of endocarditis. Beta blockers sometimes relieve chest 
pain and control palpitations. Decisions regarding anticoagulation 
for stroke prevention in AF should be based on the CHA2DS2-VASc 
score and an assessment of bleeding risk. If the patient is symptom-
atic from severe MR, mitral valve repair is indicated (see Fig. 259-1). 
Other indications for surgery for MVP with severe primary MR 
include signs of established or progressive LV systolic dysfunction, 
pulmonary artery hypertension, or recent onset AF. Mitral valve 
repair is preferred over replacement in patients with MVP or flail 
mitral leaflet (see Table 258-2); technical success is dependent not 
only on the anatomic findings, but also on the skill and experience 
of the surgeon. Repair of isolated posterior leaflet prolapse is usu-
ally straightforward, but increasingly more complex pathologies 
(e.g., anterior leaflet prolapse, bileaflet prolapse, Barlow’s deformity) 
require advanced skills. Careful pre- and intraoperative TEE imag-
ing is an important component of patient evaluation and surgical 
planning. Transcatheter edge-to-edge repair using a clip to grasp 
the anterior and posterior leaflets together can be considered for 
treatment of symptomatic patients at high surgical risk with severe 
primary MR due to MVP (see Fig. 259-2). Most often, the MR will 
be reduced in severity but not eliminated. Nevertheless, symptom 
status and indices of LV size and function can be improved with 
this approach, which is now offered at >200 specialized sites in the 
United States. Reported hospital mortality rates following the proce-
dure are ~2%. Other transcatheter repair and replacement devices are 
not yet approved for clinical use in the United States (see Chap. 259).
■
■FURTHER READING
Grover FL et al: 2016 Annual Report of the Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons/American College of Cardiology Transcatheter Valve 
Therapy Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol 69:1215, 2017.
Nishimura RA et al: Mitral valve disease. Current management and 
future challenges. Lancet 387:1324, 2016.
Nishimura RA et al: 2017 Focused Update of the 2014 AHA/ACC 
Guideline on Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 70:252, 2017.
TRICUSPID STENOSIS
Tricuspid stenosis (TS), which is much less prevalent than mitral steno-
sis (MS) in North America and Western Europe, is generally rheumatic 
in origin, and is more common in women than men (Table 261-1). It 
does not occur as an isolated lesion and is usually associated with 
MS. Hemodynamically significant TS occurs in 5–10% of patients with 
severe MS; rheumatic TS is commonly associated with some degree of 
tricuspid regurgitation (TR). Nonrheumatic causes of TS are rare.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A diastolic pressure gradient between the right atrium (RA) and right 
ventricle (RV) defines TS. It is augmented when the transvalvular 
blood flow increases during inspiration and declines during expiration. 
A mean diastolic pressure gradient of 4 mmHg is usually sufficient to 
elevate the mean RA pressure to levels that result in systemic venous 
congestion. Unless sodium intake has been restricted and diuretics 
administered, this venous congestion is associated with hepatomegaly, 
ascites, and edema, sometimes severe. In patients with sinus rhythm, 
the RA a wave may be extremely tall and may even approach the level 
of the RV systolic pressure. The y descent is prolonged. The cardiac out-
put (CO) at rest is usually depressed, and it fails to rise during exercise. 
The low CO is responsible for the normal or only slightly elevated left 
atrial (LA), pulmonary artery (PA), and RV systolic pressures despite 
261 Tricuspid Valve Disease
Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo 
TABLE 261-1  Causes of Tricuspid Valve Diseases
VALVE LESION
ETIOLOGIES
Tricuspid stenosis
Rheumatic
Congenital
Tricuspid regurgitation
Primary (organic)
  Rheumatic
  Endocarditis
  Myxomatous (TVP)
  Carcinoid
  Radiation
  Congenital (Ebstein’s)
  Trauma
  Papillary muscle injury (post-MI)
Secondary (functional)
  RV and tricuspid annular dilatation due to 
multiple causes of RV enlargement (e.g., long-
standing pulmonary HTN, remodeling post-RV MI, 
left-sided valve disease, cardiomyopathy, AF)
  Chronic RV apical pacing
Abbreviations: AF, atrial fibrillation; HTN, hypertension; MI, myocardial infarction; 
RV, right ventricular; TVP , tricuspid valve prolapse.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1824
and tricuspid orifice areas <1.5–2 cm2. TS is almost always accom-
panied by significant TR. Operative repair may permit substantial 
improvement of tricuspid valve function. If repair cannot be accom-
plished, the tricuspid valve may have to be replaced. Meta-analysis 
has shown no difference in overall survival between mechanical and 
tissue valve replacement. Mechanical valves in the tricuspid position 
are more prone to thromboembolic complications than in other posi-
tions. Percutaneous tricuspid balloon valvotomy for isolated severe 
TS without significant TR is very rarely performed.
TRICUSPID REGURGITATION
More than 80% of TR cases encountered in clinical practice are second-
ary (functional) in nature and related to tricuspid annular dilatation 
and leaflet tethering in the setting of RV remodeling caused by pressure 
or volume overload (or both), myocardial infarction (MI) or trauma 
(Table 261-1). Secondary TR is commonly seen in the late stages of 
heart failure due to rheumatic or congenital heart disease with severe 
PA hypertension (PA systolic pressure >55 mmHg), as well as in other 
types of left-sided valvular (e.g., mitral regurgitation) or myocardial 
diseases (e.g., ischemic and idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathies). It 
is reversible in part if PA hypertension can be relieved. Secondary TR 
can also develop from chronic RV apical pacing and dyssynchronous 
contraction; in some patients, the RV leads may also perforate or 
entrap the TV leaflets. TR can often emerge in the setting of new onset 
atrial fibrillation (AF), particularly in elderly patients. Rheumatic fever 
may produce primary TR, often associated with TS. Tricuspid valve 
prolapse, carcinoid heart disease, endomyocardial fibrosis, radiation, 
infective endocarditis, and leaflet trauma can also produce primary TR. 
Less commonly, primary TR results from congenitally deformed tricus-
pid valves, and can occur with defects of the atrioventricular canal, as 
well as with Ebstein’s malformation of the tricuspid valve (Chap. 264).
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The incompetent tricuspid valve allows blood to flow backward from 
the RV into the RA, the volume of which is dependent on the driving 
pressure (i.e., RV systolic pressure) and the size of the regurgitant orifice. 
The severity and physical signs of TR can vary as a function of PA sys-
tolic pressure (in the absence of RV outflow tract stenosis), the dimension 
of the tricuspid valve annulus, the respiratory cycle-dependent changes 
in RV preload, and RA compliance. RV filling is increased during inspi-
ration. Forward CO is reduced and does not augment with exercise. 
Significant degrees of TR will lead to RA enlargement and elevation of 
the RA and jugular venous pressures with prominent c-v waves in the 
pulse tracings. Progressively severe TR can lead to “ventricularization” 
of the RA wave form (see Fig. 234-1B). Severe TR is also characterized 
by RV dilation (RV volume overload) and eventual systolic dysfunc-
tion, the progression of which can be accelerated by a concomitant 
pressure load from PA hypertension or by myocardial fibrosis from 
previous injury.
■
■SYMPTOMS
Mild or moderate degrees of TR are usually well tolerated in the 
absence of other hemodynamic disturbances. Because TR most often 
coexists with left-sided valve lesions, LV dysfunction, and/or PA 
hypertension, symptoms related to these lesions may dominate the 
clinical picture. Fatigue and exertional dyspnea owing to reduced 
forward CO are early symptoms of isolated, severe TR. As the disease 
progresses and RV function declines, patients may report cervical pul-
sations, abdominal fullness/bloating, diminished appetite, and muscle 
wasting, although with progressive weight gain and painful swelling 
of the lower extremities.
■
■PHYSICAL FINDINGS
The neck veins in patients with severe TR are distended with promi-
nent c-v waves and rapid y descents (in the absence of TS). TR is more 
often diagnosed by examination of the neck veins than by auscultation 
of the heart sounds. Other findings may include marked hepatomegaly 
with systolic pulsations, ascites, pleural effusions, edema, and a pos-
itive hepatojugular reflux sign. A prominent RV pulsation along the 
the presence of MS. Thus, the presence of TS can mask the hemody-
namic and clinical features of any associated MS.
■
■SYMPTOMS
Because the development of MS generally precedes that of TS, many 
patients initially have symptoms of pulmonary congestion and fatigue. 
Characteristically, patients with severe TS complain of relatively little 
dyspnea for the degree of hepatomegaly, ascites, and edema that they 
have. However, fatigue secondary to a low CO and discomfort due to 
refractory edema, ascites, and marked hepatomegaly are common in 
patients with advanced TS and/or TR. In some patients, TS may be sus-
pected for the first time when symptoms of right-sided failure persist 
after an adequate mitral valvotomy.
■
■PHYSICAL FINDINGS
Because TS usually occurs in the presence of other obvious valvular 
disease, the diagnosis may be missed unless it is considered. Severe 
TS is associated with marked hepatic congestion, often resulting in 
cirrhosis, jaundice, serious malnutrition, anasarca, and ascites. Con-
gestive hepatomegaly and, in cases of severe tricuspid valve disease, 
splenomegaly are present. The jugular veins are distended, and in 
patients with sinus rhythm, there may be giant a waves. The v waves 
are less conspicuous, and because tricuspid obstruction impedes RA 
emptying during diastole, there is a slow y descent. In patients with 
sinus rhythm, there may be prominent presystolic pulsations of the 
enlarged liver as well.
On auscultation, an opening snap (OS) of the tricuspid valve may 
rarely be heard ~0.06 s after pulmonic valve closure. The diastolic 
murmur of TS has many of the qualities of the diastolic murmur of MS, 
and because TS almost always occurs in the presence of MS, it may be 
missed. However, the tricuspid murmur is generally heard best along 
the left lower sternal border and over the xiphoid process, and is most 
prominent during presystole in patients with sinus rhythm. The mur-
mur of TS is augmented during inspiration, and it is reduced during 
expiration and particularly during the strain phase of the Valsalva 
maneuver, when tricuspid transvalvular flow is reduced.
■
■LABORATORY EXAMINATION
The electrocardiogram (ECG) features of RA enlargement (see Fig. 235-8) 
include tall, peaked P waves in lead II, as well as prominent, upright 
P waves in lead V1. The absence of ECG evidence of RV hypertrophy 
(RVH) in a patient with right-sided heart failure who is believed to 
have MS should suggest associated tricuspid valve disease. The chest 
x-ray in patients with combined TS and MS shows particular promi-
nence of the RA and superior vena cava without much enlargement of 
the PA and with less evidence of pulmonary vascular congestion than 
occurs in patients with isolated MS; engorgement of the azygos vein 
can often be appreciated. On transthoracic echocardiographic (TTE) 
examination, the tricuspid valve is usually thickened and domes in 
diastole; the transvalvular gradient can be estimated by continuous 
wave Doppler echocardiography. Severe TS is characterized by a valve 
area ≤1 cm2 or pressure half-time of ≥190 ms. The RA and inferior 
vena cava (IVC) are enlarged. TTE provides additional information 
regarding the severity of any associated TR, mitral valve structure and 
function, left ventricle (LV) and RV size and function, and PA pressure. 
Cardiac catheterization is not routinely necessary for assessment of TS.
TREATMENT
Tricuspid Stenosis
Patients with TS generally exhibit marked systemic venous con-
gestion; salt restriction, bed rest, and diuretic therapy are required 
during the preoperative period. Such a preparatory period may 
diminish hepatic congestion and thereby improve hepatic function 
sufficiently so that the risks of operation, particularly bleeding, are 
diminished. Surgical relief of the TS should be carried out, preferably 
at the time of surgical mitral valvotomy or mitral valve replacement 
(MVR) for mitral valve disease, in patients with moderate or severe 
TS who have mean diastolic pressure gradients exceeding ~4 mmHg 
CHAPTER 261 Tricuspid Valve Disease
1825
left parasternal region and a blowing holosystolic murmur along the 
lower left sternal margin, which may be intensified during inspiration 
(Carvallo’s sign) and reduced during expiration or the strain phase 
of the Valsalva maneuver, are characteristic findings. The murmur of 
TR may sometimes be confused with that of mitral regurgitation (MR) 
unless attention is paid to its variation during the respiratory cycle and 
the extent of RV enlargement is appreciated. AF is usually present in 
the chronic phase of the disease.
■
■LABORATORY EXAMINATION
The ECG may show changes characteristic of the lesion responsible for 
the TR, e.g., an inferior Q-wave MI suggestive of a prior RV MI, RVH, 
or a bizarre right bundle branch block-type pattern with preexcitation 
in patients with Ebstein’s anomaly. ECG signs of RA enlargement may 
be present in patients with sinus rhythm; AF is frequently noted. The 
chest x-ray may show RA and RV enlargement, depending on the chro-
nicity and severity of TR. TTE is usually definitive with demonstration 
of RA dilation and RV volume overload and prolapsing, flail, scarred, 
or displaced/tethered tricuspid leaflets with annular dilatation; the 
diagnosis and assessment of TR can be made by color flow Doppler 
imaging (see Fig. 236-8). Severe TR is accompanied by hepatic vein 
systolic flow reversal. Continuous wave Doppler of the TR velocity 
profile is useful in estimating PA systolic pressure, except when the 
TR is very severe and the jet velocity is blunted by rapidly increasing 
RA pressure. Accurate assessment of TR severity, PA pressures, and RV 
size and systolic function with TTE can be quite challenging in many 
patients. Real-time three-dimensional echocardiography and cardiac 
magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging provide alternative imaging 
modalities, although they are not widely available. In patients with 
severe TR, the CO is usually markedly reduced, and the RA pressure 
pulse may not exhibit an x descent during early systole but rather show 
a prominent c-v wave with a rapid y descent. The mean RA and RV 
end-diastolic pressures are often elevated. Exercise testing can be used 
to assess functional capacity in patients with asymptomatic severe TR. 
The prognostic significance of exercise-induced changes in TR severity 
and RV function has not been well studied.
TREATMENT
Tricuspid Regurgitation (Fig. 261-1)
Diuretics can be useful for patients with severe TR and signs of right 
heart failure. An aldosterone antagonist may be particularly helpful 
because many patients have secondary hyperaldosteronism from 
marked hepatic congestion. Therapies to reduce elevated PA pres-
sures and/or pulmonary vascular resistance, including those tar-
geted at left-sided heart disease, can also be considered for patients 
with PA hypertension and severe secondary TR. Tricuspid valve 
surgery is recommended for patients with severe TR who are under-
going left-sided valve surgery and is also undertaken frequently for 
treatment of even moderate TR in patients undergoing left-sided 
valve surgery who have tricuspid annular dilation (>40 mm), a 
history of right heart failure, or PA hypertension. Operation most 
often comprises repair rather than replacement in these settings and 
has become routine in most major surgical centers. Surgery may 
also infrequently be required for treatment of severe, primary TR 
with right heart failure not responsive to standard medical therapy 
or because of progressively declining RV systolic function. Reported 
perioperative mortality rates for isolated tricuspid valve surgery 
(repair and replacement) are high (~8–9%) and likely are influenced 
by the hazards encountered during reoperation on patients who 
have undergone previous left-sided valve surgery and have reduced 
RV function. Indwelling pacemaker or defibrillator leads can also 
pose technical challenges. Investigation of transcatheter tricuspid 
valve repair and replacement systems is in its earliest clinical stages.
Mild
Moderate
Functional
Primary
TA dilation*
PHTN without
TA dilation
Reoperation
Functional
Primary
Tricuspid Regurgitation
Symptomatic severe TR
(stage D)
Progressive functional TR
(stage B)
Asymptomatic severe TR
(stage C)
At time of left-sided
valve surgery
At time of left-sided
valve surgery
At time of left-
sided valve surgery
TV repair
(IIa)
TV repair
(IIb)
TV repair or TVR
(I)
TV repair or
TVR
(IIa)
TV repair or TVR
(IIb)
Progressive RV
dysfunction
Preserved RV
function
PHTN not severe
TV repair or
TVR
(I)
Class I
Class IIa
Class IIb
FIGURE 261-1  Management of tricuspid regurgitation. See legend for Fig. 256-4 for explanation of treatment recommendations (Class I, IIa, IIb) and disease stages 
(B, C, D). Preoperative coronary angiography should be performed routinely as determined by age, symptoms, and coronary risk factors. Cardiac catheterization and 
angiography may also be helpful when there is a discrepancy between clinical and noninvasive findings. PHTN, pulmonary hypertension; RV, right ventricular; TA, 
tricuspid annular; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram; TR, tricuspid regurgitation; TV, tricuspid valve; TVR, tricuspid valve replacement. TA dilation is defined by >40 mm 
on TTE (>21 mm/m2) or >70 mm on direct intraoperative measurement. (Adapted from RA Nishimura et al: 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients 
with Valvular Heart Disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 63:e57-185, 2014, with permission.)
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1826
■
■FURTHER READING
Dreyfus GD et al: Functional tricuspid regurgitation. J Am Coll Cardiol 
65:2331, 2015.
Hahn RT et al: Early feasibility study of transcatheter tricuspid valve 
annuloplasty. J Am Coll Cardiol 69:1795, 2017.
Nishimura RA et al: 2014 AHA/ACC guidelines for management of 
patients with valvular heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 63:e59, 2014.
Rodés-Cabau J, Taramasso M, O’Gara PT: Diagnosis and treatment 
of tricuspid valve disease: Current and future perspectives. Lancet 
388:2431, 2016.
Rodés-Cabau J et al: Transcatheter therapies for treating tricuspid 
regurgitation. J Am Coll Cardiol 67:1829, 2016.
PULMONIC STENOSIS
Pulmonic valve stenosis (PS) is essentially a congenital disorder 
(Table 262-1). With isolated PS, the valve is typically domed. Dys-
plastic pulmonic valves are seen as part of the Noonan syndrome 
(Chap. 275), which maps to chromosome 12. Mutations in the PTPN1 
gene are associated with about half of all cases of Noonan syndrome. 
Much less common etiologies include carcinoid and obstructing 
tumors or bulky vegetations. The pulmonic valve is only very rarely 
affected by the rheumatic process.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
PS is defined hemodynamically by a systolic pressure gradient between 
the right ventricle (RV) and main pulmonary artery (PA). RV hypertro-
phy (RVH) develops as a consequence of sustained obstruction to RV 
outflow, and systolic ejection is prolonged. Compared with the ability 
of the LV to compensate for the pressure overload imposed by aortic 
stenosis (AS), RV dysfunction from afterload mismatch occurs earlier 
in the course of PS and at lower peak systolic pressures, because the RV 
adapts less well to this type of hemodynamic burden. With normal sys-
tolic function and cardiac output (CO), severe PS is defined by a peak 
systolic gradient across the pulmonic valve of >50 mmHg; moderate PS 
correlates with a peak gradient of 30–50 mmHg. PS rarely progresses in 
patients with peak gradients <30 mmHg, but may worsen in those with 
moderate disease due to valve thickening and calcification with age. 
The RA a wave elevates in relation to the higher pressures needed to fill 
a noncompliant, hypertrophied RV. A prominent RA v wave signifies 
functional tricuspid regurgitation (TR) from RV and annular dilation. 
The CO is maintained until late in the course of the disease.
Pulmonic Valve Disease
Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo 
262
TABLE 262-1  Causes of Pulmonic Valve Disease
VALVE LESION
ETIOLOGIES
Pulmonic stenosis
Congenital
  Carcinoid
  Tumor
  Endocarditis
Pulmonic regurgitation
Primary valve disease
  Congenital
  Postvalvotomy
  Endocarditis
  Carcinoid
Annular enlargement
  Pulmonary hypertension
  Idiopathic dilation
  Marfan syndrome
■
■SYMPTOMS
Patients with mild or even moderate PS are usually asymptomatic and 
first come to medical attention because of a heart murmur (or early sys-
tolic click) that leads to echocardiography. With severe PS, patients may 
report exertional dyspnea or early-onset fatigue. Anginal chest pain from 
RV oxygen supply-demand mismatch and syncope may occur with very 
severe forms of obstruction, particularly in the presence of a destabilizing 
trigger such as atrial fibrillation, fever, infection, anemia, or pregnancy.
■
■PHYSICAL FINDINGS
The murmur of mild or moderate PS is mid-systolic in timing, cre-
scendo–decrescendo in configuration, heard best in the left second inter-
space, and usually introduced by an ejection sound (click) in younger 
adults whose valves are still pliable. The ejection sound is the only 
right-sided acoustic event that decreases in intensity with inspiration. 
This phenomenon reflects premature opening of the pulmonic valve by 
the elevated RV end-diastolic (postatrial a wave) pressure. The systolic 
murmur increases in intensity during inspiration. With progressively 
severe PS, the ejection sound moves closer to the first heart sound and 
eventually becomes inaudible. A right-sided fourth heart sound may 
emerge. The systolic murmur peaks later and may persist through the 
aortic component of the second heart sound (A2). Pulmonic valve closure 
is delayed, and the pulmonic component of the second heart sound (P2) 
is reduced or absent. A prominent a wave, indicative of the higher atrial 
pressure necessary to fill the noncompliant RV, may be seen in the jugu-
lar venous pulse. A parasternal or RV lift can be felt with significant pres-
sure overload. Signs of right heart failure, such as hepatomegaly, ascites, 
and edema, are uncommon but may appear very late in the disease.
■
■LABORATORY EXAMINATION
The electrocardiogram (ECG) will show right axis deviation, RVH, and 
RA enlargement in adult patients with severe PS. Chest x-ray findings 
include poststenotic dilation of the main PA in the frontal plane projec-
tion and filling of the retrosternal airspace due to RV enlargement on 
the lateral film. In some patients with RVH, the cardiac apex appears 
to be lifted off the left hemidiaphragm. The RA may also be enlarged. 
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) allows definitive diagnosis and 
characterization in most cases, with depiction of the valve and assess-
ment of the gradient, RV function, PA pressures (which should be low), 
and any associated cardiac lesions. Transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE) may be useful in some patients for improved delineation of the 
RV outflow tract (RVOT) and assessment of infundibular hypertro-
phy. Cardiac catheterization is not usually necessary for diagnostic 
purposes, but if performed, pressures should be obtained from just 
below and above the pulmonic valve with attention to the possibility 
that a dynamic component to the gradient may exist. The correlation 
between Doppler assessment of peak instantaneous gradient and 
catheterization-measured peak-to-peak gradient is weak. The latter 
may correlate better with the Doppler mean gradient.
TREATMENT
Pulmonic Stenosis
Diuretics can be used to treat symptoms and signs of right heart 
failure. Provided there is less than moderate pulmonic regurgitation 
(PR), percutaneous pulmonic balloon valvotomy is recommended 
for symptomatic patients with a domed valve and a peak gradient 
>50 mmHg (or mean gradient >30 mmHg) and for asymptom-
atic patients with a peak gradient >60 mmHg (or mean gradient  
>40 mmHg). Surgery may be required when the valve is dysplastic 
(as seen in patients with Noonan’s syndrome and other disorders). 
A multidisciplinary heart team is best positioned to make treatment 
decisions of this nature.
PULMONIC REGURGITATION
PR may develop as a consequence of primary valve pathology, annular 
enlargement, or their combination; after surgical treatment of RVOT 
obstruction in children with such disorders as tetralogy of Fallot; or 
CHAPTER 263 Multiple and Mixed Valvular Heart Disease 
1827
■
■FURTHER READING
Ansari MM et al: Percutaneous pulmonary valve implantation. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 66:2246, 2015.
Baumgartner H et al: ESC guidelines for the management of grown-up 
congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J 31:2915, 2010.
Warnes CA et al: 2008 ACC/AHA guidelines for the management of 
adults with congenital heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 52:e143, 2008.
after percutaneous pulmonic balloon valvotomy (Table 262-1). Carci-
noid usually causes mixed pulmonic valve disease with PR and PS. 
Long-standing severe PA hypertension from any cause can result in 
dilation of the pulmonic valve ring and PR.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Severe PR results in RV chamber enlargement and eccentric hyper-
trophy. As is the case for aortic regurgitation (AR), PR is a state of 
increased preload and afterload. The reverse pressure gradient from 
the PA to the RV, which drives the PR, progressively decreases through-
out diastole and accounts for the decrescendo nature of the diastolic 
murmur. As RV diastolic pressure increases, the murmur becomes 
shorter in duration. The forward CO is preserved during the early 
stages of the disease, but may not increase normally with exercise and 
declines over time. A reduction in RV ejection fraction may be an early 
indicator of hemodynamic compromise. In advanced stages, there is 
significant enlargement of the RV and RA with marked elevation of the 
jugular venous pressure.
■
■SYMPTOMS
Mild or moderate degrees of PR do not, by themselves, result in 
symptoms. Other problems, such as PA hypertension, may dominant 
the clinical picture. With progressively severe PR and RV dysfunction, 
fatigue, exertional dyspnea, abdominal fullness/bloating, and lower 
extremity swelling may be reported.
■
■PHYSICAL FINDINGS
The physical examination hallmark of PR is a high-pitched, decre-
scendo diastolic murmur (Graham Steell murmur) heard along the 
left sternal border that can be difficult to distinguish from the more 
frequently appreciated murmur of AR. The Graham Steell murmur 
may become louder with inspiration and is usually associated with a 
loud and sometimes palpable P2 and an RV lift, as would be expected 
in patients with significant PA hypertension of any cause. Survivors 
of childhood surgery for tetralogy of Fallot or PS/pulmonary atresia 
may have an RV-PA conduit that is freely regurgitant because it does 
not contain a valve. PA pressures in these individuals are not elevated 
and the diastolic murmur can be misleadingly low pitched and of short 
duration despite significant degrees of PR and RV volume overload.
■
■LABORATORY EXAMINATION
Depending on both the etiology and severity of PR, the ECG may show 
findings of RVH and RA enlargement. On chest x-ray, the RV and RA 
may be enlarged. Pulmonic valve morphology and function can be 
assessed with transthoracic Doppler echocardiography. PA pressures 
can be estimated from the tricuspid valve systolic jet velocity. Cardiac 
magnetic resonance (CMR) provides greater anatomic detail, particu-
larly in patients with repaired congenital heart disease, and more pre-
cise assessment of RV volumes. Cardiac catheterization is not routinely 
necessary but would be performed as part of a planned transcatheter 
procedure.
TREATMENT
Pulmonic Regurgitation
In patients with functional PR due to PA hypertension and annular 
dilation, efforts to reduce PA vascular resistance and pressure should 
be optimized. Such efforts may include pharmacologic/vasodilator 
and/or surgical/interventional strategies, depending on the cause 
of the PA hypertension (e.g., idiopathic PA hypertension, left-sided 
heart valve disease). Diuretics can be used to treat the manifesta-
tions of right heart failure. Surgical valve replacement for primary, 
severe, pulmonic valve disease, such as carcinoid or endocarditis, is 
rarely undertaken. Transcatheter pulmonic valve replacement has 
been successfully performed in many patients with severe PR after 
childhood repair of tetralogy of Fallot or pulmonic valve stenosis or 
atresia. This procedure was introduced clinically prior to transcath-
eter aortic valve replacement.
Many acquired and congenital cardiac lesions may result in stenosis 
and/or regurgitation of one or more heart valves. For example, rheu-
matic heart disease can involve the mitral (mitral stenosis [MS], mitral 
regurgitation [MR], or MS and MR), aortic (aortic stenosis [AS], aortic 
regurgitation [AR], or AS and AR), and tricuspid (tricuspid stenosis 
[TS], tricuspid regurgitation [TR], or TS and TR) valve, alone or in 
combination. The common association of functional TR with significant 
mitral valve disease is discussed in Chap. 261. Severe mitral annular 
calcification can result in regurgitation (due to decreased annular 
shortening during systole) and mild or moderate stenosis (caused by 
extension of the calcification onto the leaflets resulting in restricted 
valve opening). Patients with severe AS and LV remodeling may 
develop functional MR that may not improve after isolated aortic valve 
replacement (AVR). Chordal rupture has been described infrequently 
in patients with severe AS. Aortic valve infective endocarditis (IE) may 
secondarily involve the mitral apparatus either by abscess formation 
and contiguous spread via the intervalvular fibrosa or by “drop metas-
tases” from the aortic leaflets onto the anterior leaflet of the mitral 
valve. Mediastinal radiation may result in aortic, mitral, and even tri-
cuspid valve disease, most often with mixed stenosis and regurgitation. 
Carcinoid heart disease may cause mixed lesions of either or both the 
tricuspid and pulmonic valves. Ergotamines, and the previously used 
combination of fenfluramine and phentermine, can rarely result in 
mixed lesions of the aortic and/or mitral valve. Patients with Marfan 
syndrome may have both AR from aortic root dilation and MR due to 
mitral valve prolapse (MVP). Myxomatous degeneration causing pro-
lapse of multiple valves (mitral, aortic, tricuspid) can also occur in the 
absence of an identifiable connective tissue disorder. Bicuspid aortic 
or pulmonic valve disease can result in mixed stenosis and regurgita-
tion. The former is also associated with aortic aneurysm disease and a 
predisposition to aortic dissection.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
In patients with multivalvular heart disease, the pathophysiologic 
derangements associated with the more proximal valve disease can 
mask the full expression of the attributes of the more distal valve lesion. 
For example, in patients with rheumatic mitral and aortic valve disease, 
the reduction in cardiac output (CO) imposed by the mitral valve dis-
ease will decrease the magnitude of the hemodynamic derangements 
related to the severity of the aortic valve lesion (stenotic, regurgitant, 
or both). Alternatively, the development of atrial fibrillation (AF) dur-
ing the course of MS can lead to sudden worsening in a patient whose 
aortic valve disease was not previously felt to be significant. The devel-
opment of reactive pulmonary vascular disease, sometimes referred to 
as a “secondary obstructive lesion in series,” can impose an additional 
challenge in these settings. As CO falls with progressive tricuspid valve 
disease, the severity of any associated mitral or aortic disease can be 
underestimated.
One of the most common examples of multivalve disease is that 
of functional TR in the setting of significant mitral valve disease. 
Multiple and Mixed  
Valvular Heart Disease
Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo 
263
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1828 Functional TR occurs as a consequence of right ventricular and annu-
lar dilation; pulmonary artery (PA) hypertension is often present. The 
tricuspid leaflets are morphologically normal. Progressive degrees of 
TR lead to right ventricular volume overload and continued chamber 
and annular dilation. The TR is usually central in origin; reflux into 
the right atrium (RA) is expressed as large, systolic c-v waves in the 
RA pressure pulse. The height of the c-v wave is dependent on RA 
compliance and the volume of regurgitant flow. The RA waveform 
may become “ventricularized” in advanced stages of chronic, severe 
TR with PA hypertension. CO falls and the severity of the associated 
mitral valve disease may become more difficult to appreciate. Findings 
related to advanced right heart failure (e.g., ascites, edema) predom-
inate. Primary rheumatic tricuspid valve disease may occur with 
rheumatic mitral disease and cause hemodynamic changes reflective of 
TR, TS, or their combination. With TS, the y descent in the RA pressure 
pulse is prolonged.
Another example of rheumatic, multivalve disease involves the 
combination of mitral and aortic valve pathology, frequently character-
ized by MS and AR. In isolated MS, left ventricular (LV) preload and 
diastolic pressure are reduced as a function of the severity of inflow 
obstruction. With concomitant AR, however, LV filling is enhanced and 
diastolic pressure may rise depending on the compliance characteris-
tics of the chamber. Because the CO falls with progressive degrees of 
MS, transaortic valve flows will decline, masking the potential severity 
of the aortic valve lesion (AR, AS, or its combination). As noted above, 
onset of AF in such patients can be especially deleterious. The loss of 
atrial systole with AF may result in a critical reduction in CO, a rise 
in LA and LV diastolic pressures, and a further deleterious increase in 
heart rate.
Secondary (functional) MR may complicate the course of some 
patients with severe AS. The mitral valve leaflets and chordae tendineae 
are usually normal. Incompetence is related to changes in LV geome-
try (remodeling) and abnormal systolic tethering of the leaflets in the 
context of markedly elevated LV systolic pressures. Relief of the excess 
afterload with surgical or transcatheter AVR often, but not always, 
results in reduction or elimination of the MR. Persistence of significant 
MR following AVR is associated with impaired functional outcomes 
and reduced survival. Identification of patients who would benefit from 
concomitant treatment of their functional MR at time of AVR is quite 
challenging. Most surgeons advocate for repair of moderate-to-severe 
or severe functional MR at time of surgical AVR. Significant primary 
MR is routinely managed with repair or replacement at the time of 
AVR.
In patients with mixed AS and AR, assessment of valve stenosis can 
be influenced by the magnitude of the regurgitant valve flow. Because 
transvalvular systolic flow velocities are augmented in patients with 
AR and preserved LV systolic function, the LV-aortic Doppler-derived 
pressure gradient and the intensity of the systolic murmur will be ele-
vated to values higher than expected for the true systolic valve orifice 
size as delineated by planimetry. Uncorrected, the Gorlin formula, 
which relies on forward CO (systolic transvalvular flow) and the mean 
pressure gradient for calculation of valve area, is not accurate in the 
setting of mixed aortic valve disease. Similar considerations apply to 
patients with mixed mitral valve disease. The peak mitral valve Dopp-
ler E wave velocity (v0) is increased in the setting of severe MR because 
of enhanced early diastolic flow and may not accurately reflect the 
contribution to left atrial (LA) hypertension from any associated MS. 
When either AR or MR is the dominant lesion in patients with mixed 
aortic or mitral valve disease, respectively, the LV is dilated. When AS 
or MS predominates, LV chamber size will be normal or small. It can 
sometimes be difficult to ascertain whether stenosis or regurgitation 
is the dominant lesion in patients with mixed valve disease, although 
an integrated clinical and noninvasive assessment can usually provide 
clarification for purposes of patient management and follow-up.
Patients with significant AS, a nondilated LV chamber, and con-
centric hypertrophy will poorly tolerate the abrupt development of 
aortic regurgitation, as may occur, for example, with IE or after surgical 
or transcatheter AVR (TAVR) complicated by paravalvular leakage. 
The noncompliant LV is not prepared to accommodate the sudden 
volume load, and as a result, LV diastolic pressure rises rapidly and 
severe heart failure develops. Indeed, paravalvular regurgitation is a 
significant risk factor for short- to intermediate-term death following 
transcatheter AVR. Conditions in which the LV may not be able to 
dilate in response to chronic AR (or MR) include radiation heart disease 
and, in some patients, the cardiomyopathy associated with obesity and 
diabetes. Noncompliant ventricles of small chamber size predispose to 
earlier onset diastolic dysfunction and heart failure in response to any 
further perturbation in valve function.
■
■SYMPTOMS
Compared with patients with isolated, single-lesion valve disease, 
patients with multiple or mixed valve disease may develop symp-
toms at a relatively earlier stage in the natural history of their disease. 
Symptoms such as exertional dyspnea and fatigue are usually related 
to elevated filling pressures, reduced CO, or their combination. Palpi-
tations may signify AF and identify mitral valve disease as an impor-
tant component of the clinical presentation, even when not previously 
suspected. Chest pain compatible with angina could reflect left or 
right ventricular oxygen supply/demand mismatch on a substrate of 
hypertrophy and pressure/volume overload with or without super-
imposed coronary artery disease. Symptoms related to right heart 
failure (abdominal fullness/bloating, edema) are late manifestations of 
advanced disease.
■
■PHYSICAL FINDINGS
Mixed disease of a single valve is most often manifested by systolic and 
diastolic murmurs, each with the attributes expected for the valve in 
question. Thus, patients with AS and AR will have characteristic mid-
systolic, crescendo-decrescendo and blowing, decrescendo diastolic 
murmurs at the base of the heart in the second right interspace and 
along the left sternal edge, respectively. Many patients with significant 
AR have mid-systolic outflow murmurs even in the absence of valve 
sclerosis/stenosis, and other findings of AS must be sought. The sepa-
rate murmurs of AS and AR can occasionally be difficult to distinguish 
from the continuous murmurs associated with either a patent ductus 
arteriosus (PDA) or ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm. With mixed 
aortic valve disease, the systolic murmur should end before, and not 
envelope or extend through, the second heart sound (S2). The murmur 
associated with a PDA is heard best to the left of the upper sternum. 
The continuous murmur heard with a ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneu-
rysm is often first appreciated after an episode of acute chest pain. An 
early ejection click, which usually defines bicuspid aortic valve disease 
in young adults, is often not present in patients with congenital, mixed 
AS and AR. As noted above, both the intensity and duration of these sep-
arate murmurs can be influenced by a reduction in CO and transvalvular 
flow due to coexistent mitral valve disease. In patients with isolated 
MS and MR, expected findings would include a blowing, holosystolic 
murmur and a mid-diastolic rumble (with or without an opening snap) 
best heard at the cardiac apex. An irregularly irregular heart rhythm in 
such patients would likely signify AF. Findings with TS and TR would 
mimic those of left-sided MS and MR, save for the expected changes in 
the murmurs with respiration. The murmurs of pulmonic stenosis and 
regurgitation behave in a fashion directionally similar to AS and AR; 
dynamic changes during respiration should be noted. Specific attributes 
of these cardiac murmurs are reviewed in Chaps. 38 and 261.
■
■LABORATORY EXAMINATION
The electrocardiogram (ECG) may show evidence of ventricular hyper-
trophy and/or atrial enlargement. ECG signs indicative of right-sided 
cardiac abnormalities in patients with left-sided valve lesions should 
prompt additional assessment for PA hypertension and/or right-sided 
valve disease. The presence of AF in patients with aortic valve disease 
may be a clue to the presence of previously unsuspected mitral valve 
disease in the appropriate context. The chest x-ray can be reviewed for 
evidence of cardiac chamber enlargement, valve and/or annular cal-
cification, and any abnormalities in the appearance of the pulmonary 
vasculature. The latter could include enlargement of the main and 
proximal pulmonary arteries with PA hypertension and pulmonary 
CHAPTER 264 Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult 
1829
venous redistribution/engorgement or Kerley B lines with increasing 
degrees of LA hypertension. An enlarged azygos vein in the frontal 
projection indicates RA hypertension. Roentgenographic findings not 
expected based on a single or mixed valve lesion may reflect other 
valve disease.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is the most commonly used 
imaging modality for the diagnosis and characterization of multiple 
and/or mixed valvular heart disease and may often demonstrate find-
ings not clinically suspected. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 
may sometimes be required for more accurate assessment of valve 
anatomy (specifically, the mitral valve) and when IE is considered 
responsible for the clinical presentation. TTE findings of particular 
interest include those related to valve morphology and function, calci-
fication, chamber size, ventricular wall thickness, estimated PA systolic 
pressure, and the dimensions of the great vessels, including the root 
and ascending aorta, PA, and inferior vena cava. Exercise testing (with 
or without echocardiography) can be useful when the degree of func-
tional limitation reported by the patient is not adequately explained by 
the findings on TTE performed at rest. An integrated assessment of the 
clinical and TTE findings is needed to help determine the dominant 
valve lesion(s) and establish an appropriate plan for treatment and 
follow-up. Natural history is usually influenced to a relatively greater 
degree by the dominant lesion.
Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) can be used to provide addi-
tional anatomic and physiologic information when echocardiography 
proves suboptimal, but is less well suited to the evaluation of valve 
morphology. Cardiac computed tomography (CT) has been used to 
assess intracardiac structures in patients with complicated IE. It is 
invaluable in planning for transcatheter valve replacement. Coronary 
CT angiography provides a noninvasive alternative for the assess-
ment of coronary artery anatomy prior to surgery or transcatheter 
intervention.
Invasive hemodynamic evaluation with right and left heart catheter-
ization may be required to characterize more completely the individual 
contributions of each lesion in patients with either multiple or mixed 
valvular heart disease. It is strongly recommended when there is a dis-
crepancy between the clinical and non-invasive findings in a symptom-
atic patient. Measurement of PA pressures and calculation of pulmonary 
vascular resistance (PVR) can help inform clinical decision-making in 
certain patient subsets, such as those with advanced mitral and tricus-
pid valve disease. It is important to identify any potential contribution 
to the clinical picture from pulmonary vascular disease. Attention to 
the accurate assessment of CO is essential. Coronary angiography (if 
indicated) can be performed as part of the procedure. Contrast ventric-
ulography and great vessel angiography are performed infrequently.
TREATMENT
Multiple and Mixed Valve Disease
Management of patients with multiple or mixed valve disease 
can be challenging. As noted above, it is helpful to determine the 
dominant valve lesion and proceed according to the treatment and 
follow-up recommendations for it (Chaps. 256–262), being mindful 
of deviations from the expected course due to the contributions of 
more than one valve lesion. For example, AF that emerges in the 
course of moderate mitral valve disease may precipitate heart failure 
in patients with concomitant, severe aortic valve disease that was 
previously asymptomatic.
Medical therapies are limited and include diuretics when indi-
cated for relief of congestion and anticoagulation to prevent stroke 
and thromboembolism in patients with AF. Blood pressure–lowering 
medications may be needed to treat systemic hypertension, which 
may aggravate left-sided regurgitant valve lesions, but should be 
initiated and titrated carefully. Pulmonary vasodilators to lower 
PVR are not generally effective in this context.
There is a paucity of evidence to inform practice guidelines for 
surgical and/or transcatheter valve intervention in patients with 
multiple or mixed valve disease. When there is a clear, dominant 
lesion, as for example in a patient with severe AS and mild AR, 
indications for intervention are straightforward and follow those 
recommended for patients with AS (Chap. 256). In other patients, 
however, there is less clarity, and decisions regarding intervention 
should be based on several considerations, including those related 
to lesion severity, ventricular remodeling, functional capacity, and 
PA pressures. In this regard, it is important to realize that patients 
with multiple and/or mixed valve disease may develop limiting 
symptoms or signs of physiologic impairment even with moderate 
valve lesions.
Concomitant aortic and mitral valve replacement surgery is asso-
ciated with a significantly higher perioperative mortality risk than 
replacement of either valve alone, and operation should be carefully 
considered. Double valve replacement surgery is usually performed 
for treatment of severe (unrepairable) valve disease at both locations 
and for the combination of severe disease at one location with mod-
erate disease at the other, so as to avoid the hazards of reoperation 
in the intermediate to late term for progressive disease of the unop-
erated valve. In addition, the presence of a prosthesis in the aortic 
position significantly restricts surgical exposure of the native mitral 
valve. The need for double valve replacement may also impact the 
decision regarding the type of prosthesis (i.e., mechanical vs tissue).
Tricuspid valve repair for moderate or severe secondary 
(functional) TR at the time of left-sided valve surgery is now com-
monplace, particularly if there is dilation of the tricuspid annulus 
(>40 mm). The addition of tricuspid valve repair, consisting usually 
of insertion of an annuloplasty ring, adds little time or complexity 
to the procedure and is well tolerated. Reoperation for repair (or 
replacement) of progressive TR years after initial surgery for left-sided 
valve disease, on the other hand, is associated with a relatively high 
perioperative mortality risk. Repair of moderate or severe functional 
MR at time of AVR for AS can usually be undertaken with acceptable 
risk for perioperative death or major complication.
The presence of moderate or severe MR in patients with rheu-
matic MS is a contraindication to percutaneous mitral balloon 
valvotomy (PMBV). Likewise, the presence of significant AR in 
patients with AS disqualifies them from percutaneous aortic balloon 
valvotomy (PABV). TAVR is generally not undertaken for patients 
with severe, mixed AS and AR. Transcatheter management of both 
severe AS (with TAVR) and functional MR (with deployment of an 
edge-to-edge clip) has been reported. Further advances in transcath-
eter treatments for multiple and mixed valve disease are anticipated.
■
■FURTHER READING
Bolling SF: Tricuspid regurgitation after left heart surgery. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 64:2643, 2014.
Egbe AC et al: Outcomes in mixed aortic valve disease. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 167:2321, 2016.
Magne J et al: Pulmonary hypertension in valvular disease. JACC: 
Cardiovasc Imaging 8:83, 2015.
■
■PREVALENCE
The number of adults with congenital heart disease (CHD) living in 
the United States is estimated to be at least 1.4 million, with just over 
one in five having a complex form of CHD. The majority of adults 
with CHD were diagnosed in childhood, although a substantial per-
centage may have CHD first recognized as adults. Lifelong follow-up 
Congenital Heart Disease  
in the Adult
Anne Marie Valente,  Michael J. Landzberg 
264
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1830
Mitral
valve
Tricuspid
valve
Superior
vena cava
Normal Heart
Right
ventricle
Right
ventricle
Right
ventricle
Right
atrium
Left
atrium
Mitral
valve
Aortic valve
Tricuspid valve
Left
pulmonary
veins 
Right
pulmonary
veins 
Left
ventricle
Left
ventricle
Left
ventricle
Pulmonary
artery
Pulmonary
valve
Aorta
Inferior
vena cava
Aortic
valve
IVC
SVC
PA
Ao
RV
LV
RA
LA
PV
Pulmonary
valve 
FIGURE 264-1  Normal heart. Understanding of congenital cardiac anatomy and physiology is facilitated by use of box diagrams, displaying passage of blood flow 
between blood vessels and cardiac chambers. Labeling (e.g., structure names, arrows to denote direction of flow, coloring to represent oxygen saturation, connections 
or obstructions, chamber or vascular pressures, oxygen saturations) can aid in representation. Ao, aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, 
pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary veins; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava.
TABLE 264-1  Multi-Organ Considerations in ACHD Patients
Neurologic
Increased incidence of occult or clinically 
evident strokes
Decreased level of executive functioning skills
Anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, 
depression
Psychosocial disorders
Lungs
Restrictive lung disease
Pulmonary vascular disease
Renal
Decreased perfusion
Hepatic
Liver fibrosis
Peripheral Vasculature
Increased chronic venous insufficiency
Lymphatic
Impaired reabsorption
Orthopedic
Scoliosis
Kyphosis
Hematologic
Anemia
Coagulopathies
in coordination with, or directly by, clinicians with expertise in adult 
congenital heart disease (ACHD) is recommended. In this chapter, 
we will review the current field of ACHD, with an introduction to 
CHD nomenclature and cardiac development. This is followed by a 
summary of the more common CHD lesions that may be diagnosed in 
adulthood. Lastly, some of the common repaired CHD lesions that are 
encountered in adults are discussed. Throughout the chapter, to aid in 
the understanding of congenital cardiac anatomy and physiology, we 
include figures displaying the passage of blood flow between blood 
vessels and cardiac chambers in various disorders (Fig. 264-1).
■
■THE CHANGING LANDSCAPE OF ADULT CHD
A Relatively New Subspecialty in Cardiovascular Disease  
Over the past decade, the field of caring for adults with CHD (ACHD) 
has blossomed, and several nationwide initiatives have been initiated 
in an attempt to standardize care. The American College of Cardiology 
and American Heart Association developed guidelines for the care of 
adults with CHD, first published in 2008. These guidelines emphasize 
the need for collaboration among primary care practitioners, cardi-
ologists, and ACHD subspecialty cardiologists. The body of medical 
knowledge and competencies attendant with ACHD combined with 
skill acquisition in coordination of complex care over a patient’s medical 
lifetime led in 2015 to both ACHD board certification examinations by the 
American Board of Medical Subspecialties, as well as the establishment 
of requirements for 2-year subspecialty fellowship training in ACHD 
care, by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. In 
temporal association, the Adult Congenital Heart Association (ACHA) 
developed a process for ACHD care program accreditation based upon 
standardization of infrastructural components felt requisite to achieve 
quality outcomes for ACHD.
■
■SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE ACHD PATIENT
Adults with CHD may not recognize subtle changes in their exercise 
capacity, some of which are associated with worse survival; by the 
time symptoms are recognized, irreversible physiological changes 
may have occurred. ACHD patients are, therefore, advised to undergo 
regular evaluations for surveillance of anatomic, hemodynamic, and 
electrophysiologic sequelae that may be present. In addition, specific 
situations may arise in which it is prudent to review care in consul-
tation with an ACHD specialist, several of which are outlined below.
Non-Cardiac Surgery  Nearly all adults with CHD can be clas-
sified with stage A (harboring risk) or greater degrees of heart failure. 
As such, adults with CHD may demonstrate limited hemodynamic 
reserve to altered myocardial perfusion or loading conditions, and may 
have subclinical organ dysfunction that is not recognized by standard 
laboratory assessment. Comprehensive, multi-specialty assessment 
and care strategy review are recommended in advance of invasive or 
operative procedures for adults with CHD. Table 264-1 lists the multi- 
organ considerations that should be taken into account in adults with 
CHD during perioperative resuscitation and convalescence. Anesthetic 
management requires particular knowledge of anatomy, physiologic 
consequence of underlying defects, myocardial and vascular perfor-
mance, presence and nature of previous palliative procedures and 
CHAPTER 264 Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult 
1831
residual shunts, alteration of venous or arterial pathways within the 
circulation, and status of non-cardiovascular organ physiology.
Pregnancy  Women with CHD should receive counseling regarding 
both maternal and fetal risks prior to conceiving a pregnancy and should 
be cared for in institutions with experience in treating CHD during preg-
nancy. Preconception evaluation includes detailed medical history, with 
a focus on the women’s functional capacity, which is closely linked to 
maternal and fetal outcomes. Table 264-2 lists the World Health Organi-
zation Classification of risk during pregnancy in women with heart dis-
ease; women at risk should be strongly counseled about the significant 
risks of morbidity and mortality during pregnancy and the postpartum 
period. Normal physiological hemodynamic changes of pregnancy are 
significant, occur over a relatively condensed period of time, and may 
be compounded in adults with CHD. Women with certain forms of 
CHD, particularly those complicated by elevated pulmonary artery (PA) 
pressures, decreased ventricular function, or symptomatic left-sided 
obstructive lesions, may not tolerate these dramatic changes.
Pre-pregnancy medications should be reviewed to ensure their safety 
in pregnancy. Alternatives to angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, and endothelin-receptor block-
ers should be considered, as these agents are teratogenic and contrain-
dicated during pregnancy, and should be discontinued. Traditionally, 
the FDA utilized a classification system of five categories (A, B, C, D, 
X) to indicate the teratogenic potential of a drug; in December of 2014, 
the FDA promulgated the Pregnancy and Lactation Labeling Rule, 
requiring removal of these categories from all human prescription drugs 
and biological products, and replacement with three comprehensive 
subsections that provide details about the use of the drug in pregnancy 
and lactation in women and men of reproductive potential. These 
pregnancy subsections include potential risks to the developing fetus, 
known dosing alterations in pregnancy, effects of timing and duration 
of exposure during pregnancy, adverse maternal reactions, effects of the 
drug on labor and delivery, and information on pregnancy exposure 
registry for the drug, if such exists. Women requiring anticoagulation 
must be advised of the challenges of managing anticoagulation during 
pregnancy and individualized strategies should be developed. A fetal 
echocardiogram between 18 and 22 weeks of gestation is advised for 
parents with CHD. Additionally, both men and women with CHD 
should be counseled regarding the risk of CHD in their offspring.
■
■CONGENITAL TERMINOLOGY, DEVELOPMENT, 
AND GENETICS
Congenital Nomenclature  One of the challenges in caring for 
adults with CHD is the inconsistent terminology used to describe the 
congenital heart lesions. Several classification systems have been pro-
posed, from the initial descriptions by Maude Abbott, Maurice Lev, 
and Jesse Edwards, to the extensive characterizations by Stella and 
Richard Van Praagh and Robert Anderson. In this chapter, we follow a 
segmental approach. The heart is composed of several segments that are 
analyzed separately before formulating a comprehensive diagnosis. The 
principal segments are the atria, the ventricles, and the great arteries, 
which are joined together by the atrioventricular canal and the conus 
(infundibulum). In the normal heart, the right ventricle (RV) is right-
sided and organized inflow-to-outflow from right to left, while the left 
ventricle (LV) is left-sided and organized inflow-to-outflow from left 
to right. It is important to determine the segmental alignments: that is, 
what drains into what. For example, in the normal heart the right atrium 
(RA) is aligned with the RV and the LV with the aorta. Finally, the seg-
mental connections, the way in which adjacent segments are physically 
linked to each other, are described. For example, in the normal heart 
the PA is connected to the RV by a complete muscular conus (infundib-
ulum), while the aorta is connected to the LV by aortic-mitral fibrous 
continuity (without a complete conus). Alignment and connection are 
different concepts and both are important, especially in complex defects.
Cardiac Development  The heart starts to form in the third week 
of gestation, and is nearly fully formed by 8 weeks’ gestation. Mesoder-
mal precardiac cells migrate to form the cardiac crescents (primary 
heart fields) in anterior lateral plate mesoderm, which are then brought 
together to form a primary linear heart tube by ventral closure of the 
embryo. Cells of the second heart field continue to proliferate outside 
the heart and are added to the heart tube over the course of embryo-
genesis, contributing to the atria, the RV, and outflow tract. Addition-
ally, cardiac neural crest cells migrate into the developing heart in the 
5th–6th weeks and are essential for septation of the outflow, formation 
of the semilunar valves, and patterning of the aortic arches. Once 
formed, the heart tube grows and elongates by addition of cells from 
the second heart field. The ends of the heart tube are relatively fixed by 
the pericardial sac so that as it elongates it must loop (bend), and in the 
vast majority of hearts the loop falls to the right (D-loop). Further elon-
gation pushes the mid-portion of the tube (future ventricles) inferior or 
caudal to the inflow, resulting in the normal relationship between the 
atria and ventricles. Further growth pushes the outflow medially and 
is associated with outflow rotation, both processes essential for normal 
alignment of the outflow. Finally the proximal part of the outflow is 
incorporated in the RV, shortening the outflow in association with 
further rotation. While this remodeling is occurring, the outflow is 
undergoing septation under the influence of cardiac neural crest cells. 
Septation proceeds from distal to proximal, culminating in formation 
and muscularization of the infundibular, or muscular, outflow septum, 
which inserts onto the superior endocardial cushion at the rightward 
rim of the outflow foramen, walling the aorta into the LV via the out-
flow foramen and the PA directly into the RV.
Genetic Considerations  CHD is the most commonly occurring 
birth defect; etiological contributors are increasingly recognized, although 
often speculated to be multifactorial. Children born with Trisomy 21 
TABLE 264-2  Modified WHO Classification of Heart Disease  
in Pregnancy
WHO I
•  Uncomplicated, small or mild pulmonary stenosis, patent ductus arteriosus, 
mitral valve prolapse
•  Successfully repaired simple lesions (atrial or ventricular septal defect, 
patent ductus arteriosus, partially anomalous pulmonary venous 
drainage).
•  Isolated atrial or ventricular ectopic beats
WHO II (if otherwise well and uncomplicated)
•  Unoperated atrial or ventricular septal defect
•  Repaired tetralogy of Fallot
•  Most arrhythmias
WHO II-III (depending on individual)
•  Mild left ventricular impairment
•  Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
•  Native or tissue valvular heart disease not considered WHO I or IV
•  Marfan syndrome without aortic dissection
•  Aorta < 45 mm in bicuspid aortic valve
•  Repaired coarctation
WHO III
•  Mechanical valve
•  Systemic right ventricle
•  Fontan circulation
•  Cyanotic heart disease (unrepaired)
•  Other complex congenital heart disease
•  Aortic dilation 40–45 mm in Marfan syndrome
•  Aortic dilation 45–50 mm in bicuspid aortic valve
WHO IV (pregnancy contraindicated)
•  Pulmonary arterial hypertension
•  Severe systemic ventricular dysfunction (LVEF <30%, NYHA class > II)
•  Previous peripartum cardiomyopathy with any residual impairment of left 
ventricular function
•  Severe mitral stenosis, severe symptomatic aortic stenosis
•  Marfan syndrome with aorta dilated >45 mm
•  Aortic dilation >50 mm in bicuspid aortic valve
•  Native severe aortic coarctation
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1832 have a 50% chance of having CHD, most commonly defects in the atri-
oventicular canal. Conotruncal defects are associated with a number of 
chromosomal abnormalities, most notably a deletion at chromosome 
22q11 (DiGeorge syndrome). Echocardiographic clues to this association 
in patients with a conotruncal defect include an associated right aortic 
arch or aberrant subclavian artery. Many adults currently living with 
conotruncal defects may not have undergone testing for DiGeorge syn-
drome. This condition is important to recognize as a variety of psychiatric 
disorders and disabilities in cognitive function may be present and go 
untreated. Patients with Noonan syndrome commonly have a dysplastic 
pulmonary valve and have facial and lymphatic abnormalities. Several 
defects in specific genes have been associated with Noonan syndrome, 
most notably PTPN11. Adults with Williams syndrome (7q11.23 deletion) 
commonly have supravalvar aortic stenosis and diffuse arteriopathy, 
with a “cocktail-like” personality and hypercalcemia. There is a growing 
importance of genome-wide analyses in subjects with CHD.
■
■SPECIFIC CHD LESIONS
Dilated Right Heart  There are many congenital etiologies for 
right heart dilation (Table 264-3). These include congenital valvular 
anomalies (such as Ebstein anomaly or pulmonary regurgitation), 
intrinsic RV myocardial anomalies (arrhythromogenic RV dysplasia, 
Uhl’s anomaly), or shunt lesions occurring proximal to the tricuspid 
valve. Cardiac imaging is critical in determining the etiology of right 
heart dilation, and knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of vari-
ous shunt lesions is essential.
Atrial Septal Defect  One of the most common etiologies of right 
heart dilation is presence of an atrial septal defect (ASD, Fig. 264-2A). 
Intracardiac holes allow blood transmission between chambers or spaces 
based upon relative resistance, propulsion, and flow patterns. Patients 
with large ASDs often present in childhood; however, many ASDs are 
not discovered until adult life. The physiology of an ASD is predom-
inantly that of a “left-to-right” shunt (flow of pulmonary venous, or 
oxygenated, blood toward systemic venous, or deoxygenated, chambers 
or vessels). The degree of left-to-right shunting determines the amount 
of right heart volume loading and is dictated by the size of the defect 
as well as the diastolic properties of the heart. As patients age, several 
factors, such as diabetes mellitus, systemic hypertension, and athero-
sclerosis, may contribute to decreased compliance of the left-sided 
cardiac chambers and contribute to increased left-to-right shunting and 
symptomatology. The classic physical examination finding is a wide, 
fixed splitting of the second heart sound, which is due to prolonged RV 
ejection and increased PA capacitance, which, in turn, delay pulmonary 
valve closure. The surface electrocardiogram (ECG) commonly displays 
an incomplete right bundle branch block. Symptoms, when they occur, 
most commonly include exercise intolerance, arrhythmia, and dyspnea 
with exertion. It is not uncommon for adults to have incidentally noted 
asymptomatic ASD during evaluation of other comorbid issues. Right 
heart dilation, without additional etiology for such, in the setting of 
unrepaired ASD is considered a risk for progression toward symptom-
atic right heart failure, atrial arrhythmias, and potential development of 
pulmonary arterial hypertension (if such is not already present). There-
fore, a patient with an ASD and right heart dilation, particularly with 
symptoms attributable to such, should be offered ASD closure. Pulmo-
nary vascular disease leading to pulmonary hypertension develops in 
up to 10% of patients with unrepaired ASD, and Eisenmenger syndrome 
(ES) is a rare complication (see below). Management of patients with 
concomitant ASD and pulmonary hypertension should be coordinated 
with both ACHD and pulmonary hypertension experts.
Figure 264-2B illustrates the locations of various ASDs. The most 
common type of an ASD is a secundum ASD, which is a defect, or 
true deficiency in the atrial septum, in the region of the fossa ovalis. 
This should be differentiated from a patent foramen ovale (PFO), 
which is persistence of patency of the flap valve of the fossa ovalis (not 
associated with right-sided cardiac dilation) and persists in up to 25% 
of adults. Secundum ASDs can often be closed with occluder devices 
placed percutaneously. However, certain anatomic determinants make 
percutaneous closure less favorable, including large defects, inad-
equate tissue rims surrounding the defect, and concomitance of 
anomalous draining pulmonary veins. A primum ASD is a deficiency 
of the AV canal portion of the atrial septum; primum ASD is always 
associated with abnormal development of the AV valves, most com-
monly resulting in a cleft in the mitral valve. A coronary sinus defect 
is rare and involves an opening between the coronary sinus and the 
left atrium. A sinus venosus defect is not a defect in the atrial septum, 
but, rather, a defect between either the right superior vena caval-atrial 
junction and the right upper pulmonary vein(s) or, less commonly, the 
inferior vena caval-atrial junction and the right lower pulmonary veins. 
Surgical closure is required for primum ASDs, sinus venosus defects, 
and coronary sinus septal defects.
Partial Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Return 
Partial 
anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR) is occasionally dis-
covered in adults with right heart dilation, or incidentally on cross-
sectional imaging (Fig. 264-3). There are several possible anomalous 
connections, with the most common being a left upper pulmonary 
vein to an ascending vertical vein into the innominate vein or the right 
upper pulmonary vein draining to the superior vena cava. In the latter 
case, careful attention should be paid to ensure that there is not an 
associated sinus venosus defect. Concomitant pulmonary hypertension 
can occur, but is uncommon. Symptomatology may be absent, and 
decision to repair isolated PAPVR should take into account variance 
in anatomy, lung ventilation and perfusion, hemodynamic response to 
shunt, symptoms, and surgical experience.
Ebstein Anomaly  Ebstein anomaly (Fig. 264-4) is the result of 
embryologic failure of delamination, or “peeling away,” of the tricuspid 
valve leaflets from the ventricular myocardium, resulting in adherence 
of the valve leaflets to the underlying myocardium. This results in a 
wide variety of abnormalities, including apical and posterior displace-
ment of the dilated tricuspid valve annulus, dilation of the “atrialized” 
portion of the RV, and fenestrations, redundancy, and tethering typically 
of the anterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve. The malformed tricuspid 
valve is usually regurgitant, but may occasionally be stenotic. The clin-
ical presentation of Ebstein anomaly in the adult depends on several 
factors, including the extent of tricuspid valve leaflet distortion, degree 
of tricuspid regurgitation (TR), right atrial pressure, and presence of an 
atrial level shunt. The physical examination of a patient with Ebstein 
anomaly may vary depending on the severity of disease. In more severe 
cases, the first heart sound may be split and the second component of 
the first heart sound may have a distinctive snapping quality (known as 
the sail sign, due to the redundancy of the anterior tricuspid valve leaf-
let). Patients with significant TR may have prominent “v” waves of the 
jugular venous pulsations; however, this finding is often absent due to 
abnormal right atrial compliance. The ECG is often abnormal, with right 
atrial and ventricular enlargement. Up to 20% of patients have evidence 
TABLE 264-3  Congenital Etiologies of Right Heart Dilation
Congenital tricuspid valve disease
  Tricuspid valve dysplasia with regurgitation
  Ebstein anomaly
Congenital pulmonary valve regurgitation
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Myocardial abnormalities
  Arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy
  Uhl’s anomaly
Shunt lesions
  Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return
  Primum ASD
  Secundum ASD
  Sinus venosus defect
  Coronary sinus septal defect
  Gerbode defect (LV-RA shunt)
  Coronary artery fistula to the RA, CS
  Postoperative residual shunts
CHAPTER 264 Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult 
1833
SVC
x
IVC
SVC
PA
Ao
RV
LV
RA
LA
PV
x+y
x
x
x
x+y
x+y
x+y
y
x
IVC
Partial Anomalous
Pulmonary Venous Return
PA
Ao
LA
Left
PVs
Right
PVs
APV
APV
x+y
x+y
x
x
x+y
LV
RV
RA
y
x
FIGURE 264-3  Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return. In the presence of an anomalously draining pulmonary vein (typically to a systemic vein such as the left 
innominate vein, SVC, or rarely IVC), an obligate “shunt” of flow (“y”) of “red” (oxygenated) blood from the affected pulmonary vein to the right heart (deoxygenated) 
ensues. Systemic venous return of pure deoxygenated blood (“x”) is increased by the oxygenated shunted blood (“y”) to increase volume of blood (“x + y”) in the SVC, 
RA, RV, and total blood flow to the lungs. If the volume or the sequelae of the shunted blood is sufficient, RA and RV can dilate (hashed lines), or shortness of breath 
can ensue. Ao, aorta; APV, anomalous pulmonary vein; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary arteries; PV, pulmonary veins; RA, right 
atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava.
FIGURE 264-2  A. Atrial septal defect. In the presence of an atrial septal defect, the difference in compliance between the (RA+ RV) as compared to the (LA+LV), combined 
with the size of the defect itself, allows for a “shunt” of flow (“y”) of “red” (oxygenated) blood from the left side of the heart to the right side (deoxygenated). Systemic 
venous return of pure deoxygenated blood (“x”) is increased by the oxygenated shunted blood (“y”) to increase volume of blood (“x + y”) in the RA, RV, and total blood flow 
to the lungs. If the volume or the sequelae of the shunted blood is sufficient, RA and RV can dilate (hashed lines), and arrhythmias or shortness of breath (and occasionally 
pulmonary hypertension) can ensue. Ao, aorta; ASD, atrial septal defect; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary veins; 
RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava. B. Diagrammatic representation of the location of various atrial septal defects. ASD 1, primum atrial septal 
defect; ASD 2, secundum atrial septal defect. (Part B used with permission from Emily Flynn McIntosh, illustrator.)
IVC
SVC
PA
Ao
RV
LV
RA
LA
PV
SVC
IVC
Atrial Septal Defect
PA
Ao
LA
Left
PVs
Right
PVs
x+y
x+y
x+y
x
x
x
y
x
x
x+y
x+y
x+y
LV
RV
RA
x
y
x
x+y
ASD
ASD
x
A
Sinus
venosus
defect
ASD 1°
ASD 2°
B
of ventricular pre-excitation (Wolff-Parkinson White pattern). Surgical 
treatment includes a tricuspid valve repair or replacement, closure of 
any atrial level defects, and arrhythmia ablative procedures.
Shunt Lesions Causing Left Heart Dilation  Intracardiac 
shunts or intravascular passages that occur below the level of the 
tricuspid valve result in left heart dilation. The two major types of 
congenital shunts that result in left heart dilation are a ventricular 
septal defect (VSD, Fig. 264-5A) and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA, 
Fig. 264-6).
Ventricular Septal Defects  VSD are the most common congen-
ital anomaly recognized at birth, however, they account for only about 
10% of CHD in the adult, due to the high rate of spontaneous closure 
of small VSDs during the early years of life. Large VSDs usually cause 
symptoms of heart failure and poor somatic growth, and are most often 
closed before adulthood. Several classification systems for VSDs exist. 
Figure 264-5B illustrates various locations of VSDs; the most common 
location is in the membranous septum (also referred to as perimem-
branous, or outlet defects). Muscular defects that persist into adult life 
are often pressure and flow restricted, resulting in no significant hemo-
dynamic consequence. Atrioventricular canal defects, also referred to 
as inlet defects, are located in the crux of the heart and are associated 
with abnormalities of the atrioventricular valve leaflets. Subpulmonary 
defects, also known as conal septal defects, are commonly associated 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1834
with prolapse of the right coronary cusp and aortic insufficiency. The 
outcome for adults with small VSDs without evidence of ventricular 
dilation or pulmonary hypertension is generally excellent.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus  A PDA courses between the aortic 
isthmus and the origin of one of the branch pulmonary arteries. Small 
PDAs are often silent to auscultation, and do not cause hemodynamic 
changes. The classic murmur is heard best just below the left clavicle 
and typically extends from systole past the second heart sound into 
diastole, reflecting flow turbulence and gradient between the aorta and 
the pulmonary arteries (resulting in left-to-right shunting). Large PDAs 
will lead to left heart dilation and may lead to chronically elevated pul-
monary vascular resistance, including the potential for ES.
■
■MODERATE AND COMPLEX CHD
Tetralogy of Fallot  Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is the most common 
form of cyanotic CHD, occurring in 0.5 per 1000 live births. It involves 
what may be a singular deviation of the anterior conal septum, result-
ing in right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction, a VSD, right 
y
SVC
IVC
PA
Ao
RV
LV
RA
LA
PV
Left
PVs
Right
PVs 
x+y
x+z
y
*
x+z
x+z
x+y
x
x
x
PFO
SVC
IVC
Ebstein Malformation
PA
Ao
LA
x+y
x+z
x+z
x+y
LV
RV
RA
x
PFO
x+z
x
z
z
FIGURE 264-4  Ebstein malformation. In the presence of Ebstein anomaly, the tricuspid valve leaflets can be redundant, fenestrated and sail-like (typically seen in the 
anterior leaflet *), or adherent to the underlying myocardium with apical displacement of the non-adherent components (typically the septal and posterior leaflets). 
Location and degree of leaflet coaptation are variable and account for varying degrees of tricuspid regurgitation, shift of the functional tricuspid valve anterior from 
the anatomic annulus into the right ventricle, “atrialization” of the right ventricle, and most commonly angulation of the tricuspid valve into the RV outflow tract. RA 
and RV dilation (hashed lines) can occur due to the effects of combined volume from systemic venous return (“x”) and tricuspid regurgitant flow (“y”). PFO is frequent; 
worsening compliance and elevation of pressure in the RA as compared to the LA can lead to increasing “right-to-left” (deoxygenated to oxygenated) shunt and 
cyanosis. RV myocardial function may be abnormal. Ao, aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary arteries; PFO, patent foramen 
ovale; PV, pulmonary veins; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava; *, anterior tricuspid valve leaflet.
FIGURE 264-5  A. Ventricular septal defect. In the presence of a ventricular septal defect, the difference in pressure and outflow resistance in systole (and the 
difference in compliance in diastole) between the RV and LV, combined with the size of the defect itself, allow for a “shunt” of flow (“y”) of “red” (oxygenated) blood 
from the left side of the heart to the right side (deoxygenated). Systemic venous return of pure deoxygenated blood (“x”) is increased by the oxygenated shunted blood 
(“y”) to increase volume of blood (“x + y”) through the outflow of the RV into the lungs, and in the left atrium and left ventricle. If the volume or the sequelae of the 
shunted blood is sufficient, LA and LV can dilate (hashed lines), and arrhythmias or shortness of breath (and occasionally pulmonary hypertension) can ensue. Ao, 
aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary arteries; PV, pulmonary veins; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava; 
VSD, ventricular septal defect. B. Diagrammatic representation of the location of various ventricular septal defects. AV, atrioventricular. (Part B used with permission 
from Emily Flynn McIntosh, illustrator.)
Muscular
AV canal
type
Membranous
Subpulmonary
B
SVC
x
y
IVC
SVC
PA
Ao
RV
LV
RA
LA
PV
x
x+y
x+y
y
x
x
x+y
x
x+y
IVC
Ventricular Septal Defect
PA
Ao
LA
Left
PVs
Right
PVs
x
x
x
x+y
x+y
x+y
LV
RV
RA
VSD
A
CHAPTER 264 Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult 
1835
ventricular hypertrophy and an overriding aorta (Fig. 264-7A, B). There 
is a large spectrum of severity of disease in TOF, from patients who 
have only mild pulmonary stenosis to those with complete pulmonary 
atresia (TOF/PA). Current surgical strategies involve primary repair 
in infancy (Fig. 264-7C); however, many adults may have first under-
gone palliative procedures (Blalock-Taussig, Potts, Waterston shunts) 
prior to a complete repair. The goal of surgical repair is to alleviate the 
pulmonary stenosis and close the VSD. Up to 7% of patients with TOF 
have an anomalous coronary artery, most commonly, an anomalous 
left anterior descending coronary artery from the right coronary cusp. 
Patients with an anomalous coronary as well as those with TOF/PA 
may require a RV-to-PA conduit.
Adults with repaired TOF often have hemodynamic sequelae that 
may require re-intervention in adulthood (Table 264-4). Pulmonary 
regurgitation is common following TOF repair and is usually asso-
ciated with RV dilation. Accurate quantification of RV size, function, 
and mass is particularly important in adults after repair of TOF, as RV 
dilation, dysfunction, and hypertrophy are associated with adverse 
outcomes in these patients. Patients may also have residual RVOT 
obstruction, which may occur beneath the pulmonary valve, at the 
valve level, above the valve, or in the branch pulmonary arteries. 
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging is routinely used in the surveil-
lance of these patients. Left ventricular dysfunction is present in at 
least 20% of adults with repaired TOF, particularly those who were 
repaired later in life, had prior palliative shunts, or have concomitant 
RV dysfunction.
As patients age with repaired TOF, both atrial and ventricular 
arrhythmias occur with increasing frequency. A QRS duration on a 
resting ECG of 180 ms or more has been associated with increased risk 
of ventricular tachycardia and sudden death in this patient population. 
In one prospective follow-up study of 144 adults with repaired TOF, 
there was a 72% survival at 40 years, but only a 25% cumulative event 
free survival. These events include need for re-intervention (most com-
monly pulmonary valve replacement, PVR), symptomatic arrhythmias, 
and heart failure.
The most common re-intervention in a repaired TOF patient is 
a PVR. However, optimal timing of PVR in these patients remains 
unclear. Although PVR has been shown to decrease right ventricular 
volumes and subjectively improve symptoms, it has not been proven 
to result in an improved ejection fraction or less adverse outcomes, 
such as ventricular arrhythmias or death. Traditionally, PVR has been 
accomplished with a surgical procedure; however, percutaneous 
implantation of pulmonary valves is becoming increasingly utilized in 
clinical practice.
Patients with repaired TOF may also undergo interventions includ-
ing closure of residual VSDs, dilation and/or stenting of the RVOT or 
branch pulmonary arteries, and tricuspid valve repair. Patients with 
clinically significant arrhythmias may benefit from catheter ablation.
Transposition of the Great Arteries  Transposition of the great 
arteries (TGA) is defined by the great arteries arising from the opposite 
side of the ventricular septum than normal; as such, the aorta arises 
from the RV and the PA from the LV. The more common form of TGA, 
known as D-loop TGA, involves atrioventricular concordance and 
ventricular-arterial discordance, resulting in a physiology that allows 
two circuits to be in parallel rather than in series (Fig. 264-8A) and 
intense cyanosis shortly after birth. This physiology is not compatible 
with long-term survival without surgical intervention. Patients with 
TGA may be born with additional congenital defects (most commonly 
a VSD).
The surgical repairs for D-loop TGA have evolved over time. In the 
late 1950s through the 1970s, the atrial switch procedure (Mustard, 
Senning procedures) was performed (Fig. 264-8B). These atrial switch 
procedures relieved the cyanosis but left the patient with a systemic 
RV. Despite moderate-term survival over decades, there are multiple 
long-term sequelae that may present following the atrial switch proce-
dure. The most worrisome complication is that of systemic right ven-
tricular dysfunction. The prevalence of right ventricular dysfunction 
in this population is not well defined due to difficulties in quantifying 
systemic RV function. Limited study has failed to reveal medical ther-
apies effective for systemic right ventricular dysfunction.
A subset of patients with D-loop TGA, VSD, and PS may have 
undergone a Rastelli procedure. This intervention involves placing a 
RV-to-PA conduit and routing the LV to the aorta through the VSD, 
which results in relief of cyanosis and the benefit of a systemic LV.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
SVC
IVC
PA
PDA
Ao
LA
x
x+y
x+y
x+y
x
LV
RV
RA
x
y
Left
PVs
Right
PVs
IVC
PDA
SVC
RA
LA
PV
x
x+y
RV
LV
x
x
x+y
x+y
x
y
x+y
x
x+y
PA
Ao
x
FIGURE 264-6  Patent ductus arteriosus. In the presence of a patent ductus arteriosus, the difference in pressure and resistance in both systole and diastole between 
the pulmonary arteries and the aorta, combined with the size of the ductus itself, allow for a “shunt” of flow (“y”) of “red” (oxygenated) blood from the aorta to the 
pulmonary arteries (deoxygenated). Systemic venous return of pure deoxygenated blood (“x”) is increased by the oxygenated shunted blood (“y”) to increase volume 
of blood (“x + y”) in the lungs, the left atrium, the left ventricle, and out the aortic valve. If the volume or the sequelae of the shunted blood is sufficient, LA and LV can 
dilate (hashed lines), and arrhythmias or shortness of breath (and occasionally pulmonary hypertension) can ensue. Ao, aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; 
LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary arteries; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PV, pulmonary veins; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1836
A
IVC
RVH
SVC
PA
Ao
RV
LV
RA
LA
PV
x
x-y
x-y
x
x
x-y
x
x-y
VSD
SVC
IVC
Tetralogy of Fallot (unrepaired)
PA
Ao
LA
Left
PVs
x
x
x-y
x-y
x-y
x-y
x
y
y
LV
RV
RA
x
Right
PVs
 
*
#
#
*
VSD
1
B
Conal Anatomy
*
1
SVC
IVC
Tetralogy of Fallot (repaired)
PA
Ao
LA
Left
PVs
Right
PVs
x
x+y
y
x
x
x+y
LV
RV
RA
x
x
x
VSD
patch
VSD
patch
IVC
SVC
PA
Ao
RV
LV
RA
LA
PV
x+y
x
x
x
x+y
x+y
x
x
C
x
FIGURE 264-7  A. Tetralogy of Fallot involves anterior and superior malalignment of a bar of tissue (conal septum) (see * in Fig. 264-7B, which presents a cut-away view 
through the anterior surface of the RV, into the RV outflow), partially obstructing the right ventricular outflow (under the pulmonary valve, i.e., “subpulmonary stenosis”-
labeled as 1), and leaving a gap in the interventricular septum (VSD). The pulmonary valve annulus is typically hypoplastic. Outflow obstruction prevents regression of 
right ventricular hypertrophy #, which was present in utero. The difference in pressure and outflow resistance in systole (and the difference in compliance in diastole) 
between the obstructed RV and the LV allow for a “shunt” of flow (“y”) of “blue” (deoxygenated) blood from the right side of the heart to the left side (oxygenated). 
Systemic venous return of pure deoxygenated blood (“x”) is decreased by the shunted blood (“y”) leading to a total decrease in the volume of blood (“x – y”) passing 
beyond into the lungs. The deoxygenated shunted blood (“y”) mixes with fully oxygenated blood in the LV, contributing to systemic arterial cyanosis. C. Tetralogy of 
Fallot—repaired. After modern repair of tetralogy of Fallot, VSD has been patched closed, and outflow tract obstruction has been surgically removed, frequently at the 
expense of a patch enlarging the pulmonary valve annulus at the expense of sacrificing the integrity of the pulmonary valve (causing pulmonary regurgitation). Volume 
of pulmonary regurgitant volume (“y”) is added to systemic venous return (“x”), contributing to RV chamber enlargement (hashed lines), and may be associated with 
tricuspid annular dilation and valve regurgitation resulting in RA enlargement. Ao, aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary arteries; 
PV, pulmonary veins; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; RVH, right ventricular hypertrophy; SVC, superior vena cava; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
In the 1980s, the arterial switch procedure (ASO, Fig. 264-8C) became 
the surgical procedure of choice for D-loop TGA. This procedure 
involves transecting the great arteries above the sinuses, and placing 
the pulmonary arteries anteriorly to come into alignment with the RV, 
resulting in draping of the branch pulmonary arteries over the ascend-
ing aorta. A coronary artery translocation is performed. The arterial 
switch operation has resulted in substantial long-term survival.
The potential long-term sequelae of the various surgical procedures 
for D-loop TGA are listed in Table 264-5.
The less common form of TGA, known as L-loop TGA (physiologi-
cally corrected TGA, Fig. 264-9), may not require surgical intervention, 
but is presented here in relation to other forms of TGA. L-loop TGA 
involves both atrioventricular discordance (RA allowing passage of 
deoxygenated systemic venous return to the LV, and conversely, the 
left atrium conducting oxygenated pulmonary venous blood to the 
RV) as well as ventriculo-arterial discordance (connections of LV to 
PA, RV to aorta). This results in normal arterial oxygen saturation, yet 
an RV associated with the aorta. Patients with L-loop TGA commonly 
CHAPTER 264 Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult 
1837
PA
A
D-loop Transposition
SVC
IVC
LA
LV
RV
RA
PA
Ao
Left
PVs
Right
PVs
IVC
SVC
RV
LV
RA
LA
PV
ASD
Ao
FIGURE 264-8  A. Transposition of the great arteries. When the great arteries are transposed, the aorta arises from the RV, and the pulmonary artery arises from the 
LV, leaving deoxygenated blood circulating from systemic veins to systemic arteries in separated fashion from oxygenated blood, which circulates from pulmonary veins to 
pulmonary arteries. Without interchamber or intravascular communications, this circulation is incompatible with life. Presence of an atrial septal defect (ASD), depicted 
here, ventricular septal defect (VSD), or patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), allow for some interchamber or intravascular mixing, and, at best, partial relief of cyanosis 
and sustenance of life, at the expense of increased pulmonary blood flow. B. Atrial switch. Atrial level switch procedures (“Mustard” and “Senning”) were the first 
standardized surgeries to alter the natural course of complex congenital heart disease, utilizing intracardiac re-routing via a “baffle” to re-direct blood flow. The atrial 
switch simulates inverted trousers, with each “pants-leg” * attaching to either the SVC or the IVC, transporting deoxygenated blood through the interior of the trousers 
to the “waist of the trousers” and directing blood through the mitral valve to the LV and out the PA. Surgical removal of the atrial septum allows pulmonary venous return 
to traverse from posterior left atrium through the space between the pants legs of the baffle, through the tricuspid valve to the RV (serving as the “systemic ventricle,” 
i.e., that pumps to the systemic arterial circulation) and out the aorta. Non-infrequent sequelae include sinus node dysfunction, atrial arrhythmias, systolic dysfunction 
of the RV, tricuspid regurgitation (from RV to LA), leaks in the baffle material allowing shunting of blood, and obstruction of the systemic or pulmonary venous baffles. 
C. Arterial switch. The arterial switch operation allowed both anatomic and physiologic correction for D-loop transposition of the great arteries. Successful surgical 
switching of the PA and the Ao above the level of the native roots (hashed lines) necessitated ability to transfer coronary artery origins contained within a button of 
tissue * back to the neo-aorta (now supported by the LV). Deoxygenated blood flow from SVC and IVC pass from RA to RV to PA, and oxygenated blood passes from 
PV to LA to LV to Ao. Uncommon sequelae include obstruction at any of the surgical sites (supravalvar PA or Ao stenosis, coronary orifice obstruction), or more distal 
obstructions due to tension placed on the PA, Ao or coronary arteries. Ao, aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary arteries; 
PV, pulmonary veins; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava.
TABLE 264-4  Potential Sequelae of Repaired Tetralogy of Fallot
Right atrial dilation
Right ventricular dilation
Right ventricular dysfunction
Right ventricular outflow tract obstruction
Pulmonary regurgitation
Branch pulmonary artery stenosis
Tricuspid regurgitation
Residual ventricular septal defect
Left ventricular dysfunction
Aortic root dilation
Atrial arrhythmias
Ventricular arrhythmias
Sudden cardiac death
have associated congenital anomalies, including dextrocardia, ASDs, a 
dysplastic tricuspid valve, and pulmonary stenosis. Conduction dis-
turbances are common, and complete heart block occurs in up to 30% 
of patients. Those patients without associated defects may not present 
until later in life, most commonly with heart failure, tricuspid regurgi-
tation, or newly recognized conduction disease.
Coarctation of the Aorta  Adults with coarctation of the aorta 
(Fig. 264-10) typically have a shelf-like obstruction at the level of the 
descending aorta that passes just posterior to the junction of the main 
and left PA; obstruction less commonly involves the transverse aortic 
arch. On physical examination, the lower extremity blood pressure and 
pulses are lower than (and delayed in timing, in contrast to) the upper 
extremity values, unless significant aortic collaterals have developed. A 
continuous murmur over the scapula may be present, due to the collat-
eral blood flow. Significant coarctation increases afterload to all proxi-
mal structures in the path of oxygenated blood, from LV and coronary 
arteries, to ascending and transverse aorta, to cerebral and arm vessels 
and proximal descending aorta. Bicuspid aortic valve (typically with 
right-left commissural fusion) is a common association. In women with 
short stature, webbed neck, lymphedema, and primary amenorrhea, a 
concomitant diagnosis of Turner syndrome should be considered the 
presence of which indicates greater degree of, and risks from, sequelae 
from seemingly similar anatomy and physiology. Patients who have 
undergone surgical repair in general have a good prognosis; however, 
they remain at risk for systemic hypertension, premature atheroscle-
rosis, LV failure, as well as aortic aneurysm, dissection, and recurrent 
coarctation.
Single Ventricle Physiology  The term, “single ventricle heart 
disease,” is imprecise, but useful in some settings, as it refers to con-
genital heart conditions in which one ventricle or its valves preclude 
surgical creation of a biventricular circulation. Common congenital 
diagnoses in this category include tricuspid atresia, double inlet LV, 
and hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Most patients with single ventri-
cle physiology undergo a series of surgeries culminating in a Fontan 
procedure (Fig. 264-11A, B). Since its initial use for tricuspid valve 
atresia in 1971, multiple modifications of this procedure have occurred, 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1838
PA
B
IVC
SVC
RV
LV
LA
PV
Ao
Atrial Switch
SVC
IVC
LA
LV
RV
RA
PA
Ao
Left
PVs
Right
PVs
C
Arterial Switch
IVC
SVC
neo
PA
neo
Ao
RV
LV
RA
LA
PV
LA
SVC
IVC
LV
RV
RA
neo
PA
neo
Ao
oo
oo
Left
PVs
Right
PVs
*
*
FIGURE 264-8  (Continued)
TABLE 264-5  Long-Term Sequelae of D-loop TGA Surgery
ATRIAL SWITCH
ARTERIAL SWITCH
RASTELLI PROCEDURE
Systemic venous baffle
Arterial anastomosis 
stenosis
Subaortic stenosis
Pulmonary venous baffle
Branch PA stenosis
RV-PA conduit 
obstruction
RV (systemic) 
dysfunction
Neo-aortic root dilation
Pulmonary regurgitation
Tricuspid regurgitation
Neo-aortic regurgitation
Ventricular dysfunction
Baffle leaks
Coronary artery stenosis
 
LVOT obstruction (PS)
LV dysfunction
 
Abbreviations: LV, left ventricle; LVOT, left ventricular outflow tract; PA, pulmonary 
artery; RV, right ventricle.
with common features of near complete separation of the pulmonary 
and systemic circulations. The Fontan procedure utilizes the single 
ventricle to pump pulmonary venous (oxygenated) blood through the 
aorta to the body, and allows for “passive” flow of systemic venous 
return of deoxygenated blood through surgically created connections 
to the lungs. Patients who have undergone a Fontan procedure are at 
risk for multiple comorbidities in adulthood, including atrial arrhyth-
mias, heart failure, renal and hepatic dysfunction, and both venous and 
arterial thrombosis and embolism.
■
■UNREPAIRED CYANOTIC CHD
Eisenmenger Syndrome 
ES is felt to be the consequence of a 
long-standing high volume or pressurized left-to-right shunt in which 
excessive blood flow to the pulmonary vasculature leads to severely 
increased pulmonary vascular resistance that eventually results in 
reversal of the shunt, creating bidirectional or right-to-left flow. ES 
is a multiple-organ condition and may occur with any CHD with an 
initial left-to-right shunt. The natural history of ES is variable, and 
although there is significant morbidity, in general, adults with ES 
appear to survive longer than those with other forms of pulmonary 
CHAPTER 264 Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult 
1839
Congenitally (L-loop transposition)
Corrected TGA
SVC
IVC
LA
RV
LV
RA
PA
Ao
Left
PVs
Right
PVs
IVC
SVC
PA
Ao
LV
RV
RA
LA
PV
FIGURE 264-9  Congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries. Physiologically corrected transposition of the great arteries (also known as congenitally 
corrected transposition of the great arteries) is characterized by atrioventricular discordance and ventriculoarterial discordance. Systemic venous blood passes from 
the right atrium (RA) through the mitral valve into the morphologic left ventricle (LV) to the pulmonary artery (PA). Oxygenated blood then returns to the lungs to the left 
atrium (LA) through the tricuspid valve into the morphologic right ventricle (RV) and then out the aorta (Ao). IVC, inferior vena cava; PV, pulmonary veins; SVC, superior 
vena cava.
PA
*
Ao
Coarctation of the Aorta:
Sequelae/Associations
RA
LA
LV
RV
3
2
6
4
1
5
FIGURE 264-10  Aortic coarctation (*). Bicuspid aortic valve (1) is most common 
concomitant lesion. Sequelae from aortic coarctation (unrepaired or repaired) 
include systemic arterial hypertension, ascending (2) or descending (3) aortic 
enlargement or aneurysm formation, left ventricular hypertrophy (4), LV diastolic 
and systolic heart failure, accelerated coronary (5) or cerebral (6) atherosclerosis, 
cerebral aneurysm formation, and recurrence of coarctation after repair. Ao, aorta; 
LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary arteries.
arterial hypertension. Medical care recommendations have included 
sustaining adequate hydration, avoiding and treating anemia includ-
ing iron supplementation when appropriate, and anticoagulation 
(although this remains controversial due to predisposition to bleeding 
and occurrence of clinical hemoptysis, which has frequently been asso-
ciated with pulmonary vascular thrombosis). Elevation of hematocrit 
above that considered appropriate for the degree of cyanosis can be 
managed in symptomatic patients by hydration alone, or on occasion 
by performing phlebotomy with isovolumic replenishment. Routine 
phlebotomy in the asymptomatic adult with ES is contraindicated. 
Appropriate optimization of iron stores has been demonstrated to 
improve quality of life and functional performance in iron deficient 
adults with ES. Contraception for women with ES who are of childbear-
ing age is strongly recommended, avoiding use of estrogen, which may 
be thrombogenic. Pregnancy is contraindicated in these women due to 
the high risk of maternal mortality.
Recent evidence suggests that the use of selective pulmonary 
vasodilators, such as bosentan or sildenafil, may be efficacious in ES. 
Select patients may be candidates for combined heart–lung transplan-
tation or preferably lung transplantation with concomitant repair of the 
intracardiac defect, if feasible.
Global Considerations  As survival patterns improve for all 
medically complex patients, the internist and general practitioner are 
faced with particular challenges and dilemmas; foremost is accrual of 
sufficient knowledge and competency so as to be able both to engage in 
patient care provision as well as to seek greater expertise, guidance, and 
support, when such is appropriate. Across the globe, lifelong care for 
adults with CHD typifies this growing demand. Care for adults with 
CHD within medical care centers that contain an ACHD specialty care 
program has been associated with improved overall survival. How-
ever, current analyses suggest that the majority of adults with CHD 
seek and receive their medical care outside of such ACHD specialty 
care centers and within the hands of the general practitioner, internist 
and cardiologist. Under a surface of adaptability and determination, 
adults with CHD present a wide spectrum of cognitive and functional 
performance, multiple organ system comorbidities, abnormalities of 
systemic and pulmonary vasculature, and a near universal presence 
of heart failure of one stage or another, all over a lifetime. It appears 
incumbent on the ACHD specialist and ACHD specialty care centers to 
serve as a hub for partnering practitioners, encouraging engagement to 
the level of highest competencies, and providing education, oversight, 
and support, so as to achieve optimal outcomes.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1840
FIGURE 264-11  A. Fontan surgery creates a unique circulation in which deoxygenated blood is directed to the PAs from the SVC and IVC in a fashion that bypasses 
any pumping chamber. The SVC and IVC are connected * via either an internal “tunnel” or an extracardiac conduit that guides flow to the PA. Pulmonary venous 
(oxygenated) return courses from PV to LA to LV to aorta. In contrast to physiology in normal adults (where pressure is generated by an RV to propel blood flow from 
a lower pressure RA to a higher pressure LA), in Fontan circulation, by definition, due to the absence of a pumping chamber to the PA, RA pressure is greater than 
LA pressure, permitting flow through the lungs. Ao, aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary arteries; PV, pulmonary veins; SVC, 
superior vena cava, * Fontan baffle. B. Diagrammatic representation of the location of various types of Fontan operations. (Part B used with permission from Emily 
Flynn McIntosh, illustrator.)
PA
SVC
*
*
*
IVC
A
LV
Ao
RA
RA
LA
RV
Fontan
Extracardiac conduit
IVC
SVC
PA
Ao
LV
LA
PV
Extracardiac
fontan
Lateral tunnel
fontan
B
Atriopulmonary
fontan
Classic fontan
CHAPTER 265 Pericardial Disease
1841
■
■FURTHER READING
Gilboa SM et al: Congenital Heart Defects in the United States: 
Estimating the magnitude of the affected population in 2010. 
Circulation 134:101, 2016.
Gurvitz M et al: Emerging Research Directions in Adult Congenital 
Heart Disease: A report from an NHLBI/ACHA Working Group. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 67:1956, 2016.
Regitz-Zagrosek V et al: ESC guidelines on the management of cardio-
vascular diseases during pregnancy: The Task Force on the Manage-
ment of Cardiovascular Diseases during Pregnancy of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 32:3147, 2011.
Warnes CA et al: ACC/AHA 2008 guidelines for the management 
of adults with congenital heart disease: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines (writing committee to develop guidelines on the 
management of adults with congenital heart disease). Circulation 
118:e714, 2008.
Webb G et al: Specialized adult congenital heart care saves lives. 
Circulation 129:1795, 2014.
Webb G et al: The care of adults with congenital heart disease across 
the globe: Current assessment and future perspective: A position 
statement from the International Society for Adult Congenital Heart 
Disease (ISACHD). Int J Cardiol 195:326, 2015.
■
■NORMAL FUNCTIONS OF THE PERICARDIUM
The normal pericardium is a double-layered sac; the visceral pericar-
dium is a serous membrane that is separated from the fibrous parietal 
pericardium by a small quantity (15–50 mL) of fluid, an ultrafiltrate 
of plasma. The normal pericardium, by exerting a restraining force, 
prevents sudden dilation of the cardiac chambers, especially the right 
atrium and ventricle, during exercise and with hypervolemia. It also 
restricts the anatomic position of the heart, and probably retards the 
spread of infections from the lungs and pleural cavities to the heart. 
Nevertheless, total absence of the pericardium, either congenital or 
after surgery, does not produce obvious clinical disease. In partial left 
pericardial defects, the main pulmonary artery and left atrium may 
bulge through the defect; very rarely, herniation and subsequent stran-
gulation of the left atrium may cause sudden death.
ACUTE PERICARDITIS
Acute pericarditis, by far the most common pathologic process 
involving the pericardium (Table 265-1), has four principal diagnostic 
features:
1.	 Chest pain is usually present in acute infectious pericarditis and in 
many of the forms presumed to be related to hypersensitivity, autoim-
munity, or of unknown cause (idiopathic). The pain of acute pericar-
ditis is often severe, retrosternal and/or left precordial, and referred 
to the neck, arms, or left shoulder. Frequently the pain is pleuritic, 
consequent to accompanying pleural inflammation (i.e., sharp and 
aggravated by inspiration and coughing), but sometimes it is steady, 
radiates to the trapezius ridge, or into either arm, and resembles that 
of myocardial ischemia; therefore, confusion with acute myocardial 
infarction (AMI) is common. Characteristically, pericardial pain may 
be intensified by lying supine, and relieved by sitting up and leaning 
forward (Chap. 11). Pain is often absent in slowly developing tubercu-
lous, postirradiation, neoplastic, and uremic pericarditis.
  The differentiation of AMI from acute pericarditis may be chal-
lenging when, with the latter, serum biomarkers of myocardial 
damage such as troponin and creatine kinase-MB rise, presumably 
because of concomitant involvement of the epicardium in the 
265 Pericardial Disease
Eugene Braunwald 
TABLE 265-1  Classification of Pericarditis
Clinical Classification
I.  Acute pericarditis (<6 weeks)
A.  Fibrinous
B.  Effusive (serous or sanguineous)
II.  Subacute pericarditis (6 weeks to 6 months)
A.  Effusive-constrictive
B.  Constrictive
III.  Chronic pericarditis (>6 months)
A.  Constrictive
B.  Adhesive (nonconstrictive)
Etiologic Classification
I.  Infectious pericarditis
A.  Viral (coxsackievirus A and B, echovirus, herpesviruses, mumps, 
adenovirus, hepatitis, HIV)
B.  Pyogenic (pneumococcus, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Neisseria, 
Legionella, Chlamydia)
C.  Tuberculous
D.  Fungal (histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, Candida, blastomycosis)
E.  Other infections (syphilitic, protozoal, parasitic)
II.  Noninfectious pericarditis
	A.	 Acute idiopathic
	B.	 Renal failure
	C.	 Neoplasia
1.  Primary tumors (benign or malignant, mesothelioma)
2.  Tumors metastatic to pericardium (lung and breast cancer, 
lymphoma, leukemia)
	D.	 Trauma (penetrating chest wall, nonpenetrating)
	E.	 Aortic dissection (with leakage into pericardial sac)
	F.	 Acute myocardial infarction
	G.	Postirradiation
	H.	Familial Mediterranean fever
	I.	 Familial pericarditis
1.  Mulibrey nanisma
	J.	 Metabolic (myxedema, cholesterol)
III.  Pericarditis presumably related to hypersensitivity or autoimmunity
A.  Rheumatic fever
B.  Collagen vascular disease (systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid 
arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, scleroderma, acute rheumatic fever, 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis [Wegener’s])
C.  Drug-induced (e.g., procainamide, hydralazine, phenytoin, isoniazid, 
minoxidil, anticoagulants, methysergide)
D.  Postcardiac injury
1.  Postpericardiotomy
2.  Posttraumatic
3.  Postmyocardial infarction (Dressler’s syndrome)
aAn autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by growth failure, muscle 
hypotonia, hepatomegaly, ocular changes, enlarged cerebral ventricles, mental 
retardation, ventricular hypertrophy, and chronic constrictive pericarditis.
inflammatory process (an epi-myocarditis) with resulting myocyte 
necrosis. However, these elevations, if they occur, are quite modest 
compared to those in AMI, given the extensive electrocardiographic 
ST-segment elevation in pericarditis. This dissociation is useful in 
differentiating between these conditions.
2.	 A pericardial friction rub is audible at some point in the illness in 
about 85% of patients with acute pericarditis, it may have up to 
three components per cardiac cycle, is rasping, scratching, or grating 
(Chap. 234). It is heard most frequently at end expiration with the 
patient upright and leaning forward.
3.	 The electrocardiogram (ECG) in acute pericarditis without massive 
effusion usually displays changes secondary to acute subepicardial 
inflammation (Fig. 265-1A). It typically evolves through four stages. 
In stage 1, there is widespread elevation of the ST segments, often 
with upward concavity, involving two or three standard limb leads 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1842
Diagnosis  Echocardiography (Chap. 236) is the most widely used 
imaging technique. It is sensitive, specific, simple, noninvasive, may 
be performed at the bedside, and allows localization and estimation 
of the quantity of pericardial fluid. The presence of pericardial fluid 
is recorded by two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography as a 
relatively echo-free space between the posterior pericardium and left 
ventricular epicardium and/or as a space between the anterior right 
ventricle and the parietal pericardium just beneath the anterior chest 
wall (Fig. 265-2).
The diagnosis of pericardial fluid or thickening may be confirmed 
by computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
These techniques may be superior to echocardiography in detecting 
loculated pericardial effusions, pericardial thickening, and the identifi-
cation of pericardial masses. MRI is also helpful in detecting pericardial 
inflammation (Fig. 265-3).
TREATMENT
Acute Pericarditis
There is no specific therapy for acute idiopathic pericarditis, but bed 
rest and anti-inflammatory treatment with aspirin (2–4 g/d), with 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibupro-
fen (600–800 mg tid) or indomethacin (25–50 mg tid), and should 
be administered along with gastric protection (e.g., omeprazole  
20 mg/d). In responsive patients, these doses should be continued 
for 1–2 weeks and then tapered over several weeks. In addition, 
and V2–V6, with reciprocal depressions only in aVR and sometimes 
V1. Also, there is depression of the PR segment below the TP seg-
ment, reflecting atrial involvement. Usually there are no significant 
changes in QRS complexes, unless a large pericardial effusion 
develops (see below). After several days, the ST segments return 
to normal (stage 2), and only then, or even later, do the T waves 
become inverted (stage 3). Weeks or months after the onset of acute 
pericarditis, the ECG returns to normal (stage 4). In contrast, in 
AMI, ST elevations are upwardly convex, and reciprocal depression 
is usually more prominent; these changes may return to normal 
within a day or two. Q waves may develop, with loss of R-wave 
amplitude, and T-wave inversions; these changes are usually 
seen within hours before the ST segments have become isoelectric 
(Chaps. 268 and 269).
4.	 Pericardial effusion is usually associated with pain and/or the ECG 
changes mentioned above, and if the effusion is large with electrical 
alternans (Fig. 265-1B). Pericardial effusion is especially important 
clinically when it develops within a relatively short time because 
it may lead to cardiac tamponade (see below). Differentiation from 
cardiac enlargement on physical examination may be difficult, but 
heart sounds may be fainter with large pericardial effusion. The 
friction rub and the apex impulse may disappear. The base of the 
left lung may be compressed by pericardial fluid, producing Ewart’s 
sign, a patch of dullness and increased fremitus beneath the angle of 
the left scapula. The chest roentgenogram may show enlargement of 
the cardiac silhouette, with a “water bottle” configuration, but may 
be normal in patients with small effusions.
I
II
III
aVR
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
PR
ST
ST
PR
A
aVR
V1
V4
I
aVL
V2
V5
II
aVF
V3
V6
III
II
B
FIGURE 265-1  A. Acute pericarditis. There are diffuse ST-segment elevations in leads I, II, aVF, and V2–V6). There is PR-segment depression due to a concomitant atrial 
injury current. B. Electrical alternans. This tracing was obtained from a patient with a large pericardial effusion with cardiac tamponade.
CHAPTER 265 Pericardial Disease
1843
FIGURE 265-2  Two-dimensional echocardiogram in lateral view in a patient with a 
large pericardial effusion. Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle; pe, pericardial effusion; RV, 
right ventricle. (From M Imazio: Curr Opin Cardiol 27:308, 2012.)
colchicine (0.5 mg qd [<70 kg] or 0.5 mg bid [>70 kg]), should be 
administered for 3 months. Colchicine enhances the response to 
NSAIDs and also aids in reducing the risk of recurrent pericarditis. 
This drug is concentrated in and interferes with the migration of 
neutrophils, may cause diarrhea and other gastrointestinal side 
effects, and is contraindicated in patients with hepatic or renal dys-
function. Glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone 1 mg/kg per day) usually 
suppress the clinical manifestations of acute pericarditis in patients 
who have failed therapy with or do not tolerate NSAIDs and colchic-
ine. However, since they increase the risk of subsequent recurrence, 
full-dose corticosteroids should be given for only 2–4 days and then 
tapered. Anticoagulants should be avoided because their use could 
cause bleeding into the pericardial cavity and tamponade.
In patients with multiple, frequent, and disabling recurrences that 
continue for more than 2 years, and are not prevented by continuing 
colchicine and other NSAIDs and are not controlled by glucocor-
ticoids, azathioprine, or anakinra (an IL-1β receptor antagonist) 
have been reported to be of benefit. Rarely, pericardial stripping 
may be necessary but this procedure may not always terminate the 
recurrences.
The majority of patients with acute pericarditis can be managed 
as outpatients with careful follow-up. However, when specific 
causes (tuberculosis, neoplastic disease, bacterial infection) are sus-
pected, or if any of the predictors of poor prognosis (fever >38°C, 
subacute onset, or large pericardial effusion) are present, hospital-
ization is advisable.
RV
A
B
LV
LV
LA
AO
*
*
*
FIGURE 265-3  Pericardial inflammation by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. A. Short axis view. The pericardium is thickened and enhanced on T2 magnetic 
images. Note thickened white line denoted by arrow. B. Long axis view. Late gadolinium enhancement of thickened, inflamed pericardium. AO, aorta; LA, left atrium; 
LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (From RY Kwong: Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging, in Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 10th ed, Mann DL et al [eds]. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier, 2015, pp 320–40.)
■
■CARDIAC TAMPONADE
The accumulation of fluid in the pericardial space in a quantity suf-
ficient to cause serious obstruction of the inflow of blood into the 
ventricles results in cardiac tamponade. This complication may be fatal 
if it is not recognized and treated promptly. The most common causes 
of tamponade are idiopathic pericarditis and pericarditis secondary to 
neoplastic disease, tuberculosis, or bleeding into the pericardial space 
after leakage from an aortic dissection, cardiac operation, trauma, and 
treatment with anticoagulants.
The three principal features of tamponade (Beck’s triad) are hypoten-
sion, soft or absent heart sounds, and jugular venous distention with 
a prominent x (early systolic) descent but an absent y (early diastolic) 
descent. The limitations to ventricular filling are responsible for reduc-
tions of cardiac output and arterial pressure. The quantity of fluid 
necessary to produce cardiac tamponade may be as small as 200 mL 
when the fluid develops rapidly to as much as >2000 mL in slowly 
developing effusions when the pericardium has had the opportunity 
to stretch and adapt to an increasing volume.
A high index of suspicion for cardiac tamponade is required because 
in many instances no obvious cause for pericardial disease is apparent, 
and this diagnosis should be considered in any patient with otherwise 
unexplained sudden enlargement of the cardiac silhouette, hypotension, 
and elevation of jugular venous pressure. There also may be reductions 
in amplitude of the QRS complexes, and electrical alternans of the P, QRS, 
or T waves should raise the suspicion of cardiac tamponade (Fig. 265-1).
Table 265-2 lists the features that distinguish acute cardiac tampon-
ade from constrictive pericarditis.
Paradoxical Pulse  This important clue to the presence of cardiac 
tamponade consists of a greater than normal (10 mmHg) inspiratory 
decline in systolic arterial pressure. When severe it may be detected by 
palpating weakness or even disappearance of the arterial pulse during 
inspiration, but usually sphygmomanometric measurement of systolic 
pressure during slow respiration is required.
Because both ventricles share a tight incompressible covering, i.e., 
the pericardial sac, the inspiratory enlargement of the right ventricle 
causes leftward bulging of the interventricular septum, compresses 
and reduces left ventricular volume; stroke volume, and arterial sys-
tolic pressure. Paradoxical pulse also occurs in approximately one-third 
of patients with constrictive pericarditis (see below), and in some cases 
of hypovolemic shock, acute and chronic obstructive airway disease, 
and pulmonary embolism. Right ventricular infarction (Chap. 269) 
may resemble cardiac tamponade with hypotension, elevated jugular 
venous pressure, an absent y descent in the jugular venous pulse, and, 
occasionally, a paradoxical pulse (Table 265-2).
Diagnosis  Because immediate treatment of cardiac tamponade 
may be lifesaving, prompt establishment of the diagnosis, usually by 
echocardiography, should be undertaken. When pericardial effusion 
causes tamponade, Doppler ultrasound shows that tricuspid and 
pulmonic valve flow velocities increase markedly during inspiration, 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1844
TABLE 265-2  Features That Distinguish Cardiac Tamponade from Constrictive Pericarditis and Similar Clinical Disorders
CHARACTERISTIC
TAMPONADE
CONSTRICTIVE 
PERICARDITIS
RESTRICTIVE 
CARDIOMYOPATHY
RVMI
EFFUSIVE 
CONSTRICTIVE 
PERICARDITIS
Clinical
Pulsus paradoxus
+++
+
+
+
+++
Jugular veins
  Prominent y descent
–
++
+
+
–
  Prominent x descent
+++
++
+++
+
+++
  Kussmaul’s sign
–
+++
+
+++
++
Third heart sound
–
–
+
+
+
Pericardial knock
–
++
–
–
–
Electrocardiogram
Low ECG voltage
++
++
+
–
+
Electrical alternans
++
–
–
–
+
Echocardiogram
Thickened pericardium
–
+++
–
–
++
Pericardial calcification
–
++
–
–
_
Pericardial effusion
+++
–
–
–
++
RV size
Usually small
Usually normal
Usually normal
Enlarged
Usually normal
Exaggerated respiratory 
variation in flow velocity
+++
+++
–
+++
+
CT/MRI
Thickened pericardium
–
+++
–
++
Equalization of diastolic 
pressures
+++
+++
–
++
++
Abbreviations: +++, always present; ++, usually present; +, rare; –, absent; DC, diastolic collapse; ECG, electrocardiogram; RV, right ventricle; RVMI, right ventricular 
myocardial infarction.
Source: Adapted from GM Brockington et al: Cardiol Clin 8:645, 1990, with permission.
Septum
E
RV
RA
LA
LV
DIASTOLE
DIASTOLE
E
A
A
TV
TV
MV
MV
Septum
Doppler
transvalvular
inflow patterns
Thickened
pericardium
Pulmonary
vein
IVC and hepatic veins
Inspiration
Expiration
Apical 4-chamber views
FIGURE 265-4  Constrictive pericarditis. Doppler schema of respirophasic 
changes in mitral and tricuspid inflow. Reciprocal patterns of ventricular filling 
are assessed on pulsed Doppler examination of mitral valve (MV) and tricuspid 
valve (TV) inflow. IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right 
atrium; RV, right ventricle. (Courtesy of Bernard E. Bulwer, MD; with permission.)
whereas pulmonic vein, mitral, and aortic flow velocities diminish (as 
in constrictive pericarditis, see below) (Fig. 265-4). In tamponade, there 
is late diastolic inward motion (collapse) of the right ventricular free 
wall and the right atrium. Transesophageal echocardiography, CT, or 
cardiac MRI may be necessary to diagnose a loculated effusion respon-
sible for cardiac tamponade.
TREATMENT
Cardiac Tamponade
Patients with acute pericarditis should be observed frequently for 
the development of an effusion. If a large effusion is present, pericar-
diocentesis should be carried out or the patient watched closely for 
signs of tamponade with serial echocardiography and monitoring of 
arterial and venous pressures.
PERICARDIOCENTESIS
If manifestations of tamponade appear, pericardiocentesis using an 
apical, parasternal, or, most commonly, subxiphoid approach must 
be carried out at once because if left untreated, tamponade may be 
rapidly fatal. Whenever possible, this procedure should be carried 
out under echocardiographic guidance. Intravenous saline may be 
administered as the patient is being readied for the procedure, but 
the pericardiocentesis must not be delayed. If possible, intrapericar-
dial pressure should be measured before fluid is withdrawn, and 
the pericardial cavity should be drained as completely as possible. 
A small, multiholed catheter may be advanced over the needle 
inserted into the pericardial cavity and left in place to allow drain-
ing of the pericardial space if fluid reaccumulates. Surgical drainage 
through a limited (subxiphoid) thoracotomy may be required in 
recurrent tamponade to remove loculated effusions, and/or when it 
is necessary to obtain tissue for diagnosis.
Pericardial fluid obtained from an effusion may have the physical 
characteristics of an exudate. In developed nations, bloody fluid 
is most commonly due to neoplasm, renal failure, or after cardiac 
injury. In developing nations, tuberculosis, often associated with 
HIV infection, may also cause exudative and/or bloody effusion.
The pericardial fluid should be analyzed for red and white blood 
cells and cytology for neoplastic cells. Cultures should be obtained. 
The presence of DNA of Mycobacterium tuberculosis determined by 
the polymerase chain reaction strongly supports the diagnosis of 
tuberculous pericarditis (Chap. 173).
■
■VIRAL OR IDIOPATHIC ACUTE PERICARDITIS
In many instances, acute pericarditis occurs in association with or 
following illnesses of known or presumed viral origin and probably 
is caused by the same agent. There may be an antecedent infection 
CHAPTER 265 Pericardial Disease
1845
of the respiratory tract, but viral isolation and serologic studies are 
usually negative. In some cases coxsackievirus A or B or the virus of 
influenza, echovirus, mumps, herpes simplex, chickenpox, adenovi-
rus, or cytomegalovirus has been isolated from pericardial fluid and/
or appropriate elevations in viral antibody titers have been observed. 
Frequently, a viral cause cannot be established, and the term idiopathic 
acute pericarditis is appropriate.
Viral or idiopathic acute pericarditis occurs at all ages but is most 
common in young adult males, and is often associated with pleural 
effusion and pneumonitis. The almost simultaneous development of 
fever and precordial pain, often 10–12 days after a presumed viral 
illness, constitutes an important feature in the differentiation of acute 
pericarditis from AMI, in which chest pain precedes fever. The con-
stitutional symptoms are usually mild to moderate, and a pericardial 
friction rub is often audible. The disease ordinarily runs its course in a 
few days to 4 weeks. Elevations of C-reactive protein and of the white 
blood cell count are common. The ST-segment alterations in the ECG 
usually disappear after 1 or more weeks, but the abnormal T waves 
may persist for several years and be a source of confusion in persons 
without a clear history of pericarditis. Accumulation of some pericar-
dial fluid is common, and both tamponade and constrictive pericarditis 
are possible, but infrequent, complications.
The most frequent complication is recurrent (relapsing) pericarditis, 
which occurs in about one-fourth of patients with acute idiopathic peri-
carditis. In a smaller number, there are multiple recurrences.
Postcardiac Injury Syndrome  Acute pericarditis may appear 
in a variety of circumstances that have one common feature—previous 
injury to the myocardium with blood in the pericardial cavity. The 
syndrome may develop after a cardiac operation (postpericardiotomy 
syndrome), after blunt or penetrating cardiac trauma (Chap. S8), or 
after perforation of the heart with a catheter; rarely, it follows AMI.
The clinical picture mimics acute viral or idiopathic pericarditis. 
The principal symptom is the pain of acute pericarditis, which usually 
develops 1–4 weeks after the cardiac injury. Recurrences are common 
and may occur up to 2 years or more following the injury. Fever, pleuri-
tis, and pneumonitis are accompanying features, and the illness usually 
subsides in 1 or 2 weeks. The pericarditis may be of the fibrinous vari-
ety, or it may be a pericardial effusion, which is often serosanguineous 
and rarely causes tamponade. ECG changes typical of acute pericarditis 
may also occur. This syndrome is probably the result of a hypersen-
sitivity reaction to antigen(s) that originate from injured myocardial 
tissue and/or pericardium.
Often no treatment is necessary aside from aspirin and analgesics. 
When the illness is severe or followed by a series of disabling recur-
rences, therapy with another NSAID, colchicine, or a glucocorticoid, 
such as described for treatment of acute pericarditis, is usually effective.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Because there is no specific test for acute idiopathic pericarditis, the diag-
nosis is one of exclusion. Consequently, all other disorders that may be 
associated with acute fibrinous pericarditis must be considered. A com-
mon diagnostic error is mistaking acute viral or idiopathic pericarditis 
for AMI and vice versa. 
Pericarditis secondary to postcardiac injury is differentiated from 
acute idiopathic pericarditis chiefly by timing. If it occurs within a few 
days or weeks of a chest blow, a cardiac perforation, a cardiac opera-
tion, or an AMI, the two are probably related.
It is important to distinguish pericarditis due to collagen vascular dis-
ease from acute idiopathic pericarditis. Most important in the differen-
tial diagnosis is the pericarditis due to systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE; Chap. 349) or drug-induced (procainamide or hydralazine) 
lupus. When pericarditis occurs in the absence of any obvious under-
lying disorder, the diagnosis of SLE may be suggested by a rise in the 
titer of antinuclear antibodies. Acute pericarditis is an occasional com-
plication of rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, and polyarteritis nodosa, and 
other evidence of these diseases is usually obvious.
Pyogenic (purulent) pericarditis is usually secondary to cardiothoracic 
operations, by extension of infection from the lungs or pleural cavities, 
from rupture of the esophagus into the pericardial sac, or from rupture 
of a valvular ring abscess in a patient with infective endocarditis. It 
may also complicate the viral, bacterial, mycobacterial, and fungal 
infections that occur with HIV infection. It is generally accompanied 
by fever, chills, septicemia, and evidence of infection elsewhere and 
generally has a poor prognosis. The diagnosis is made by examination 
of the pericardial fluid. It requires immediate drainage as well as vig-
orous antibiotic treatment.
Pericarditis of renal failure (uremic pericarditis) occurs in up to one-third of 
patients with severe renal dysfunction, and is also seen in patients under-
going chronic dialysis who have normal levels of blood urea (dialysis- 
associated pericarditis). These two forms of pericarditis may be fibrinous 
and are generally associated with serosanguineous effusions. A pericar-
dial friction rub is common, but pain is usually absent or mild. Treatment 
with an NSAID and intensification of dialysis are usually adequate. 
Occasionally, tamponade occurs and pericardiocentesis is required. When 
the pericarditis of renal failure is recurrent or persistent, a pericardial win-
dow should be created or pericardiectomy may be necessary.
Pericarditis due to neoplastic diseases results from extension or inva-
sion of metastatic tumors (most commonly carcinoma of the lung and 
breast, malignant melanoma, lymphoma, and leukemia) to the pericar-
dium. The pain of pericarditis, tamponade, and atrial arrhythmias are 
complications that occur occasionally. Diagnosis is made by pericardial 
fluid cytology or pericardial biopsy. Mediastinal irradiation for neoplasm 
may cause acute pericarditis and/or chronic constrictive pericarditis. 
Unusual causes of acute pericarditis include syphilis, fungal infection 
(histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, aspergillosis, and candidiasis), and 
parasitic infestation (amebiasis, toxoplasmosis, echinococcosis, and 
trichinosis) (Table 265-1).
■
■CHRONIC PERICARDIAL EFFUSIONS
Chronic pericardial effusions are sometimes encountered in patients 
without an antecedent history of acute pericarditis. They may cause 
few symptoms per se, and their presence may be detected by finding 
an enlarged cardiac silhouette on a chest roentgenogram. Tuberculosis 
and myxedema may be causal. Neoplasms, SLE, rheumatoid arthritis, 
mycotic infections, radiation therapy to the chest, and chylopericardium 
may also cause chronic pericardial effusion and should be considered 
and specifically sought in such patients. Aspiration and analysis of the 
pericardial fluid are often helpful in diagnosis. Pericardial fluid should 
be analyzed as described under pericardiocentesis. Grossly sanguineous 
pericardial fluid results most commonly from a neoplasm, tuberculosis, 
renal failure, or slow leakage from an aortic dissection. Pericardiocen-
tesis may resolve large effusions, but pericardiectomy may be required 
in patients with recurrence. Intrapericardial instillation of sclerosing 
agents may be used to prevent reaccumulation of fluid.
CHRONIC CONSTRICTIVE PERICARDITIS
This disorder results when the healing of an acute fibrinous or serofi-
brinous pericarditis or the resorption of a chronic pericardial effusion is 
followed by obliteration of the pericardial cavity with the formation of 
granulation tissue. The latter gradually contracts and forms a firm scar 
encasing the heart, which may become calcified. In developing nations, 
a high percentage of cases are of tuberculous origin, but this is now an 
uncommon cause in North America or Western Europe. Chronic con-
strictive pericarditis may follow acute or relapsing viral or idiopathic 
pericarditis, trauma with organized blood clot, or cardiac surgery of any 
type, or results from mediastinal irradiation, purulent infection, histo-
plasmosis, neoplastic disease (especially breast cancer, lung cancer, and 
lymphoma), rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, or chronic renal failure treated 
by chronic dialysis. In many patients, the cause of the pericardial disease 
is undetermined, and in these patients an asymptomatic or forgotten 
bout of viral pericarditis, idiopathic or acute, may have been the inciting 
event.
The basic physiologic abnormality in patients with chronic constric-
tive pericarditis is the inability of the ventricles to fill because of the 
limitations imposed by the rigid, thickened pericardium. Ventricular 
filling is unimpeded during early diastole but is reduced abruptly 
when the elastic limit of the pericardium is reached, whereas in cardiac 
tamponade, ventricular filling is impeded throughout diastole. In both 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1846 conditions, ventricular end-diastolic and stroke volumes are reduced 
and the end-diastolic pressures in both ventricles and the mean pres-
sures in the atria, pulmonary veins, and systemic veins are all elevated 
to similar levels (i.e., within 5 mmHg of one another). Despite these 
hemodynamic changes, systolic function may be normal or only 
slightly impaired at rest. However, in advanced cases, the fibrotic pro-
cess may extend into the myocardium and cause myocardial scarring 
and atrophy, and venous congestion may then be due to the combined 
effects of the pericardial and myocardial lesions.
In constrictive pericarditis, the right and left atrial pressure pulses 
display an M-shaped contour, with prominent x and y descents. The 
y descent, which is absent or diminished in cardiac tamponade, is the 
most prominent deflection in constrictive pericarditis; it reflects rapid 
early filling of the ventricles. The y descent is interrupted by a rapid 
rise in atrial pressure during early diastole, when ventricular filling is 
impeded by the constricting pericardium. These characteristic changes 
are transmitted to the jugular veins, where they may be recognized by 
inspection. In constrictive pericarditis, the ventricular pressure pulses 
in both ventricles exhibit characteristic “square root” signs during 
diastole. These hemodynamic changes, although characteristic, are not 
pathognomonic of constrictive pericarditis and may also be observed in 
restrictive cardiomyopathies (Chap. 254, Table 254-2).
■
■CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
Weakness, fatigue, weight gain, increased abdominal girth, abdominal 
discomfort, and edema are common. The patient often appears chron-
ically ill, and in advanced cases, anasarca, skeletal muscle wasting, 
and cachexia may be present. Exertional dyspnea is common, and 
orthopnea may occur, although it is usually not severe. The cervical 
veins are distended and may remain so even after intensive diuretic 
treatment, and venous pressure may fail to decline during inspiration 
(Kussmaul’s sign). The latter is common in chronic pericarditis but may 
also occur in tricuspid stenosis, right ventricular infarction, and restric-
tive cardiomyopathy.
The pulse pressure is normal or reduced. A paradoxical pulse can be 
detected in about one-third of cases. Congestive hepatomegaly is pro-
nounced and may impair hepatic function and cause jaundice; ascites is 
common and is usually more prominent than dependent edema. Pleural 
effusions and splenomegaly may also be present. The apical pulse is 
reduced and may retract in systole (Broadbent’s sign). The heart sounds 
may be distant; an early third heart sound (i.e., a pericardial knock) 
occurring at the cardiac apex with the abrupt cessation of ventricular 
filling is often conspicuous.
The ECG frequently displays low voltage of the QRS complexes 
and diffuse flattening or inversion of the T waves. Atrial fibrillation is 
present in about one-third of patients. The chest roentgenogram shows 
a normal or slightly enlarged heart. Pericardial calcification is most 
common in tuberculous pericarditis. Pericardial calcification may, how-
ever, occur in the absence of constriction, and constriction may occur 
without calcification.
Inasmuch as the common physical signs of cardiac disease (mur-
murs, cardiac enlargement) may be inconspicuous or absent in chronic 
constrictive pericarditis, hepatic enlargement, and dysfunction associ-
ated with jaundice and intractable ascites may lead to a mistaken diag-
nosis of hepatic cirrhosis. This error can be avoided if the neck veins are 
inspected and found to be distended.
The transthoracic echocardiogram often shows pericardial thickening, 
dilation of the inferior vena cava and hepatic veins, and a sharp halt to 
rapid left ventricular filling in early diastole, with normal ventricular 
systolic function and flattening of the left ventricular posterior wall. 
There is a distinctive pattern of transvalvular flow velocity on Doppler 
echocardiography (Fig. 265-4). During inspiration, there is an exag-
gerated reduction in blood flow velocity in the pulmonary veins and 
across the mitral valve and a leftward shift of the ventricular septum; 
the opposite occurs during expiration. Diastolic flow velocity in the 
inferior vena cava into the right atrium and across the tricuspid valve 
increases in an exaggerated manner during inspiration and declines 
during expiration. However, echocardiography cannot definitively 
establish or exclude the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis; CT and 
MRI are more accurate, the latter is useful in evaluating myocardial 
involvement.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Like chronic constrictive pericarditis, cor pulmonale (Chap. 252) may 
be associated with marked systemic venous hypertension, little pul-
monary congestion, a heart that is not enlarged, and a paradoxical 
pulse. However, in cor pulmonale, advanced parenchymal pulmonary 
disease is usually apparent and venous pressure falls during inspira-
tion (i.e., Kussmaul’s sign is negative). Tricuspid stenosis (Chap. 261) 
may also simulate chronic constrictive pericarditis with congestive 
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, and venous distention. However, 
the characteristic murmur and that of accompanying mitral stenosis 
are usually present.
Because it can be corrected surgically, it is important to distin-
guish chronic constrictive pericarditis from restrictive cardiomyopathy 
(Chap. 254), which has a similar physiologic abnormality (i.e., restric-
tion of ventricular filling). The differentiating features are summa-
rized in Table 265-2. When a patient has progressive, disabling, and 
unresponsive congestive heart failure and displays any of the features 
of constrictive heart disease, Doppler echocardiography to record 
respiratory effects on transvalvular flow (Fig. 265-4) and an MRI or CT 
scan should be obtained to detect or exclude constrictive pericarditis, 
because the latter is usually correctable.
TREATMENT
Constrictive Pericarditis
Pericardial resection is the only definitive treatment of constrictive 
pericarditis and should be as complete as possible. Dietary sodium 
restriction and diuretics are useful during preoperative prepara-
tion. Coronary arteriography should be carried out preoperatively 
in patients aged >50 years to exclude unsuspected accompanying 
coronary artery disease. The benefits derived from cardiac decorti-
cation are usually progressive over a period of months. The risk of 
this operation depends on the extent of penetration of the myocar-
dium by the fibrotic and calcific process, the severity of myocardial 
atrophy, the extent of secondary impairment of hepatic and/or renal 
function, and the patient’s general condition. Operative mortality is 
in the range of 5–10% even in experienced centers; the patients with 
the most severe disease, especially secondary to radiation therapy, 
are at highest risk. Therefore, surgical treatment should, if possible, 
be carried out as early as possible.
Subacute Effusive-Constrictive Pericarditis  This form of 
pericardial disease is characterized by the combination of a tense 
effusion in the pericardial space and constriction of the heart by thick-
ened pericardium. As such, it shares a number of features with both 
chronic pericardial effusion producing cardiac compression and with 
pericardial constriction. It may be caused by tuberculosis (see below), 
multiple attacks of acute idiopathic pericarditis, radiation, traumatic 
pericarditis, renal failure, scleroderma, and neoplasms. The heart is 
generally enlarged, and a paradoxical pulse is usually present. After 
pericardiocentesis, the physiologic findings may change from those of 
cardiac tamponade to those of pericardial constriction. Furthermore, 
the intrapericardial pressure and the central venous pressure may 
decline, but not to normal. The diagnosis can be established by pericar-
diocentesis followed by pericardial biopsy. Wide excision of both the 
visceral and parietal pericardium is usually effective therapy.
Tuberculous Pericardial Disease  This chronic infection is 
a common cause of chronic pericardial effusion, especially in the 
developing world where active tuberculosis and HIV are endemic. 
Tuberculous pericarditis may present as pericardial effusion, chronic 
constrictive pericarditis, or subacute effusive constrictive pericarditis 
(see above). The clinical picture is that of a chronic, systemic illness 
in a patient with pericardial effusion. It is important to consider this 
diagnosis in a patient with known tuberculosis, with HIV, and with 
fever, chest pain, weight loss, and enlargement of the cardiac silhouette 
CHAPTER 266 Atrial Myxoma and Other Cardiac Tumors
1847
of undetermined origin. If the etiology of chronic pericardial effusion 
remains obscure despite detailed analysis including culture of the peri-
cardial fluid, a pericardial biopsy, preferably by a limited thoracotomy, 
should be performed. If definitive evidence is still lacking but the spec-
imen shows granulomas with caseation, antituberculous chemotherapy 
(Chap. 173) is indicated.
If the biopsy specimen shows a thickened pericardium after 
2–4 weeks of antituberculous therapy, pericardiectomy should be car-
ried out to prevent the development of constriction. Tubercular cardiac 
constriction should be treated surgically while the patient is receiving 
antituberculous chemotherapy.
■
■FURTHER READING
Adler Y et al: 2015 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management 
of pericardial diseases. Eur Heart J 36:2921, 2015.
Alraies MC et al: Usefulness of cardiac magnetic resonance-guided 
management in patients with recurrent pericarditis. Am J Cardiol 
115:542, 2015.
Cremer PC et al: Complicated pericarditis: Understanding risk factors 
and pathophysiology to inform imaging and treatment. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 68:2311, 2016.
Garcia MJ: Constrictive pericarditis versus restrictive cardiomyopa-
thy? J Am Coll Cardiol 67:2061, 2016.
Imazio M et al: Efficacy and safety of colchicine for treatment of multi-
ple recurrences of pericarditis (CORP-2); a multicentre, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, randomised trial. Lancet 383:2232, 2014.
LeWinter MM: Acute pericarditis. N Engl J Med 371:2410, 2014.
Lotan D et al: Usefulness of novel immunotherapeutic strategies for 
idiopathic recurrent pericarditis. Am J Cardiol 117:861, 2016.
Vistarini N et al: Pericardiectomy for constrictive pericarditis. Ann 
Thorac Surg 100:107, 2015.
Atrial Myxoma and Other 
Cardiac Tumors
Eric H. Awtry 
266
Cardiac tumors can be broadly classified into those that arise primarily 
in the heart and those that reflect metastatic disease from a distant pri-
mary source. Primary cardiac tumors can be further divided into those 
that are pathologically benign and those that are malignant. Overall, 
primary cardiac tumors are relatively uncommon, whereas secondary 
involvement of the heart or pericardium occurs in as many as 20% of 
patients with end-stage metastatic cancer. While patients with cardiac 
tumors may present with a variety of symptoms, many patients are 
asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis as the tumor may be identified 
incidentally on imaging studies performed for other reasons. Such 
findings need to be differentiated from other cardiac masses such as 
vegetation, thrombus, or myocardial hypertrophy. Echocardiography 
is usually the initial method of evaluation of cardiac tumors; however, 
a variety of imaging modalities are now available and a multimodality 
approach is often necessary for accurate diagnosis and clarification of 
treatment options (Table 266-1).
■
■PRIMARY TUMORS
Primary tumors of the heart are rare. Approximately three-quarters are 
histologically benign, and the majority of these tumors are myxomas. 
Malignant tumors, almost all of which are sarcomas, account for 25% 
of primary cardiac tumors. All cardiac tumors, regardless of pathologic 
type, have the potential to cause life-threatening complications. Many 
tumors are now surgically curable; thus, early diagnosis is imperative.
Clinical Presentation  Cardiac tumors may present with a wide 
array of cardiac and noncardiac manifestations. These manifestations, 
which depend in large part on the location and size of the tumor as 
well as its impact on surrounding cardiac structures, are often non-
specific features of more common forms of heart disease, such as chest 
pain, syncope, congestive heart failure (CHF), murmurs, arrhythmias, 
conduction disturbances, and pericardial effusion with or without 
tamponade. Additionally, embolic phenomena and constitutional 
symptoms may occur.
Myxoma  Myxomas are the most common type of primary cardiac 
tumor in adults, accounting for one-third to one-half of all cases at post-
mortem examination, and approximately three-quarters of the tumors 
treated surgically. They occur at all ages, most commonly in the third 
through sixth decades, with a female predilection. Approximately 90% 
of myxomas are sporadic; the remainder are familial with autosomal 
dominant transmission. The familial variety often occurs as part of a 
syndrome complex (Carney complex) that includes (1) myxomas (car-
diac, skin, and/or breast), (2) lentigines and/or pigmented nevi, and 
(3) endocrine overactivity (primary nodular adrenal cortical disease 
with or without Cushing’s syndrome, testicular tumors, and/or pitu-
itary adenomas with gigantism or acromegaly). Certain constellations 
of findings have been referred to as the NAME syndrome (nevi, atrial 
myxoma, myxoid neurofibroma, and ephelides) or the LAMB syndrome 
(lentigines, atrial myxoma, and blue nevi), although these syndromes 
probably represent subsets of the Carney complex. The genetic basis of 
this complex has not been elucidated completely; however, inactivating 
mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene PRKAR1A, which encodes the 
protein kinase A type I-α regulatory subunit, have been identified in 
~70% of patients with Carney complex.
Pathologically, myxomas are gelatinous structures that consist of 
myxoma cells embedded in a stroma rich in glycosaminoglycans. 
Most sporadic tumors are solitary, arise from the interatrial septum 
in the vicinity of the fossa ovalis (particularly in the left atrium), and 
are often pedunculated on a fibrovascular stalk. In contrast, familial 
or syndromic tumors tend to occur in younger individuals, are often 
multiple, may be ventricular in location, and are more likely to recur 
after initial resection.
Myxomas commonly present with obstructive signs and symptoms. 
The most common clinical presentation mimics that of mitral valve dis-
ease: either stenosis owing to tumor prolapse into the mitral orifice or 
regurgitation resulting from tumor-induced valvular trauma or distor-
tion. Ventricular myxomas may cause outflow tract obstruction similar 
to that caused by subaortic or subpulmonic stenosis. The symptoms 
and signs of myxoma may be sudden in onset or positional in nature, 
TABLE 266-1  Imaging Modalities and Their Utility in the Evaluation 
of Cardiac Tumors
MODALITY
UTILITY IN CARDIAC TUMOR EVALUATION
Transthoracic 
echocardiography (TTE) 
(including 2-D, 3-D, and 
contrast)
Assessment of tumor location and size, and 
its impact on adjacent structures (e.g., valves, 
pericardium).
Transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE)
Improved tumor characterization and spatial 
resolution compared with TTE. May aid in 
determining surgical approach.
Cardiac MRI with 
gadolinium contrast
Improved tissue characterization, definition 
of tumor size and identification of local 
invasion when compared with TTE or TEE. May 
differentiate tumor from thrombus.
Gated cardiac CT
Provides anatomic assessment and tissue 
characterization of the tumor. Useful when 
patients cannot tolerate MRI or when MRI is 
not feasible (e.g., patients with implantable 
cardiac devices). Allows for better assessment of 
calcified lesions and evaluation of extra-cardiac 
tumor involvement.
Nuclear Imaging (including 
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose 
positron emission 
tomography [FDG-PET])
Definition of extra-cardiac disease. May be 
useful in diagnosis of certain cardiac tumors 
(e.g., neuroendocrine tumors) but assessment 
of smaller tumors may be limited by surrounding 
myocardial FDG uptake.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1848
A
B
FIGURE 266-1  Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrating a large atrial myxoma. The myxoma (Myx) fills the entire left atrium in systole (A) and prolapses across 
the mitral valve and into the left ventricle (LV) during diastole (B). RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. (Courtesy of Dr. Michael Tsang; with permission.)
FIGURE 266-2  Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating a rounded 
mass (M) within the left atrium (LA). Pathologic evaluation at the time of surgery 
revealed it to be an atrial myxoma. LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right 
ventricle.
owing to the effects of gravity on tumor position. A characteristic low-
pitched sound, a “tumor plop,” may be appreciated on auscultation 
during early or mid-diastole and is thought to result from the impact 
of the tumor against the mitral valve or ventricular wall. Myxomas 
also may present with peripheral or pulmonary embolic phenomenon 
(resulting from embolization of tumor fragments or tumor-associated 
thrombus) or with constitutional signs and symptoms, including 
fever, weight loss, cachexia, malaise, arthralgias, rash, digital club-
bing, and Raynaud’s phenomenon. Laboratory abnormalities, such as 
hypergammaglobulinemia, anemia, polycythemia, leukocytosis, ele-
vated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, elevated C-reactive protein level, 
thrombocytopenia, and thrombocytosis are often present. These fea-
tures account for the frequent misdiagnosis of patients with myxomas 
as having endocarditis, collagen vascular disease, or a paraneoplastic 
syndrome.
Two-dimensional and three-dimensional transthoracic and/or 
transesophageal echocardiography are useful in the diagnosis of 
cardiac myxoma and allow for assessment of tumor size and deter-
mination of the site of tumor attachment, both of which are important 
considerations in the planning of surgical excision (Fig. 266-1). Com-
puted tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may 
provide important information regarding size, shape, composition, and 
surface characteristics of the tumor (Fig. 266-2).
Although cardiac catheterization and angiography were previously 
performed routinely before tumor resection, they no longer are consid-
ered mandatory when adequate noninvasive information is available 
and other cardiac disorders (e.g., coronary artery disease) are not 
considered likely. Additionally, catheterization of the chamber from 
which the tumor arises carries the risk of tumor embolization. Because 
myxomas may be familial, echocardiographic screening of first-degree 
relatives is appropriate, particularly if the patient is young and has 
multiple tumors or features of a myxoma syndrome.
TREATMENT
Myxoma
Surgical excision using cardiopulmonary bypass is indicated regard-
less of tumor size, and is generally curative. Myxomas recur in 
12–22% of familial cases but in only 1–2% of sporadic cases. Tumor 
recurrence most likely results from multifocal lesions in the former 
setting and incomplete tumor resection in the latter.
Other Benign Tumors  Cardiac lipomas, although relatively com-
mon, are usually incidental findings at postmortem examination; how-
ever, they may grow as large as 15 cm, may present as an abnormality 
of the cardiac silhouette on chest x-ray, and should be resected if they 
produce symptoms owing to mechanical interference with cardiac func-
tion, arrhythmias, or conduction disturbances. Papillary fibroelastomas 
are friable tumors with frond-like projections that are usually solitary 
and are the most common tumors of the cardiac valves. Remnants 
of cytomegalovirus have been recovered from these tumors, raising 
the possibility that they arise as a result of chronic viral endocarditis. 
Although usually clinically silent, they can cause valve dysfunction and 
may embolize distally, resulting in transient ischemic attacks, stroke, or 
myocardial infarction. In general, these tumors should be resected even 
when asymptomatic, although a more conservative approach may be 
considered for small, right-sided lesions. Rhabdomyomas and fibromas 
are the most common cardiac tumors in infants and children and 
usually occur in the ventricles, where they may produce mechanical 
obstruction to blood flow, thereby mimicking valvular stenosis, CHF, 
restrictive or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or pericardial constriction. 
Rhabdomyomas are probably hamartomatous growths, are multiple 
in 90% of cases, and are strongly associated with tuberous sclerosis 
CHAPTER 266 Atrial Myxoma and Other Cardiac Tumors
1849
RA 
RV 
LV 
T
T
T
T
FIGURE 266-3  Transthoracic echocardiogram revealing multiple tumors (T) 
consistent with rhabdomyomas in a 1-day-old infant. The largest tumor (arrows) 
was located in the left AV groove and measured 2 cm × 2 cm. LV; left ventricle; 
RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.
■
■TUMORS METASTATIC TO THE HEART
Tumors metastatic to the heart are much more common than primary 
tumors, and their incidence is likely to increase as the life expectancy 
of patients with various forms of malignant neoplasms is extended by 
more effective therapy and improved imaging modalities allow ear-
lier identification of metastatic disease. Although cardiac metastases 
may occur with any tumor type, the relative incidence is especially 
high in malignant melanoma and, to a somewhat lesser extent, leuke-
mia and lymphoma (Fig. 266-4). In absolute terms, the most common 
primary sites from which cardiac metastases originate are carcinoma 
of the breast and lung, reflecting the high incidence of those cancers. 
Cardiac metastases almost always occur in the setting of widespread 
primary disease, and most often there is either primary or metastatic 
disease elsewhere in the thoracic cavity. Nevertheless, cardiac metas-
tasis occasionally may be the initial presentation of an extrathoracic 
tumor.
Cardiac metastases may occur via hematogenous or lymphangitic 
spread or by direct tumor invasion. They generally manifest as small, 
firm nodules; diffuse infiltration also may occur, especially with 
sarcomas or hematologic neoplasms. The pericardium is most often 
involved, followed by myocardial involvement of any chamber and, 
rarely, by involvement of the endocardium or cardiac valves.
Cardiac metastases are clinically apparent only ~10% of the time, are 
usually not the cause of the patient’s presentation, and rarely are the 
cause of death. The vast majority occur in the setting of a previously 
recognized malignant neoplasm. As with primary cardiac tumors, the 
clinical presentation reflects more the location and size of the tumor 
than its histologic type. When symptomatic, cardiac metastases may 
result in a variety of clinical features, including dyspnea, acute pericar-
ditis, cardiac tamponade, ectopic tachyarrhythmias, heart block, and 
CHF. Importantly, many of these signs and symptoms may also result 
from myocarditis, pericarditis, or cardiomyopathy induced by radio-
therapy or chemotherapy, and a high index of suspicion for cardiac 
involvement should be maintained for patients with malignant disease 
who develop these symptoms.
Electrocardiographic (ECG) findings are nonspecific but may reveal 
features consistent with pericarditis or may demonstrate low QRS volt-
age and electrical alternans in the setting of a large pericardial effusion. 
On chest x-ray, the cardiac silhouette is most often normal but may be 
enlarged or exhibit a bizarre contour. Echocardiography is useful for 
identifying and assessing the significance of pericardial effusions and 
visualizing larger metastases, although CT and radionuclide imaging 
may define the tumor burden more clearly. Cardiac MRI offers superb 
image quality and plays a central role in the diagnostic evaluation of 
cardiac metastases and cardiac tumors in general. Pericardiocentesis 
may allow for a specific cytologic diagnosis in patients with malignant 
(Fig. 266-3). These tumors have a tendency to regress completely or 
partially; only tumors that cause obstruction require surgical resec-
tion. Fibromas are usually single, universally ventricular in location, 
often calcified, tend to grow and cause arrhythmias and obstruc-
tive symptoms, and should be completely resected when possible. 
Paragangliomas are rare chromaffin cell tumors that represent extra- 
adrenal pheochromocytomas. Most are located in the roof of the left 
atrium and can be identified on cardiac CT or MRI, or with nuclear 
scanning using 131-I-metaiodobenzylguanidine. They are highly vas-
cular and may be hormonally active, resulting in uncontrolled hyper-
tension. Extensive surgical resection is usually required. Hemangiomas 
and mesotheliomas are generally small tumors, most often intramyo-
cardial in location, and may cause atrioventricular (AV) conduction 
disturbances and even sudden death as a result of their propensity 
to develop in the region of the AV node. Other benign tumors arising 
from the heart include teratoma, chemodectoma, neurilemoma, granular cell 
myoblastoma, and paraganglioma.
Sarcoma  Almost all malignant primary cardiac tumors are sar-
comas; isolated cardiac lymphomas have been rarely described, but 
usually occur in the context of more systemic disease. Sarcomas may be 
of several histologic types; angiosarcomas are the most common type 
in adults while rhabdomyosarcomas are the most common type in chil-
dren. In general, sarcomas are characterized by rapid progression that 
culminates in the patient’s death within weeks to months from the time 
of presentation as a result of hemodynamic compromise, local invasion, 
or distant metastases. Almost one-third are metastatic at the time of 
initial diagnosis, usually involving the lungs. Sarcomas commonly 
involve the right side of the heart, are rapidly growing, frequently 
invade the pericardial space, and may obstruct the cardiac chambers or 
venae cavae. Sarcomas also may occur on the left side of the heart and 
may be mistaken for myxomas.
TREATMENT
Sarcoma
The optimal therapy for cardiac sarcoma is complete resection often 
with neoadjuvant and postoperative chemotherapy; however, at the 
time of presentation, many of these tumors have spread too exten-
sively to allow for surgical excision. Although there are scattered 
reports of palliation with radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy, the 
response of cardiac sarcomas to these therapies is generally poor. 
The one exception appears to be cardiac lymphosarcomas, which 
may respond to a combination of chemo- and radiotherapy.
RV
LV
LA
Met
FIGURE 266-4  Large metastatic lesion (Met) in the left ventricle (LV) of a 
patient with diffusely metastatic bladder cancer. The mass arose from the 
interventricular septum and prolapsed into the aortic outflow tract during systole.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1850 pericardial effusions. Angiography is rarely necessary but may help to 
delineate discrete myocardial lesions.
TREATMENT
Tumors Metastatic to the Heart
Most patients with cardiac metastases have advanced malignant 
disease; thus, therapy is generally palliative and consists of control-
ling symptoms and treatment of the primary tumor. Symptomatic 
malignant pericardial effusions should be drained by pericardio-
centesis. Prolonged drainage (3–5 days) and concomitant instillation 
of a sclerosing agent (e.g., tetracycline or bleomycin) may delay or 
prevent reaccumulation of the effusion, and creation of a pericardial 
window allows drainage of the effusion to the adjacent pleural or 
peritoneal space. Given the overall poor prognosis of these patients, 
discussions regarding goals of care and involvement of palliative 
care services are often appropriate.
■
■FURTHER READING
Buckley O et al: Cardiac masses, part 1: Imaging strategies and techni-
cal considerations. AJR Am J Roentgenol 197:W837, 2011.
Buckley O et al: Cardiac masses, part 2: Key imaging features for diag-
nosis and surgical planning. AJR 1 Am J Roentgenol 97:W842, 2011.
Bussani R et al: Cardiac metastases. J Clin Path 60:27, 2007.
Shapira O et al: Tumors of the heart, in Sabiston and Spenser Surgery of 
the Chest, 9th ed, FW Sellke et al (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2016, 
pp 1849–1857.
Tamin SS et al: Prognostic and bioepidemiologic implications of papil-
lary fibroelastomas. J Am Coll Cardiol 65:2420, 2015.
Section 5  Coronary and Peripheral  
Vascular Disease
267 Ischemic Heart Disease
Elliott M. Antman, Joseph Loscalzo 
Ischemic heart disease (IHD) is a condition in which there is an inade-
quate supply of blood and oxygen to a portion of the myocardium; 
it typically occurs when there is an imbalance between myocardial 
oxygen supply and demand. The most common cause of myocardial 
ischemia is atherosclerotic disease of an epicardial coronary artery 
(or arteries) sufficient to cause a regional reduction in myocardial 
blood flow and inadequate perfusion of the myocardium supplied by 
the involved coronary artery. Chapter 291e (from the 19th edition of 
Harrison’s) deals with the development and treatment of atherosclero-
sis. This chapter focuses on the chronic manifestations and treatment of 
IHD. The subsequent chapters address the acute phases of IHD.
■
■EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GLOBAL TRENDS
IHD causes more deaths and disability and incurs greater 
economic costs than any other illness in the developed world. 
IHD is the most common, serious, chronic, life-threatening 
illness in the United States, where 15.5 million persons have IHD, and 
3.4 million people aged ≥40 years have angina pectoris. Although there 
is regional variation, about 4% of the population has sustained a myo-
cardial infarction. Genetic factors, a high-fat and energy-rich diet, 
smoking, and a sedentary lifestyle are associated with the emergence of 
IHD. In the United States and Western Europe, IHD is growing among 
low-income groups, but primary prevention has delayed the disease to 
later in life across socioeconomic groups. Despite these sobering 
statistics, it is worth noting that epidemiologic data show a decline in 
the rate of deaths due to IHD, about half of which is attributable to 
treatments and half to prevention by risk factor modification.
Obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes mellitus are increas-
ing and are powerful risk factors for IHD. These trends are occurring in 
the general context of population growth and as a result of the increase 
in the average age of the world’s population. With urbanization in 
countries with emerging economies and a growing middle class, ele-
ments of the energy-rich Western diet are being adopted. As a result, 
the prevalence of risk factors for IHD and the prevalence of IHD itself 
are both increasing rapidly, so that in analyses of the global burden of 
disease, there is a shift from communicable to noncommunicable dis-
eases. Population subgroups that appear to be particularly affected are 
men in South Asian countries, especially India and the Middle East. In 
light of the projection of large increases in IHD throughout the world, 
IHD is likely to become the most common cause of death worldwide 
by 2020.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Central to an understanding of the pathophysiology of myocardial 
ischemia is the concept of myocardial supply and demand. In normal 
conditions, for any given level of a demand for oxygen, the myocar-
dium will control the supply of oxygen-rich blood to prevent under-
perfusion of myocytes and the subsequent development of ischemia 
and infarction. The major determinants of myocardial oxygen demand 
(MVO2) are heart rate, myocardial contractility, and myocardial wall 
tension (stress). An adequate supply of oxygen to the myocardium 
requires a satisfactory level of oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood 
(determined by the inspired level of oxygen, pulmonary function, and 
hemoglobin concentration and function) and an adequate level of coro-
nary blood flow. Blood flows through the coronary arteries in a phasic 
fashion, with the majority occurring during diastole. About 75% of the 
total coronary resistance to flow occurs across three sets of arteries: 
(1) large epicardial arteries (Resistance 1 = R1), (2) prearteriolar vessels 
(R2), and (3) arteriolar and intramyocardial capillary vessels (R3). In 
the absence of significant flow-limiting atherosclerotic obstructions, R1 
is trivial; the major determinant of coronary resistance is found in R2 
and R3 (Fig. 267-1). The normal coronary circulation is dominated and 
controlled by the heart’s requirements for oxygen. This need is met 
by the ability of the coronary vascular bed to vary its resistance (and, 
therefore, blood flow) considerably while the myocardium extracts a 
high and relatively fixed percentage of oxygen. Normally, intramyo-
cardial resistance vessels demonstrate a great capacity for dilation (R2 
and R3 decrease). For example, the changing oxygen needs of the heart 
with exercise and emotional stress affect coronary vascular resistance 
and in this manner regulate the supply of oxygen and substrate to the 
myocardium (metabolic regulation). The coronary resistance vessels also 
adapt to physiologic alterations in blood pressure to maintain coronary 
blood flow at levels appropriate to myocardial needs (autoregulation).
By reducing the lumen of the coronary arteries, atherosclerosis 
limits appropriate increases in perfusion when the demand for flow is 
augmented, as occurs during exertion or excitement. When the luminal 
reduction is severe, myocardial perfusion in the basal state is reduced. 
Coronary blood flow also can be limited by spasm (see Prinzmetal’s 
angina in Chap. 268), arterial thrombi, and, rarely, coronary emboli as 
well as by ostial narrowing due to aortitis. Congenital abnormalities 
such as the origin of the left anterior descending coronary artery from 
the pulmonary artery may cause myocardial ischemia and infarction in 
infancy, but this cause is very rare in adults.
Myocardial ischemia also can occur if myocardial oxygen demands 
are markedly increased and particularly when coronary blood flow 
may be limited, as occurs in severe left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) 
due to aortic stenosis. The latter can present with angina that is indis-
tinguishable from that caused by coronary atherosclerosis largely 
owing to subendocardial ischemia (Chap. 256). A reduction in the 
oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood, as in extremely severe anemia 
or in the presence of carboxyhemoglobin, rarely causes myocardial 
ischemia by itself but may lower the threshold for ischemia in patients 
with moderate coronary obstruction.
CHAPTER 267 Ischemic Heart Disease
1851
Segment
and size
Macrocirculation
Microcirculation
Main stimulus
for vasomotion
Metabolites
Pressure
Flow
Exchange
Regulation
Transport
Main
function
Percentage of
total resistance
to flow
Epicardial arteries >400 µm
Small arteries <400 µm
Arterioles <100 µm
Capillaries <10 µm
FIGURE 267-1  Macrocirculation and microcirculation across segments and sizes of the arteries. The location and size of the arteries supplying blood to the heart 
is shown at the top. Vasomotion of the arterial segments occurs in response to the stimuli shown. The main function of each of the arterial segments is shown next, 
followed by a depiction of the relative resistance to antegrade flow. (Modified from B De Bruyne et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 67:1170, 2016.)
Not infrequently, two or more causes of ischemia coexist in a patient, 
such as an increase in oxygen demand due to LVH secondary to 
hypertension and a reduction in oxygen supply secondary to coronary 
atherosclerosis and anemia. Abnormal constriction or failure of normal 
dilation of the coronary resistance vessels also can cause ischemia. 
When it causes angina, this condition is referred to as microvascular 
angina.
CORONARY ATHEROSCLEROSIS
Epicardial coronary arteries are the major site of atherosclerotic dis-
ease. The major risk factors for atherosclerosis (high levels of plasma 
low-density lipoprotein [LDL], low plasma high-density lipoprotein 
[HDL], cigarette smoking, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus vary in 
their relative impact on disturbing the normal functions of the vascular 
endothelium. These functions include local control of vascular tone, 
maintenance of an antithrombotic surface, and control of inflamma-
tory cell adhesion and diapedesis. The loss of these defenses leads to 
inappropriate constriction, luminal thrombus formation, and abnormal 
interactions between blood cells, especially monocytes and platelets, 
and the activated vascular endothelium. Functional changes in the 
vascular milieu ultimately result in the subintimal collections of fat, 
smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts, and intercellular matrix that define the 
atherosclerotic plaque. Rather than viewing atherosclerosis strictly as a 
vascular problem, it is useful to consider it in the context of alterations 
in the nature of the circulating blood (hyperglycemia; increased con-
centrations of LDL cholesterol, tissue factor, fibrinogen, von Willebrand 
factor, coagulation factor VII, and platelet microparticles). The combi-
nation of a “vulnerable vessel” in a patient with “vulnerable blood” 
promotes a state of hypercoagulability and hypofibrinolysis. This is 
especially true in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Atherosclerosis develops at irregular rates in different segments of 
the epicardial coronary tree and leads eventually to segmental reduc-
tions in cross-sectional area, i.e., plaque formation. There is also a 
predilection for atherosclerotic plaques to develop at sites of increased 
turbulence in coronary flow, such as at branch points in the epicardial 
arteries. When a stenosis reduces the diameter of an epicardial artery 
by 50%, there is a limitation of the ability to increase flow to meet 
increased myocardial demand. When the diameter is reduced by ~80%, 
blood flow at rest may be reduced, and further minor decreases in the 
stenotic orifice area can reduce coronary flow dramatically to cause 
myocardial ischemia at rest or with minimal stress.
Segmental atherosclerotic narrowing of epicardial coronary arter-
ies is caused most commonly by the formation of a plaque, which is 
subject to rupture or erosion of the cap separating the plaque from 
the bloodstream. Upon exposure of the plaque contents to blood, two 
important and interrelated processes are set in motion: (1) platelets 
are activated and aggregate, and (2) the coagulation cascade is acti-
vated, leading to deposition of fibrin strands. A thrombus composed 
of platelet aggregates and fibrin strands traps red blood cells and can 
reduce coronary blood flow, leading to the clinical manifestations of 
myocardial ischemia.
The location of the obstruction influences the quantity of myocar-
dium rendered ischemic and determines the severity of the clinical 
manifestations. Thus, critical obstructions in vessels, such as the 
left main coronary artery and the proximal left anterior descending 
coronary artery, are particularly hazardous. Chronic severe coronary 
narrowing and myocardial ischemia frequently are accompanied by 
the development of collateral vessels, especially when the narrow-
ing develops gradually. When well developed, such vessels can by 
themselves provide sufficient blood flow to sustain the viability of the 
myocardium at rest but not during conditions of increased demand.
With progressive worsening of a stenosis in a proximal epicardial 
artery, the distal resistance vessels (when they function normally) dilate 
to reduce vascular resistance and maintain coronary blood flow. A pres-
sure gradient develops across the proximal stenosis, and poststenotic 
pressure falls. When the resistance vessels are maximally dilated, myo-
cardial blood flow becomes dependent on the pressure in the coronary 
artery distal to the obstruction. In these circumstances, ischemia, manifest 
clinically by angina or electrocardiographically by ST-segment deviation, 
can be precipitated by increases in myocardial oxygen demand caused 
by physical activity, emotional stress, and/or tachycardia. Changes in 
the caliber of the stenosed coronary artery resulting from physiologic 
vasomotion, loss of endothelial control of dilation (as occurs in athero-
sclerosis), pathologic spasm (Prinzmetal’s angina), or small platelet-rich 
plugs also can upset the critical balance between oxygen supply and 
demand and thereby precipitate myocardial ischemia.
■
■EFFECTS OF ISCHEMIA
During episodes of inadequate perfusion caused by coronary ath-
erosclerosis, myocardial tissue oxygen tension falls and may cause 
transient disturbances of the mechanical, biochemical, and electrical 
functions of the myocardium (Fig. 267-2). Coronary atherosclerosis is a 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1852
focal process that usually causes nonuniform ischemia. During ische-
mia, regional disturbances of ventricular contractility cause segmental 
hypokinesia, akinesia, or, in severe cases, bulging (dyskinesia), which 
can reduce myocardial pump function.
The abrupt development of severe ischemia, as occurs with total or 
subtotal coronary occlusion, is associated with almost instantaneous 
failure of normal muscle relaxation and then contraction. The relatively 
poor perfusion of the subendocardium causes more intense ischemia 
of this portion of the wall (compared with the subepicardial region). 
Ischemia of large portions of the ventricle causes transient left ven-
tricular (LV) failure, and if the papillary muscle apparatus is involved, 
mitral regurgitation can occur. When ischemia is transient, it may be 
associated with angina pectoris; when it is prolonged, it can lead to 
myocardial necrosis and scarring with or without the clinical picture of 
acute myocardial infarction (Chap. 269).
A wide range of abnormalities in cell metabolism, function, and 
structure underlie these mechanical disturbances during ischemia. The 
normal myocardium metabolizes fatty acids and glucose to carbon 
dioxide and water. With severe oxygen deprivation, fatty acids cannot 
be oxidized, and glucose is converted to lactate; intracellular pH is 
reduced, as are the myocardial stores of high-energy phosphates, i.e., 
ATP and creatine phosphate. Impaired cell membrane function leads 
to the leakage of potassium and the uptake of sodium by myocytes as 
well as an increase in cytosolic calcium. The severity and duration of 
the imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand deter-
mine whether the damage is reversible (≤20 min for total occlusion in 
the absence of collaterals) or permanent, with subsequent myocardial 
necrosis (>20 min).
Ischemia also causes characteristic changes in the electrocardiogram 
(ECG) such as repolarization abnormalities, as evidenced by inversion 
of T waves and, when more severe, displacement of ST segments 
(Chap. 235). Transient T-wave inversion probably reflects nontransmu-
ral, intramyocardial ischemia; transient ST-segment depression often 
reflects patchy subendocardial ischemia; and ST-segment elevation is 
thought to be caused by more severe transmural ischemia. Another 
important consequence of myocardial ischemia is electrical instability, 
which may lead to isolated ventricular premature beats or even ventric-
ular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation (Chaps. 249 and 250). Most 
patients who die suddenly from IHD do so as a result of ischemia- 
induced ventricular tachyarrhythmias (Chap. 299).
■
■ASYMPTOMATIC VERSUS SYMPTOMATIC IHD
Although the prevalence is decreasing, postmortem studies of accident 
victims and military casualties in Western countries show that coronary 
atherosclerosis can begin before age 20 and is present even among 
adults who were asymptomatic during life. Exercise stress tests in 
asymptomatic persons may show evidence of silent myocardial ische-
mia, i.e., exercise-induced ECG changes not accompanied by angina 
pectoris; coronary angiographic studies of such persons may reveal 
coronary artery plaques and previously unrecognized obstructions 
(Chap. 237). Coronary artery calcifications (CAC) may be seen on CT 
images of the heart, can be quantified in a CAC score, and may be used 
as adjunctive information to support a diagnosis of IHD. However, 
they should not be used as the primary screening modality or as the 
isolated basis on which to formulate therapeutic decisions. (See further 
discussion below.) Postmortem examination of patients with such 
obstructions without a history of clinical manifestations of myocardial 
ischemia often shows macroscopic scars secondary to myocardial 
infarction in regions supplied by diseased coronary arteries, with or 
without collateral circulation. According to population studies, ~25% 
of patients who survive acute myocardial infarction may not come to 
medical attention, and these patients have the same adverse prognosis 
as do those who present with the classic clinical picture of acute myo-
cardial infarction (Chap. 269). Sudden death may be unheralded and is 
a common presenting manifestation of IHD (Chap. 299).
Patients with IHD also can present with cardiomegaly and heart 
failure secondary to ischemic damage of the LV myocardium that may 
have caused no symptoms before the development of heart failure; this 
condition is referred to as ischemic cardiomyopathy. In contrast to the 
asymptomatic phase of IHD, the symptomatic phase is characterized 
by chest discomfort due to either angina pectoris or acute myocardial 
infarction (Chap. 269). Having entered the symptomatic phase, the 
patient may exhibit a stable or progressive course, revert to the asymp-
tomatic stage, or die suddenly.
STABLE ANGINA PECTORIS
This episodic clinical syndrome is due to transient myocardial ische-
mia. Various diseases that cause myocardial ischemia and the numer-
ous forms of discomfort with which it may be confused are discussed 
in Chap. 11. Males constitute ~70% of all patients with angina pectoris 
and an even greater proportion of those aged <50 years. It is, however, 
Systolic dysfunction
Regional wall motion
Decreased segmental perfusion
Diastolic dysfunction
Micro-infarction/myocardial fibrosis
Altered metabolism/abnormal ST segment
Decreased subendocardial perfusion
Endothelial and microvascular dysfunction
Exposure time of mismatch in myocardial oxygen supply/demand
Near term
Repetitive/progressive manifestations of ischemia
Prolonged
FIGURE 267-2  Cascade of mechanisms and manifestations of ischemia. (Modified from LJ Shaw et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 54:1561, 2009. Original figure illustration by 
Rob Flewell.)
CHAPTER 267 Ischemic Heart Disease
1853
important to note that angina pectoris in women is often atypical in 
presentation (see below).
■
■HISTORY
The typical patient with angina is a man >50 years or a woman 
>60 years of age who complains of episodes of chest discomfort, usually 
described as heaviness, pressure, squeezing, smothering, or choking 
and only rarely as frank pain. When the patient is asked to localize the 
sensation, he or she typically places a hand over the sternum, some-
times with a clenched fist, to indicate a squeezing, central, substernal 
discomfort (Levine’s sign). Angina is usually crescendo-decrescendo in 
nature, typically lasts 2–5 min, and can radiate to either shoulder and 
to both arms (especially the ulnar surfaces of the forearm and hand). 
It also can arise in or radiate to the back, interscapular region, root of 
the neck, jaw, teeth, and epigastrium. Angina is rarely localized below 
the umbilicus or above the mandible. A useful finding in assessing 
a patient with chest discomfort is the fact that myocardial ischemic 
discomfort does not radiate to the trapezius muscles; that radiation 
pattern is more typical of pericarditis.
Although episodes of angina typically are caused by exertion (e.g., 
exercise, hurrying, or sexual activity) or emotion (e.g., stress, anger, 
fright, or frustration) and are relieved by rest, they also may occur at 
rest (Chap. 268) and while the patient is recumbent (angina decubitus). 
The patient may be awakened at night by typical chest discomfort 
and dyspnea. Nocturnal angina may be due to episodic tachycardia, 
diminished oxygenation as the respiratory pattern changes during 
sleep, or expansion of the intrathoracic blood volume that occurs with 
recumbency; the latter causes an increase in cardiac size (end-diastolic 
volume), wall tension, and myocardial oxygen demand that can lead to 
ischemia and transient LV failure.
The threshold for the development of angina pectoris may vary by 
time of day and emotional state. Many patients report a fixed threshold 
for angina, which occurs predictably at a certain level of activity, such 
as climbing two flights of stairs at a normal pace. In these patients, cor-
onary stenosis and myocardial oxygen supply are fixed, and ischemia 
is precipitated by an increase in myocardial oxygen demand; they are 
said to have stable exertional angina. In other patients, the threshold 
for angina may vary considerably within any particular day and from 
day to day. In such patients, variations in myocardial oxygen supply, 
most likely due to changes in coronary vasomotor tone, may play an 
important role in defining the pattern of angina. A patient may report 
symptoms upon minor exertion in the morning (a short walk or shav-
ing) yet by midday be capable of much greater effort without symp-
toms. Angina may also be precipitated by unfamiliar tasks, a heavy 
meal, exposure to cold, or a combination of these factors.
Exertional angina typically is relieved in 1–5 min by slowing or 
ceasing activities and even more rapidly by rest and sublingual nitro-
glycerin (see below). Indeed, the diagnosis of angina should be sus-
pect if it does not respond to the combination of these measures. The 
severity of angina can be conveniently summarized by the Canadian 
Cardiac Society functional classification (Table 267-1). Its impact on the 
patient’s functional capacity can be described by using the New York 
Heart Association functional classification (Table 267-1).
Sharp, fleeting chest pain or a prolonged, dull ache localized to the 
left submammary area is rarely due to myocardial ischemia. However, 
especially in women and diabetic patients, angina pectoris may be atyp-
ical in location and not strictly related to provoking factors. In addition, 
this symptom may exacerbate and remit over days, weeks, or months. Its 
occurrence can be seasonal, occurring more frequently in the winter in 
temperate climates. Anginal “equivalents” are symptoms of myocardial 
ischemia other than angina. They include dyspnea, nausea, fatigue, and 
faintness and are more common in the elderly and in diabetic patients.
Systematic questioning of a patient with suspected IHD is impor-
tant to uncover the features of an unstable syndrome associated with 
increased risk, such as angina occurring with less exertion than in the 
past, occurring at rest, or awakening the patient from sleep. Since cor-
onary atherosclerosis often is accompanied by similar lesions in other 
arteries, a patient with angina should be questioned and examined 
for peripheral arterial disease (intermittent claudication [Chap. 275]), 
stroke, or transient ischemic attacks (Chap. 419). It is also important to 
uncover a family history of premature IHD (<55 years in first-degree 
male relatives and <65 in female relatives) and the presence of diabetes 
mellitus, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, cigarette smoking, and other 
risk factors for coronary atherosclerosis.
The history of typical angina pectoris establishes the diagnosis of 
IHD until proven otherwise. The coexistence of advanced age, male 
sex, the postmenopausal state, and risk factors for atherosclerosis 
increase the likelihood of hemodynamically significant coronary dis-
ease. A particularly challenging problem is the evaluation and man-
agement of patients with persistent ischemic-type chest discomfort but 
no flow-limiting obstructions in their epicardial coronary arteries. This 
situation arises more often in women than in men. Potential etiologies 
include microvascular coronary disease (detectable on coronary reac-
tivity testing in response to vasoactive agents such as intracoronary 
adenosine, acetylcholine, and nitroglycerin) and abnormal cardiac 
nociception. Treatment of microvascular coronary disease should 
focus on efforts to improve endothelial function, including nitrates, 
beta blockers, calcium antagonists, statins, and angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. Abnormal cardiac nociception is more diffi-
cult to manage and may be ameliorated in some cases by imipramine.
■
■PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The physical examination is often normal in patients with stable angina 
when they are asymptomatic. However, because of the increased 
likelihood of IHD in patients with diabetes and/or peripheral arterial 
disease, clinicians should search for evidence of atherosclerotic disease 
at other sites, such as an abdominal aortic aneurysm, carotid arterial 
bruits, and diminished arterial pulses in the lower extremities. The 
physical examination also should include a search for evidence of 
risk factors for atherosclerosis such as xanthelasmas and xanthomas. 
TABLE 267-1  Cardiovascular Disease Classification Chart
CLASS
NEW YORK HEART 
ASSOCIATION FUNCTIONAL 
CLASSIFICATION
CANADIAN CARDIOVASCULAR 
SOCIETY FUNCTIONAL 
CLASSIFICATION
I
Patients have cardiac disease 
but without the resulting 
limitations of physical activity. 
Ordinary physical activity does 
not cause undue fatigue, 
palpitation, dyspnea, or 
anginal pain.
Ordinary physical activity, such 
as walking and climbing stairs, 
does not cause angina. Angina 
present with strenuous or rapid 
or prolonged exertion at work or 
recreation.
II
Patients have cardiac disease 
resulting in slight limitation 
of physical activity. They are 
comfortable at rest. Ordinary 
physical activity results in 
fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea, 
or anginal pain.
Slight limitation of ordinary 
activity. Walking or climbing 
stairs rapidly, walking uphill, 
walking or stair climbing after 
meals, in cold, or when under 
emotional stress or only during 
the few hours after awakening. 
Walking more than two blocks 
on the level and climbing more 
than one flight of stairs at a 
normal pace and in normal 
conditions.
III
Patients have cardiac disease 
resulting in marked limitation 
of physical activity. They are 
comfortable at rest. Less 
than ordinary physical activity 
causes fatigue, palpitation, 
dyspnea, or anginal pain.
Marked limitation of ordinary 
physical activity. Walking one 
to two blocks on the level and 
climbing more than one flight of 
stairs in normal conditions.
IV
Patients have cardiac 
disease resulting in inability 
to carry on any physical 
activity without discomfort. 
Symptoms of cardiac 
insufficiency or of the anginal 
syndrome may be present 
even at rest. If any physical 
activity is undertaken, 
discomfort is increased.
Inability to carry on any physical 
activity without discomfort—
anginal syndrome may be 
present at rest.
Source: Modified from L Goldman et al: Circulation 64:1227, 1981.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1854 Evidence for peripheral arterial disease should be sought by evaluat-
ing the pulse contour at multiple locations and comparing the blood 
pressure between the arms and between the arms and the legs (ankle- 
brachial index). Examination of the fundi may reveal an increased light 
reflex and arteriovenous nicking as evidence of hypertension. There 
also may be signs of anemia, thyroid disease, and nicotine stains on the 
fingertips from cigarette smoking.
Palpation may reveal cardiac enlargement and abnormal contraction 
of the cardiac impulse (LV dyskinesia). Auscultation can uncover arte-
rial bruits, a third and/or fourth heart sound, and, if acute ischemia or 
previous infarction has impaired papillary muscle function, an apical 
systolic murmur due to mitral regurgitation. These auscultatory signs 
are best appreciated with the patient in the left lateral decubitus position. 
Aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation (Chap. 256), pulmonary hyperten-
sion (Chap. 277), and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Chap. 254) must 
be excluded, since these disorders may cause angina in the absence of 
coronary atherosclerosis. Examination during an anginal attack is use-
ful, since ischemia can cause transient LV failure with the appearance 
of a third and/or fourth heart sound, a dyskinetic cardiac apex, mitral 
regurgitation, and even pulmonary edema. Tenderness of the chest wall, 
localization of the discomfort with a single fingertip on the chest, or 
reproduction of the pain with palpation of the chest makes it unlikely 
that the pain is caused by myocardial ischemia. A protuberant abdomen 
may indicate that the patient has the metabolic syndrome and is at 
increased risk for atherosclerosis.
■
■LABORATORY EXAMINATION
Although the diagnosis of IHD can be made with a high degree of 
confidence from the history and physical examination, a number of 
simple laboratory tests can be helpful. The urine should be examined 
for evidence of diabetes mellitus and renal disease (including microal-
buminuria) since these conditions accelerate atherosclerosis. Similarly, 
examination of the blood should include measurements of lipids 
(cholesterol—total, LDL, HDL—and triglycerides), glucose (hemoglo-
bin A1C), creatinine, hematocrit, and, if indicated based on the physical 
examination, thyroid function. A chest x-ray is important as it may 
show the consequences of IHD, i.e., cardiac enlargement, ventricular 
aneurysm, or signs of heart failure. These signs can support the diagno-
sis of IHD and are important in assessing the degree of cardiac damage. 
Evidence exists that an elevated level of high-sensitivity C-reactive 
protein (CRP) (specifically, between 0 and 3 mg/dL) is an independent 
risk factor for IHD and may be useful in therapeutic decision-making 
about the initiation of hypolipidemic treatment. The major benefit of 
high-sensitivity CRP is in reclassifying the risk of IHD in patients in 
the “intermediate” risk category on the basis of traditional risk factors.
■
■ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
A 12-lead ECG recorded at rest may be normal in patients with typi-
cal angina pectoris, but there may also be signs of an old myocardial 
infarction (Chap. 235). Although repolarization abnormalities, i.e., 
ST-segment and T-wave changes, as well as LVH and disturbances of 
cardiac rhythm or intraventricular conduction are suggestive of IHD, 
they are nonspecific, since they also can occur in pericardial, myocar-
dial, and valvular heart disease or, in the case of the former, transiently 
with anxiety, changes in posture, drugs, or esophageal disease. The 
presence of LVH is a significant indication of increased risk of adverse 
outcomes from IHD. Of note, even though LVH and cardiac rhythm 
disturbances are nonspecific indicators of the development of IHD, 
they may be contributing factors to episodes of angina in patients 
in whom IHD has developed as a consequence of conventional risk 
factors. Dynamic ST-segment and T-wave changes that accompany 
episodes of angina pectoris and disappear thereafter are more specific.
■
■STRESS TESTING
Electrocardiographic  The most widely used test for both the 
diagnosis of IHD and the estimation of risk and prognosis involves 
recording of the 12-lead ECG before, during, and after exercise, usually 
on a treadmill (Fig. 267-3). The test consists of a standardized incremen-
tal increase in external workload (Table 267-2) while symptoms, the 
ECG, and arm blood pressure are monitored. Exercise duration is usu-
ally symptom-limited, and the test is discontinued upon evidence of 
chest discomfort, severe shortness of breath, dizziness, severe fatigue, 
ST-segment depression >0.2 mV (2 mm), a fall in systolic blood pres-
sure >10 mmHg, or the development of a ventricular tachyarrhythmia. 
This test is used to discover any limitation in exercise performance, 
detect typical ECG signs of myocardial ischemia, and establish their 
relationship to chest discomfort. The ischemic ST-segment response 
generally is defined as flat or downsloping depression of the ST seg-
ment >0.1 mV below baseline (i.e., the PR segment) and lasting longer 
than 0.08 s (Fig. 267-2). Upsloping or junctional ST-segment changes 
are not considered characteristic of ischemia and do not constitute a 
positive test. Although T-wave abnormalities, conduction disturbances, 
and ventricular arrhythmias that develop during exercise should be 
noted, they are also not diagnostic. Negative exercise tests in which the 
target heart rate (85% of maximal predicted heart rate for age and sex) 
is not achieved are considered nondiagnostic.
In interpreting ECG stress tests, the probability that coronary artery 
disease (CAD) exists in the patient or population under study (i.e., 
pretest probability) should be considered. Overall, false-positive or 
false-negative results occur in one-third of cases. However, a positive 
result on exercise indicates that the likelihood of CAD is 98% in males 
who are >50 years with a history of typical angina pectoris and who 
develop chest discomfort during the test. The likelihood decreases if the 
patient has atypical or no chest pain by history and/or during the test.
The incidence of false-positive tests is significantly increased in 
patients with low probabilities of IHD, such as asymptomatic men age 
<40 or premenopausal women with no risk factors for premature athero-
sclerosis. It is also increased in patients taking cardioactive drugs, such 
as digitalis and antiarrhythmic agents, and in those with intraventricular 
conduction disturbances, resting ST-segment and T-wave abnormal-
ities, ventricular hypertrophy, or abnormal serum potassium levels. 
Obstructive disease limited to the circumflex coronary artery may result 
in a false-negative stress test since the lateral portion of the heart that 
this vessel supplies is not well represented on the surface 12-lead ECG. 
Since the overall sensitivity of exercise stress electrocardiography is only 
~75%, a negative result does not exclude CAD, although it makes the 
likelihood of three-vessel or left main CAD extremely unlikely.
A medical professional should be present throughout the exercise test. 
It is important to measure total duration of exercise, the times to the onset 
of ischemic ST-segment change and chest discomfort, the external work 
performed (generally expressed as the stage of exercise), and the internal 
cardiac work performed, i.e., by the heart rate–blood pressure product. 
The depth of the ST-segment depression and the time needed for recov-
ery of these ECG changes are also important. Because the risks of exercise 
testing are small but real—estimated at one fatality and two nonfatal 
complications per 10,000 tests—equipment for resuscitation should be 
available. Modified (heart rate–limited rather than symptom-limited) 
exercise tests can be performed safely in patients as early as 6 days after 
uncomplicated myocardial infarction (Table 267-2). Contraindications to 
exercise stress testing include rest angina within 48 h, unstable rhythm, 
severe aortic stenosis, acute myocarditis, uncontrolled heart failure, 
severe pulmonary hypertension, and active infective endocarditis.
The normal response to graded exercise includes progressive 
increases in heart rate and blood pressure. Failure of the blood pressure 
to increase or an actual decrease with signs of ischemia during the test 
is an important adverse prognostic sign, since it may reflect ischemia- 
induced global LV dysfunction. The development of angina and/or 
severe (>0.2 mV) ST-segment depression at a low workload, i.e., before 
completion of stage II of the Bruce protocol, and/or ST-segment depres-
sion that persists >5 min after the termination of exercise increases the 
specificity of the test and suggests severe IHD and a high risk of future 
adverse events.
Cardiac Imaging 
(See also Chap. 236) When the resting ECG 
is abnormal (e.g., preexcitation syndrome, >1 mm of resting ST- 
segment depression, left bundle branch block, paced ventricular 
rhythm), information gained from an exercise test can be enhanced 
by stress myocardial radionuclide perfusion imaging after the intra-
venous administration of thallium-201 or 99m-technetium sestamibi 
CHAPTER 267 Ischemic Heart Disease
1855
during exercise (or with pharmacologic) stress. Contemporary data 
also suggest positron emission tomography (PET) imaging (with 
exercise or pharmacologic stress) using N-13 ammonia or rubidium-82 
nuclide as another technique for assessing perfusion. Images obtained 
immediately after cessation of exercise to detect regional ischemia are 
compared with those obtained at rest to confirm reversible ischemia 
and regions of persistently absent uptake that signify infarction.
A sizable fraction of patients who need noninvasive stress testing 
to identify myocardial ischemia and increased risk of coronary events 
cannot exercise because of peripheral vascular or musculoskeletal 
disease, exertional dyspnea, or deconditioning. In these circumstances, 
an intravenous pharmacologic challenge is used in place of exercise. 
For example, dipyridamole or adenosine can be given to create a cor-
onary “steal” by temporarily increasing flow in nondiseased segments 
of the coronary vasculature at the expense of diseased segments. Alter-
natively, a graded incremental infusion of dobutamine may be admin-
istered to increase MVO2. A variety of imaging options are available to 
accompany these pharmacologic stressors (Fig. 267-3). The develop-
ment of a transient perfusion defect with a tracer such as thallium-201 
or 99m-technetium sestamibi is used to detect myocardial ischemia.
FIGURE 267-3  Evaluation of the patient with known or suspected ischemic heart disease. On the left of the figure is an algorithm for identifying patients who 
should be referred for stress testing and the decision pathway for determining whether a standard treadmill exercise with electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring alone is 
adequate. A specialized imaging study is necessary if the patient cannot exercise adequately (pharmacologic challenge is given) or if there are confounding features on 
the resting ECG (symptom-limited treadmill exercise may be used to stress the coronary circulation). Panels B–E on the next page are examples of the data obtained 
with ECG monitoring and specialized imaging procedures. CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; EBCT, electron beam computed tomography; ECHO, echocardiography; 
IHD, ischemic heart disease; MIBI, methoxyisobutyl isonitrite; MR, magnetic resonance; PET, positron emission tomography. A. Lead V4 at rest (top panel) and after 
4.5 min of exercise (bottom panel). There is 3 mm (0.3 mV) of horizontal ST-segment depression, indicating a positive test for ischemia. (Modified from BR Chaitman, 
in E Braunwald et al [eds]: Heart Disease, 8th ed, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008.) B. A 45-year-old avid jogger who began experiencing classic substernal chest pressure 
underwent an exercise echo study. With exercise the patient’s heart rate increased from 52 to 153 beats/min. The left ventricular chamber dilated with exercise, 
and the septal and apical portions became akinetic to dyskinetic (red arrow). These findings are strongly suggestive of a significant flow-limiting stenosis in the 
proximal left anterior descending artery, which was confirmed at coronary angiography. (Modified from SD Solomon, in E. Braunwald et al [eds]: Primary Cardiology, 
2nd ed, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2003.) C. Stress and rest myocardial perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography images obtained with 99m-technetium 
sestamibi in a patient with chest pain and dyspnea on exertion. The images demonstrate a medium-size and severe stress perfusion defect involving the inferolateral 
and basal inferior walls, showing nearly complete reversibility, consistent with moderate ischemia in the right coronary artery territory (red arrows). (Images provided 
by Dr. Marcello Di Carli, Nuclear Medicine Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.) D. A patient with a prior myocardial infarction presented with recurrent 
chest discomfort. On cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) cine imaging, a large area of anterior akinesia was noted (marked by the arrows in the top left and right 
images, systolic frame only). This area of akinesia was matched by a larger extent of late gadolinium-DTPA enhancements consistent with a large transmural myocardial 
infarction (marked by arrows in the middle left and right images). Resting (bottom left) and adenosine vasodilating stress (bottom right) first-pass perfusion images 
revealed reversible perfusion abnormality that extended to the inferior septum. This patient was found to have an occluded proximal left anterior descending coronary 
artery with extensive collateral formation. This case illustrates the utility of different modalities in a CMR examination in characterizing ischemic and infarcted 
myocardium. DTPA, diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid. (Images provided by Dr. Raymond Kwong, Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
MA.) E. Stress and rest myocardial perfusion PET images obtained with rubidium-82 in a patient with chest pain on exertion. The images demonstrate a large and 
severe stress perfusion defect involving the mid and apical anterior, anterolateral, and anteroseptal walls and the left ventricular apex, showing complete reversibility, 
consistent with extensive and severe ischemia in the mid-left anterior descending coronary artery territory (red arrows). (Images provided by Dr. Marcello Di Carli, Nuclear 
Medicine Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
A
Evaluation of the patient with known or suspected IHD
Can patient exercise adequately?
Are confounding features
present on resting ECG?
Perform treadmill
exercise test
An imaging study
should be performed
Yes
No
Possible indications for stress testing of patient:
1. Dx of IHD uncertain
2. Assess functional capacity of patient
3. Assess adequacy of treatment program for IHD
4. Markedly abnormal calcium score on EBCT
2-D
Echo
Nuclear
perfusion
scan
Cardiac
MR
scan
Cardiac
PET
scan
ECHO
ECG
MIBI
CMR
PET
No
Yes
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1856
FIGURE 267-3  (Continued)
CHAPTER 267 Ischemic Heart Disease
1857
TABLE 267-2  Relation of Metabolic Equivalent Tasks (METs) to Stages in Various Testing Protocols
FUNCTIONAL 
CLASS
CLINICAL STATUS
O2 COST 
mL/kg/min
METs
TREADMILL PROTOCOLS
NORMAL
AND
I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BRUCE Modified 3 min Stages
BRUCE 3 min Stages
MPH
%GR
MPH
%GR
6.0
22
6.0
22
HEALTHY, DEPENDENT ON AGE, ACTIVITY
5.5
20
5.2
20
5.0
18
5.0
18
56.0
16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52.5
15
49.0
14
45.5
13
4.2
16
4.2
16
42.0
12
 
 
 
 
38.5
11
3.4
14
3.4
14
SEDENTARY HEALTHY
35.0
10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31.5
9
28.0
8
LIMITED
24.5
7
2.5
12
2.5
12
II
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYMPTOMATIC
21.0
6
 
 
 
 
17.5
5
1.7
10
1.7
10
III
14.0
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.5
3
1.7
5
7.0
2
1.7
0
IV
 
3.5
1
 
 
Note: The standard Bruce treadmill protocol (right hand column) begins at 1.7 MPH and 10% gradient (GR) and progresses every 3 min to a higher speed 
and elevation. The corresponding oxygen consumption and clinical status of the patient are shown in the center and left hand columns.
Abbreviations: GR, grade; MPH, miles per hour.
Source: Modified from GF Fletcher et al: Circulation 104:1694, 2001.
Echocardiography is used to assess LV function in patients with 
chronic stable angina and patients with a history of a prior myo-
cardial infarction, pathologic Q waves, or clinical evidence of heart 
failure. Two-dimensional echocardiography can assess both global 
and regional wall motion abnormalities of the left ventricle that are 
transient when due to ischemia. Stress (exercise or dobutamine) 
echocardiography may cause the emergence of regions of akinesis 
or dyskinesis that are not present at rest. Stress echocardiography, 
like stress myocardial perfusion imaging, is more sensitive than exer-
cise electrocardiography in the diagnosis of IHD. Cardiac magnetic 
resonance (CMR) stress testing is also evolving as an alternative to 
radionuclide, PET, or echocardiographic stress imaging. CMR stress 
testing performed with dobutamine infusion can be used to assess wall 
motion abnormalities accompanying ischemia, as well as myocardial 
perfusion. CMR can be used to provide more complete ventricular 
evaluation using multislice magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies.
Atherosclerotic plaques become progressively calcified over time, 
and coronary calcification in general increases with age. For this rea-
son, methods for detecting coronary calcium have been developed as 
a measure of the presence of coronary atherosclerosis. These meth-
ods involve computed tomography (CT) applications that achieve 
rapid acquisition of images (electron beam [EBCT] and multidetector 
[MDCT] detection). Coronary calcium detected by these imaging 
techniques most commonly is quantified by using the Agatston score, 
which is based on the area and density of calcification. Although 
the diagnostic accuracy of this imaging method is high (sensitivity, 
90–94%; specificity, 95–97%; negative predictive value, 93–99%), its 
prognostic utility has not been defined. Thus, its role in CT, EBCT, and 
MDCT scans for the detection and management of patients with IHD 
has not been clarified.
■
■CORONARY ARTERIOGRAPHY
(See also Chap. 237) This diagnostic method outlines the lumina of the 
coronary arteries and can be used to detect or exclude serious coronary 
obstruction. However, coronary arteriography provides no informa-
tion about the arterial wall, and severe atherosclerosis that does not 
encroach on the lumen may go undetected. Of note, atherosclerotic 
plaques characteristically are scattered throughout the coronary tree, 
tend to occur more frequently at branch points, and grow progressively 
in the intima and media of an epicardial coronary artery at first without 
encroaching on the lumen, causing an outward bulging of the artery—a 
process referred to as remodeling. Later in the course of the disease, 
further growth causes luminal narrowing.
Indications  Coronary arteriography is indicated in (1) patients 
with chronic stable angina pectoris who are severely symptomatic 
despite medical therapy and are being considered for revasculariza-
tion, i.e., a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or coronary artery 
bypass grafting (CABG); (2) patients with troublesome symptoms that 
present diagnostic difficulties in whom there is a need to confirm or 
rule out the diagnosis of IHD; (3) patients with known or possible 
angina pectoris who have survived cardiac arrest; (4) patients with 
angina or evidence of ischemia on noninvasive testing with clinical or 
laboratory evidence of ventricular dysfunction; and (5) patients judged 
to be at high risk of sustaining coronary events based on signs of severe 
ischemia on noninvasive testing, regardless of the presence or severity 
of symptoms (see below).
Examples of other indications for coronary arteriography include 
the following:
1.	 Patients with chest discomfort suggestive of angina pectoris but a 
negative or nondiagnostic stress test who require a definitive diag-
nosis for guiding medical management, alleviating psychological 
stress, career or family planning, or insurance purposes.
2.	 Patients who have been admitted repeatedly to the hospital for a 
suspected acute coronary syndrome (Chaps. 268 and 269), but in 
whom this diagnosis has not been established and in whom the 
presence or absence of CAD should be determined.
3.	 Patients with careers that involve the safety of others (e.g., pilots, 
firefighters, police) who have questionable symptoms or suspicious 
or positive noninvasive tests and in whom there are reasonable 
doubts about the state of the coronary arteries.
4.	 Patients with aortic stenosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and 
angina in whom the chest pain could be due to IHD.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1858 5.	 Male patients >45 years and females >55 years who are to undergo a 
cardiac operation such as valve replacement or repair and who may 
or may not have clinical evidence of myocardial ischemia.
6.	 Patients after myocardial infarction, especially those who are at high 
risk after myocardial infarction because of the recurrence of angina 
or the presence of heart failure, frequent ventricular premature con-
tractions, or signs of ischemia on the stress test.
7.	 Patients with angina pectoris, regardless of severity, in whom nonin-
vasive testing indicates a high risk of coronary events (poor exercise 
performance or severe ischemia).
8.	 Patients in whom coronary spasm or another nonatherosclerotic 
cause of myocardial ischemia (e.g., coronary artery anomaly, Kawa-
saki disease) is suspected.
Noninvasive alternatives to diagnostic coronary arteriography 
include CT angiography and CMR angiography (Chap. 236). Although 
these new imaging techniques can provide information about obstruc-
tive lesions in the epicardial coronary arteries, their exact role in clinical 
practice has not been rigorously defined. Important aspects of their use 
that should be noted include the substantially higher radiation expo-
sure with CT angiography compared to conventional diagnostic arte-
riography and the limitations on CMR imposed by cardiac movement 
during the cardiac cycle, especially at high heart rates.
■
■PROGNOSIS
The principal prognostic indicators in patients known to have IHD are 
age, the functional state of the left ventricle, the location(s) and severity 
of coronary artery narrowing, and the severity or activity of myocardial 
ischemia. Angina pectoris of recent onset, unstable angina (Chap. 268), 
early postmyocardial infarction angina, angina that is unresponsive 
or poorly responsive to medical therapy, and angina accompanied 
by symptoms of congestive heart failure all indicate an increased risk 
for adverse coronary events. The same is true for the physical signs 
of heart failure, episodes of pulmonary edema, transient third heart 
sounds, and mitral regurgitation and for echocardiographic or radio-
isotopic (or roentgenographic) evidence of cardiac enlargement and 
reduced (<0.40) ejection fraction.
Most important, any of the following signs during noninvasive test-
ing indicates a high risk for coronary events: inability to exercise for 
6 min, i.e., stage II (Bruce protocol) of the exercise test; a strongly positive 
exercise test showing onset of myocardial ischemia at low workloads 
(≥0.1 mV ST-segment depression before completion of stage II, ≥0.2 mV 
ST-segment depression at any stage, ST-segment depression for >5 min 
after the cessation of exercise, a decline in systolic pressure >10 mmHg 
during exercise, or the development of ventricular tachyarrhythmias 
during exercise); the development of large or multiple perfusion 
defects or increased lung uptake during stress radioisotope perfusion 
imaging; and a decrease in LV ejection fraction during exercise on 
radionuclide ventriculography or during stress echocardiography. 
Conversely, patients who can complete stage III of the Bruce exercise 
protocol and have a normal stress perfusion scan or negative stress 
echocardiographic evaluation are at very low risk for future coronary 
events. The finding of frequent episodes of ST-segment deviation on 
ambulatory ECG monitoring (even in the absence of symptoms) is also 
an adverse prognostic finding.
On cardiac catheterization, elevations of LV end-diastolic pressure 
and ventricular volume and reduced ejection fraction are the most 
important signs of LV dysfunction and are associated with a poor 
prognosis. Patients with chest discomfort but normal LV function 
and normal coronary arteries have an excellent prognosis. Obstruc-
tive lesions of the left main (>50% luminal diameter) or left anterior 
descending coronary artery proximal to the origin of the first septal 
artery are associated with a greater risk than are lesions of the right 
or left circumflex coronary artery because of the greater quantity of 
myocardium at risk. Atherosclerotic plaques in epicardial arteries 
with fissuring or filling defects indicate increased risk. These lesions 
go through phases of inflammatory cellular activity, degeneration, 
endothelial dysfunction, abnormal vasomotion, platelet aggregation, 
and fissuring or hemorrhage. These factors can temporarily worsen the 
stenosis and cause thrombosis and/or abnormal reactivity of the vessel 
wall, thus exacerbating the manifestations of ischemia. The recent 
onset of symptoms, the development of severe ischemia during stress 
testing (see above), and unstable angina pectoris (Chap. 268) all reflect 
episodes of rapid progression in coronary lesions.
With any degree of obstructive CAD, mortality is greatly increased 
when LV function is impaired; conversely, at any level of LV function, 
the prognosis is influenced importantly by the quantity of myocar-
dium perfused by critically obstructed vessels. Therefore, it is essential 
to collect all the evidence substantiating past myocardial damage (evi-
dence of myocardial infarction on ECG, echocardiography, radioiso-
tope imaging, or left ventriculography), residual LV function (ejection 
fraction and wall motion), and risk of future damage from coronary 
events (extent of coronary disease and severity of ischemia defined 
by noninvasive stress testing). The larger the quantity of established 
myocardial necrosis is, the less the heart is able to withstand addi-
tional damage and the poorer the prognosis is. Risk estimation must 
include age, presenting symptoms, all risk factors, signs of arterial 
disease, existing cardiac damage, and signs of impending damage 
(i.e., ischemia).
The greater the number and severity of risk factors for coronary 
atherosclerosis (advanced age [>75 years], hypertension, dyslipidemia, 
diabetes, morbid obesity, accompanying peripheral and/or cerebrovas-
cular disease, previous myocardial infarction), the worse the prognosis 
of an angina patient. Evidence exists that elevated levels of CRP in 
the plasma, extensive coronary calcification on electron beam CT (see 
above), and increased carotid intimal thickening on ultrasound exami-
nation also indicate an increased risk of coronary events.
TREATMENT
Stable Angina Pectoris
Once the diagnosis of IHD has been made, each patient must be 
evaluated individually with respect to his or her level of under-
standing, expectations and goals, control of symptoms, and pre-
vention of adverse clinical outcomes such as myocardial infarction 
and premature death. The degree of disability and the physical and 
emotional stress that precipitates angina must be recorded carefully 
to set treatment goals. The management plan should include the fol-
lowing components: (1) explanation of the problem and reassurance 
about the ability to formulate a treatment plan, (2) identification 
and treatment of aggravating conditions, (3) recommendations for 
adaptation of activity as needed, (4) treatment of risk factors that 
will decrease the occurrence of adverse coronary outcomes, (5) drug 
therapy for angina, and (6) consideration of revascularization.
EXPLANATION AND REASSURANCE
Patients with IHD need to understand their condition and realize 
that a long and productive life is possible even though they have 
angina pectoris or have experienced and recovered from an acute 
myocardial infarction. Offering results of clinical trials showing 
improved outcomes can be of great value in encouraging patients 
to resume or maintain activity and return to work. A planned 
program of rehabilitation can encourage patients to lose weight, 
improve exercise tolerance, and control risk factors with more 
confidence.
IDENTIFICATION AND TREATMENT OF AGGRAVATING 
CONDITIONS
A number of conditions may increase oxygen demand or decrease 
oxygen supply to the myocardium and may precipitate or exacer-
bate angina in patients with IHD. LVH, aortic valve disease, and 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may cause or contribute to angina 
and should be excluded or treated. Obesity, hypertension, and 
hyperthyroidism should be treated aggressively to reduce the fre-
quency and severity of anginal episodes. Decreased myocardial oxy-
gen supply may be due to reduced oxygenation of the arterial blood 
(e.g., in pulmonary disease or, when carboxyhemoglobin is present, 
due to cigarette or cigar smoking) or decreased oxygen-carrying 
CHAPTER 267 Ischemic Heart Disease
1859
capacity (e.g., in anemia). Correction of these abnormalities, if pres-
ent, may reduce or even eliminate angina pectoris.
ADAPTATION OF ACTIVITY
Myocardial ischemia is caused by a discrepancy between the demand 
of the heart muscle for oxygen and the ability of the coronary 
circulation to meet that demand. Most patients can be helped to 
understand this concept and utilize it in the rational programming 
of activity. Many tasks that ordinarily evoke angina may be accom-
plished without symptoms simply by reducing the speed at which 
they are performed. Patients must appreciate the diurnal variation 
in their tolerance of certain activities and should reduce their energy 
requirements in the morning, immediately after meals, and in cold 
or inclement weather. On occasion, it may be necessary to recom-
mend a change in employment or residence to avoid physical stress.
Physical conditioning usually improves the exercise tolerance 
of patients with angina and has substantial psychological benefits.  
A regular program of isotonic exercise that is within the limits of the 
individual patient’s threshold for the development of angina pecto-
ris and that does not exceed 80% of the heart rate associated with 
ischemia on exercise testing should be strongly encouraged. Based 
on the results of an exercise test, the number of metabolic equivalent 
tasks (METs) performed at the onset of ischemia can be estimated 
(Table 267-2) and a practical exercise prescription can be formulated 
to permit daily activities that will fall below the ischemic threshold 
(Table 267-3).
TREATMENT OF RISK FACTORS
A family history of premature IHD is an important indicator of 
increased risk and should trigger a search for treatable risk factors 
such as hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. Obesity 
impairs the treatment of other risk factors and increases the risk of 
adverse coronary events. In addition, obesity often is accompanied 
by three other risk factors: diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and 
hyperlipidemia. The treatment of obesity and these accompanying 
risk factors is an important component of any management plan. 
A diet low in saturated and trans-unsaturated fatty acids and a 
reduced caloric intake to achieve optimal body weight are a corner-
stone in the management of chronic IHD. It is especially important 
to emphasize weight loss and regular exercise in patients with the 
metabolic syndrome or overt diabetes mellitus.
Cigarette smoking accelerates coronary atherosclerosis in both sexes 
and at all ages and increases the risk of thrombosis, plaque instabil-
ity, myocardial infarction, and death. In addition, by increasing 
myocardial oxygen needs and reducing oxygen supply, it aggravates 
angina. Smoking cessation studies have demonstrated important 
benefits with a significant decline in the occurrence of these adverse 
outcomes. Noncombustible tobacco in the form of electronic ciga-
rettes (nicotine delivery systems) may also increase the frequency of 
anginal episodes. The physician’s message must be clear and strong 
and supported by programs that achieve and monitor abstinence of 
tobacco product use (Chap. 448).
Hypertension (Chap. 271) is associated with an increased risk 
of adverse clinical events from coronary atherosclerosis as well as 
stroke. In addition, the LVH that results from sustained hyperten-
sion aggravates ischemia. There is evidence that long-term effective 
treatment of hypertension can decrease the occurrence of adverse 
coronary events (Chap. 271).
Diabetes mellitus (Chap. 396) accelerates coronary and peripheral 
atherosclerosis and is frequently associated with dyslipidemias and 
increases in the risk of angina, myocardial infarction, and sudden 
coronary death. Aggressive control of the dyslipidemia (target LDL 
cholesterol <70 mg/dL) and hypertension (target blood pressure 
120/80 mmHg) that are frequently found in diabetic patients is 
highly effective and therefore essential, as described below.
DYSLIPIDEMIA
The treatment of dyslipidemia is central in aiming for long-term 
relief from angina, reduced need for revascularization, and reduc-
tion in myocardial infarction and death. The control of lipids can be 
achieved by the combination of a diet low in saturated and trans- 
unsaturated fatty acids, exercise, and weight loss. Nearly always, 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) are required and can lower 
LDL cholesterol (25–50%), raise HDL cholesterol (5–9%), and lower 
TABLE 267-3  Energy Requirements for Some Common Activities
LESS THAN 3 METs
3–5 METs
5–7 METs
7–9 METs
MORE THAN 9 METs
Self-Care
Washing/shaving
Dressing
Light housekeeping
Desk work
Cleaning windows
Raking
Power lawn mowing
Bed making/stripping
Easy digging in garden
Level hand lawn mowing
Carrying objects (30–60 lb)
 
Heavy shoveling
Carrying objects (60–90 lb)
 
 
Carrying loads up stairs 
(objects more than 90 lb)
Climbing stairs (quickly)
Shoveling heavy snow  
Driving auto
Carrying objects (15–30 lb)
 
 
 
Occupational
Sitting (clerical/assembly)
Desk work
Stocking shelves (light objects)
Light welding/carpentry
Carpentry (exterior)
Shoveling dirt
Digging ditches (pick and 
shovel)
Heavy labor
Standing (store clerk)
 
Sawing wood
 
 
Recreational
Golf (cart)
Dancing (social)
Tennis (singles)
Canoeing
Squash
Knitting
Golf (walking)
Snow skiing (downhill)
Mountain climbing
Ski touring
 
Sailing
Light backpacking
 
Vigorous basketball
 
Tennis (doubles)
Basketball
 
 
 
 
Stream fishing
 
 
Physical Conditioning
Walking (2 mph)
Level walking (3–4 mph)
Level walking (4.5–5.0 mph)
Level jogging (5 mph)
Running more than 6 mph
Stationary bike
Level biking (6–8 mph)
Bicycling (9–10 mph)
Swimming (crawl stroke)
Bicycling (more than 13 mph)
Very light calisthenics
Light calisthenics
Swimming, breast stroke
Rowing machine
Rope jumping
 
 
 
Heavy calisthenics
Walking uphill (5 mph)
 
 
 
Bicycling (12 mph)
 
Abbreviation: METs, metabolic equivalent tasks.
Source: Modified from WL Haskell: Rehabilitation of the coronary patient, in NK Wenger, HK Hellerstein (eds): Design and Implementation of Cardiac Conditioning 
Program. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1978.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1860
triglycerides (5–30%). A powerful treatment effect of statins on ath-
erosclerosis, IHD, and outcomes is seen regardless of the pretreat-
ment LDL cholesterol level. Fibrates or niacin can be used to raise 
HDL cholesterol and lower triglycerides (Chap. 400). Controlled 
trials with lipid-regulating regimens have shown equal proportional 
benefit for men, women, the elderly, diabetic patients, and smokers. 
Injectable monoclonal antibodies against PCSK9 are now available 
and are capable of producing dramatic lowering of LDL cholesterol 
beyond that achieved with a statin alone.
Compliance with the health-promoting behaviors listed above is 
generally very poor, and a conscientious physician must not under-
estimate the major effort required to meet this challenge. Many 
patients who are discharged from the hospital with proven coronary 
disease do not receive adequate treatment for dyslipidemia. In light 
of the proof that treating dyslipidemia brings major benefits, phy-
sicians need to establish treatment pathways, monitor compliance, 
and follow up regularly.
RISK REDUCTION IN WOMEN WITH IHD
The incidence of clinical IHD in premenopausal women is very low; 
however, after menopause, the atherogenic risk factors increase 
(e.g., increased LDL, reduced HDL) and the rate of clinical coronary 
events accelerates to the levels observed in men. Women have not 
given up cigarette smoking as effectively as have men. Diabetes 
mellitus, which is more common in women, greatly increases the 
occurrence of clinical IHD and amplifies the deleterious effects of 
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and smoking. Cardiac catheteriza-
tion and coronary revascularization are underused in women and 
are performed at a later and more severe stage of the disease than 
in men. When cholesterol lowering, beta blockers after myocardial 
infarction, and CABG are applied in the appropriate patient groups, 
women benefit to the same degree as men.
DRUG THERAPY
The commonly used drugs for the treatment of angina pectoris 
are summarized in Tables 267-4 through 267-6. Pharmacotherapy 
for IHD is designed to reduce the frequency of anginal episodes, 
myocardial infarction, and coronary death. Trial data emphasize 
how important medical management is when added to the health- 
promoting behaviors discussed above. To achieve maximum benefit 
from medical therapy for IHD, it is frequently necessary to com-
bine agents from different classes and titrate the doses as guided 
by the individual profile of risk factors, symptoms, hemodynamic 
responses, and side effects.
TABLE 267-4  Nitrate Therapy in Patients with Ischemic Heart 
Disease
PREPARATION OF 
AGENT
DOSE
SCHEDULE
Nitroglycerina
 
 
  Ointment
0.5–2 in.
Two or three times daily
  Transdermal patch
0.2–0.8 mg/h
Every 24 h; remove at 
bedtime for 12–14 h
  Sublingual tablet
0.3–0.6 mg
As needed, up to three 
doses 5 min apart
  Spray
One or two sprays
As needed, up to three 
doses 5 min apart
Isosorbide dinitratea
 
 
  Oral
10–40 mg
Two or three times daily
  Oral sustained release 80–120 mg
Once or twice daily 
(eccentric schedules)
Isosorbide 5-mononitrate  
 
  Oral
20 mg
Twice daily (given  
7–8 h apart)
  Oral sustained release 30–240 mg
Once daily
aA 10- to 12-h nitrate-free interval is recommended.
Source: Modified from DA Morrow, WE Boden: Stable ischemic heart disease. In 
RO Bonow et al (eds): Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular 
Medicine, 9th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2012, p. 1224.
TABLE 267-5  Properties of Beta Blockers in Clinical Use for Ischemic 
Heart Disease
DRUGS
SELECTIVITY
PARTIAL 
AGONIST 
ACTIVITY
USUAL DOSE FOR 
ANGINA
Acebutolol
β1
Yes
200–600 mg twice daily
Atenolol
β1
No
50–200 mg/d
Betaxolol
β1
No
10–20 mg/d
Bisoprolol
β1
No
10 mg/d
Esmolol 
(intravenous)a
β1
No
50–300 μg/kg/min
Labetalolb
None
Yes
200–600 mg twice daily
Metoprolol
β1
No
50–200 mg twice daily
Nadolol
None
No
40–80 mg/d
Nebivolol
β1 (at low doses)
No
5–40 mg/d
Pindolol
None
Yes
2.5–7.5 mg 3 times daily
Propranolol
None
No
80–120 mg twice daily
Timolol
None
No
10 mg twice daily
aEsmolol is an ultra-short-acting beta blocker that is administered as a continuous 
intravenous infusion. Its rapid offset of action makes esmolol an attractive agent 
to use in patients with relative contraindications to beta blockade. bLabetolol is a 
combined alpha and beta blocker.
Note: This list of beta blockers that may be used to treat patients with angina 
pectoris is arranged alphabetically. The agents for which there is the greatest 
clinical experience include atenolol, metoprolol, and propranolol. It is preferable to 
use a sustained-release formulation that may be taken once daily to improve the 
patient’s compliance with the regimen.
Source: Data from RJ Gibbons et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 41:159, 2003.
TABLE 267-6  Calcium Channel Blockers in Clinical Use for Ischemic 
Heart Disease
DRUGS
USUAL DOSE
DURATION 
OF ACTION
SIDE EFFECTS
Dihydropyridines
Amlodipine
5–10 mg qd
Long
Headache, edema
Felodipine
5–10 mg qd
Long
Headache, edema
Isradipine
2.5–10 mg bid
Medium
Headache, fatigue
Nicardipine
20–40 mg tid
Short
Headache, dizziness, 
flushing, edema
Nifedipine
 
Immediate release:a 
30–90 mg daily orally
Slow release: 30–180 
mg orally
Short
 
Hypotension, dizziness, 
flushing, nausea, 
constipation, edema
 
Nisoldipine
20–40 mg qd
Short
Similar to nifedipine
Nondihydropyridines
Diltiazem
Immediate release: 
30–80 mg 4 times 
daily
Short
Hypotension, dizziness, 
flushing, bradycardia, 
edema
 
Slow release:  
120–320 mg qd
Long
 
Verapamil
 
Immediate release: 
80–160 mg tid
Slow release:  
120–480 mg qd
Short 
Long
Hypotension, 
myocardial depression, 
heart failure, edema, 
bradycardia 
aMay be associated with increased risk of mortality if administered during acute 
myocardial infarction.
Note: This list of calcium channel blockers that may be used to treat patients 
with angina pectoris is divided into two broad classes, dihydropyridines and 
nondihydropyridines, and arranged alphabetically within each class. Among 
the dihydropyridines, the greatest clinical experience has been obtained with 
amlodipine and nifedipine. After the initial period of dose titration with a short-
acting formulation, it is preferable to switch to a sustained-release formulation 
that may be taken once daily to improve patient compliance with the regimen.
Source: Data from RJ Gibbons et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 41:159, 2003.
NITRATES
The organic nitrates are a valuable class of drugs in the management 
of angina pectoris (Table 267-4). Their major mechanisms of action 
include systemic venodilation with concomitant reduction in LV 
CHAPTER 267 Ischemic Heart Disease
1861
Because of differences in the dose-response relationship on cardiac 
electrical activity between the dihydropyridine and nondihydro-
pyridine calcium channel blockers, verapamil and diltiazem may 
produce symptomatic disturbances in cardiac conduction and 
bradyarrhythmias. They also exert negative inotropic actions and 
are more likely to aggravate LV failure, particularly when used 
in patients with LV dysfunction, especially if the patients are 
also receiving beta blockers. Although useful effects usually are 
achieved when calcium channel blockers are combined with beta 
blockers and nitrates, individual titration of the doses is essential 
with these combinations. Variant (Prinzmetal’s) angina responds 
particularly well to calcium channel blockers (especially members 
of the dihydropyridine class), supplemented when necessary by 
nitrates (Chap. 268).
Verapamil ordinarily should not be combined with beta blockers 
because of the combined adverse effects on heart rate and contrac-
tility. Diltiazem can be combined with beta blockers in patients 
with normal ventricular function and no conduction disturbances. 
Amlodipine and beta blockers have complementary actions on cor-
onary blood supply and myocardial oxygen demands. Whereas the 
former decreases blood pressure and dilates coronary arteries, the 
latter slows heart rate and decreases contractility. Amlodipine and 
the other second-generation dihydropyridine calcium antagonists 
(nicardipine, isradipine, long-acting nifedipine, and felodipine) are 
potent vasodilators and are useful in the simultaneous treatment of 
angina and hypertension. Short-acting dihydropyridines should be 
avoided because of the risk of precipitating infarction, particularly 
in the absence of concomitant beta blocker therapy.
Choice Between Beta Blockers and Calcium Channel Blockers for 
Initial Therapy  Since beta blockers have been shown to improve 
life expectancy after acute myocardial infarction (Chaps. 268 and 
269) and calcium channel blockers have not, the former may also 
be preferable in patients with angina and a damaged left ventricle. 
However, calcium channel blockers are indicated in patients with 
the following: (1) inadequate responsiveness to the combination 
of beta blockers and nitrates; many of these patients do well with a 
combination of a beta blocker and a dihydropyridine calcium channel 
blocker; (2) adverse reactions to beta blockers such as depression, 
sexual disturbances, and fatigue; (3) angina and a history of asthma 
or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; (4) sick-sinus syndrome or 
significant atrioventricular conduction disturbances; (5) Prinzmetal’s 
angina; or (6) symptomatic peripheral arterial disease.
A comparison of the common side effects, contraindications, and 
potential drug interactions of many of the frequently presented 
antianginal agents is shown in Table 267-7.
Antiplatelet Drugs  Aspirin is an irreversible inhibitor of platelet 
cyclooxygenase and thereby interferes with platelet activation. 
Chronic administration of 75–325 mg orally per day has been shown 
to reduce coronary events in asymptomatic adult men over age 
50, patients with chronic stable angina, and patients who have or 
have survived unstable angina and myocardial infarction. There 
is a dose-dependent increase in bleeding when aspirin is used 
chronically. It is preferable to use an enteric-coated formulation in 
the range of 81–162 mg/d. Administration of this drug should be 
considered in all patients with IHD in the absence of gastrointestinal 
bleeding, allergy, or dyspepsia. Clopidogrel (300–600 mg loading and 
75 mg/d) is an oral agent that blocks P2Y12 ADP receptor–mediated 
platelet aggregation. It provides benefits similar to those of aspirin in 
patients with stable chronic IHD and may be substituted for aspirin 
if aspirin causes the side effects listed above. Clopidogrel combined 
with aspirin reduces death and coronary ischemic events in patients 
with an acute coronary syndrome (Chap. 268) and also reduces the 
risk of thrombus formation in patients undergoing implantation 
of a stent in a coronary artery (Chap. 270). Alternative antiplatelet 
agents that block the P2Y12 platelet receptor such as prasugrel and 
ticagrelor have been shown to be more effective than clopidogrel 
for prevention of ischemic events after placement of a stent for an 
acute coronary syndrome, but are associated with an increased risk 
end-diastolic volume and pressure, thereby reducing myocardial 
wall tension and oxygen requirements; dilation of epicardial coro-
nary vessels; and increased blood flow in collateral vessels. When 
metabolized, organic nitrates release nitric oxide (NO) that binds 
to guanylyl cyclase in vascular smooth muscle cells, leading to an 
increase in cyclic guanosine monophosphate, which causes relax-
ation of vascular smooth muscle. Nitrates also exert antithrombotic 
activity by NO-dependent activation of platelet guanylyl cyclase, 
impairment of intraplatelet calcium flux, and platelet activation.
The absorption of these agents is rapid and complete through 
mucous membranes. For this reason, nitroglycerin is most com-
monly administered sublingually in tablets of 0.4 or 0.6 mg. Patients 
with angina should be instructed to take the medication both to 
relieve angina and also ~5 min before activities that are likely to 
induce an episode. The value of this prophylactic use of the drug 
cannot be overemphasized.
Nitrates improve exercise tolerance in patients with chronic 
angina and relieve ischemia in patients with unstable angina as well 
as patients with Prinzmetal’s variant angina (Chap. 268). A diary of 
angina and nitroglycerin use may be valuable for detecting changes 
in the frequency, severity, or threshold for discomfort that may sig-
nify the development of unstable angina pectoris and/or herald an 
impending myocardial infarction.
Long-Acting Nitrates  None of the long-acting nitrates is as effec-
tive as sublingual nitroglycerin for the acute relief of angina. These 
organic nitrate preparations can be swallowed, chewed, or admin-
istered as a patch or paste by the transdermal route (Table 267-4). 
They provide effective plasma levels for up to 24 h, but the thera-
peutic response is highly variable. Different preparations and/or 
administration during the daytime should be tried only to prevent 
discomfort while avoiding side effects such as headache and dizzi-
ness. Individual dose titration is important to prevent side effects. 
To minimize the effects of nitrate tolerance, the minimum effective 
dose should be used and a minimum of 8 h each day kept free of the 
drug to restore any useful response(s).
a-Adrenergic Blockers  These drugs represent an important compo-
nent of the pharmacologic treatment of angina pectoris (Table 267-5). 
They reduce myocardial oxygen demand by inhibiting the increases 
in heart rate, arterial pressure, and myocardial contractility caused 
by adrenergic activation. Beta blockade reduces these variables most 
strikingly during exercise but causes only small reductions at rest. 
Long-acting beta-blocking drugs or sustained-release formulations 
offer the advantage of once-daily dosing (Table 267-5). The therapeu-
tic aims include relief of angina and ischemia. These drugs also can 
reduce mortality and reinfarction rates in patients after myocardial 
infarction and are moderately effective antihypertensive agents.
Relative contraindications include asthma and reversible airway 
obstruction in patients with chronic lung disease, atrioventricular 
conduction disturbances, severe bradycardia, Raynaud’s phenome-
non, and a history of mental depression. Side effects include fatigue, 
reduced exercise tolerance, nightmares, impotence, cold extremities, 
intermittent claudication, bradycardia (sometimes severe), impaired 
atrioventricular conduction, LV failure, bronchial asthma, worsen-
ing claudication, and intensification of the hypoglycemia produced 
by oral hypoglycemic agents and insulin. Reducing the dose or even 
discontinuation may be necessary if these side effects develop and 
persist. Since sudden discontinuation can intensify ischemia, the 
doses should be tapered over 2 weeks. Beta blockers with relative 
β1-receptor specificity such as metoprolol and atenolol may be 
preferable in patients with mild bronchial obstruction and insulin- 
requiring diabetes mellitus.
Calcium Channel Blockers  Calcium channel blockers (Table 267-6)  
are coronary vasodilators that produce variable and dose- 
dependent reductions in myocardial oxygen demand, contractility, 
and arterial pressure. These combined pharmacologic effects are 
advantageous and make these agents as effective as beta block-
ers in the treatment of angina pectoris. They are indicated when 
beta blockers are contraindicated, poorly tolerated, or ineffective. 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1862
TABLE 267-7  Antianginal Agents
AGENT
COMMON SIDE EFFECTS
CONTRAINDICATIONS
POTENTIAL DRUG INTERACTIONS
Agents That Have a Physiological Effect  
Short-acting and long-acting nitrates
Headache, flushing, hypotension, 
syncope and postural hypotension, 
reflex tachycardia, methemoglobinemia
Hypertrophic obstructive 
cardiomyopathy
Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors 
(sildenafil and similar agents), beta-
adrenergic blockers, calcium-channel 
blockers
Beta blockers
Fatigue, depression, bradycardia, 
heart block, bronchospasm, peripheral 
vasoconstriction, postural hypotension, 
impotence, masked signs of 
hypoglycemia
Low heart rate or heart conduction 
disorder, cardiogenic shock, asthma, 
severe peripheral vascular disease, 
decompensated heart failure, 
vasospastic angina; use with caution 
in patients with COPD (cardio-selective 
beta blockers may be used if patient 
receives adequate treatment with long-
acting beta agonists)
Heart-rate-lowering calcium-channel 
blockers, sinus-node or AV conduction 
depressors
Calcium-channel blockers
 
 
 
Heart-rate-lowering agents
Bradycardia, heart conduction defect, 
low ejection fraction, constipation, 
gingival hyperplasia
Cardiogenic shock, severe aortic 
stenosis, obstructive cardiomyopathy
CYP3A4 substrates (digoxin, 
simvastatin, cyclosporine)
Dihydropyridine
Headache, ankle swelling fatigue, 
flushing, reflex tachycardia
Low heart rate or heart rhythm 
disorder, sick sinus syndrome, 
congestive heart failure, low blood 
pressure
Agents with cardiodepressant effects 
(beta-blockers, flecainide), CYP3A4 
substrates
Agents That Affect Myocardial Metabolism
Ranolazine
Dizziness, constipation, nausea, 
QT-interval prolongation
Liver cirrhosis
CYP3A4 substrates (digoxin, 
simvastatin, cyclosporine), drugs that 
prolong the corrected QT interval
Abbreviations: COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CYP3A4, cytochrome P-450 3A4.
Source: Data from SE Husted: Lancet 386:691, 2015 and EM Ohman: N Engl J Med 374:1167, 2016.
of bleeding. Although combined treatment with clopidogrel and 
aspirin for at least a year is recommended in patients with an acute 
coronary syndrome treated with implantation of a drug-eluting 
stent, studies have not shown any benefit from the routine addition 
of clopidogrel to aspirin in patients with chronic stable IHD.
OTHER THERAPIES
The ACE inhibitors are widely used in the treatment of survivors of 
myocardial infarction, patients with hypertension or chronic IHD 
including angina pectoris, and those at high risk of vascular diseases 
such as diabetes. The benefits of ACE inhibitors are most evident in 
IHD patients at increased risk, especially if diabetes mellitus or left 
ventricle dysfunction is present, and those who have not achieved 
adequate control of blood pressure and LDL cholesterol on beta 
blockers and statins. However, the routine administration of ACE 
inhibitors to IHD patients who have normal LV function and have 
achieved blood pressure and LDL goals on other therapies does not 
reduce the incidence of events and therefore is not cost-effective.
Despite treatment with nitrates, beta blockers, or calcium channel 
blockers, some patients with IHD continue to experience angina, 
and additional medical therapy is now available to alleviate their 
symptoms. Ranolazine, a piperazine derivative, may be useful for 
patients with chronic angina despite standard medical therapy (see 
Table 267-7). Its antianginal action is believed to occur via inhibition 
of the late inward sodium current (INa). The benefits of INa inhibition 
include limitation of the Na overload of ischemic myocytes and 
prevention of Ca2+ overload via the Na+–Ca2+ exchanger. A dose of 
500–1000 mg orally twice daily is usually well tolerated. Ranolazine 
is contraindicated in patients with hepatic impairment or with 
conditions or drugs associated with QTc prolongation and when 
drugs that inhibit the CYP3A metabolic system (e.g., ketoconazole, 
diltiazem, verapamil, macrolide antibiotics, HIV protease inhibitors, 
and large quantities of grapefruit juice) are being used.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use in patients 
with IHD may be associated with a small but finite increased risk of 
myocardial infarction and mortality. For this reason, they generally 
should be avoided in IHD patients. If they are required for symptom 
relief, it is advisable to coadminister aspirin and strive to use an 
NSAID associated with the lowest risk of cardiovascular events, in 
the lowest dose required, and for the shortest period of time.
Another class of agents opens ATP-sensitive potassium channels 
in myocytes, leading to a reduction of free intracellular calcium ions. 
The major drug in this class is nicorandil, which typically is adminis-
tered orally in a dose of 20 mg twice daily for prevention of angina. 
(Nicorandil is not available for use in the United States but is used 
in several other countries.)
Ivabradine (2.5–7.5 mg orally twice daily) is a specific sinus 
node inhibiting agent that may be helpful for preventing cardio-
vascular events in patients with IHD who have a resting heart rate 
≥70 beats/min (alone or in combination with a beta blocker) and 
LV systolic dysfunction. It does not appear to offer any benefit in 
patients with IHD but who do not have clinical heart failure.
Angina and Heart Failure  Transient LV failure with angina can 
be controlled by the use of nitrates. For patients with established 
congestive heart failure, the increased LV wall tension raises myo-
cardial oxygen demand. Treatment of congestive heart failure with 
an ACE inhibitor, a diuretic, and digoxin (Chap. 252) reduces heart 
size, wall tension, and myocardial oxygen demand, which helps 
control angina and ischemia. If the symptoms and signs of heart 
failure are controlled, an effort should be made to use beta blockers 
not only for angina but because trials in heart failure have shown 
significant improvement in survival. A trial of the intravenous ultra-
short-acting beta blocker esmolol may be useful to establish the 
safety of beta blockade in selected patients. Nocturnal angina often 
can be relieved by the treatment of heart failure.
The combination of congestive heart failure and angina in 
patients with IHD usually indicates a poor prognosis and war-
rants serious consideration of cardiac catheterization and coronary 
revascularization.
CORONARY REVASCULARIZATION
Clinical trials have confirmed that with the initial diagnosis of stable 
IHD, it is first appropriate to initiate a medical regimen as described 
above. Revascularization should be considered in the presence of 
unstable phases of the disease, intractable symptoms, severe ischemia 
CHAPTER 267 Ischemic Heart Disease
1863
or high-risk coronary anatomy, diabetes, and impaired LV function. 
Revascularization should be employed in conjunction with but not replace the 
continuing need to modify risk factors and assess medical therapy. An algo-
rithm for integrating medical therapy and revascularization options in 
patients with IHD is shown in Fig. 267-4.
■
■PERCUTANEOUS CORONARY INTERVENTION
(See also Chap. 270) PCI involving balloon dilatation usually accompa-
nied by coronary stenting is widely used to achieve revascularization 
of the myocardium in patients with symptomatic IHD and suitable 
stenoses of epicardial coronary arteries. Whereas patients with steno-
sis of the left main coronary artery and those with three-vessel IHD 
(especially with diabetes and/or impaired LV function) who require 
revascularization are best treated with CABG, PCI is widely employed 
in patients with symptoms and evidence of ischemia due to stenoses 
of one or two vessels and even in selected patients with three-vessel 
disease (and, perhaps, in some patients with left main disease) and may 
offer many advantages over surgery.
Indications and Patient Selection  The most common clinical 
indication for PCI is symptom-limiting angina pectoris, despite medi-
cal therapy, accompanied by evidence of ischemia during a stress test. 
PCI is more effective than medical therapy for the relief of angina. PCI 
improves outcomes in patients with unstable angina or when used 
early in the course of myocardial infarction with and without cardio-
genic shock. However, in patients with stable exertional angina, clinical 
trials have confirmed that PCI does not reduce the occurrence of death 
or myocardial infarction compared to optimum medical therapy. PCI 
can be used to treat stenoses in native coronary arteries as well as in 
bypass grafts in patients who have recurrent angina after CABG.
Risks  When coronary stenoses are discrete and symmetric, two and 
even three vessels can be treated in sequence. However, case selection 
is essential to avoid a prohibitive risk of complications, which are usu-
ally due to dissection or thrombosis with vessel occlusion, uncontrolled 
ischemia, and ventricular failure (Chap. 270). Oral aspirin, a P2Y12 
antagonist, and an antithrombin agent are given to reduce coronary 
thrombus formation. Left main coronary artery stenosis generally is 
regarded as a lesion that should be treated with CABG. In selected 
cases such as patients with prohibitive surgical risks, PCI of an unpro-
tected left main can be considered, but such a procedure should be 
performed only by a highly skilled operator; importantly, there are 
regional differences in the use of this approach internationally.
Efficacy  Primary success, i.e., adequate dilation (an increase in 
luminal diameter >20% to a residual diameter obstruction <50%) with 
relief of angina, is achieved in >95% of cases. Recurrent stenosis of the 
dilated vessels occurs in ~20% of cases within 6 months of PCI with 
bare metal stents, and angina will recur within 6 months in 10% of 
cases. Restenosis is more common in patients with diabetes mellitus, 
arteries with small caliber, incomplete dilation of the stenosis, long 
stents, occluded vessels, obstructed vein grafts, dilation of the left 
anterior descending coronary artery, and stenoses containing thrombi. 
In diseased vein grafts, procedural success has been improved by the 
use of capture devices or filters that prevent embolization, ischemia, 
and infarction.
It is usual clinical practice to administer aspirin indefinitely and a 
P2Y12 antagonist for 1–3 months after the implantation of a bare metal 
stent. Although aspirin in combination with a thienopyridine may help 
prevent coronary thrombosis during and shortly after PCI with stent-
ing, there is no evidence that these medications reduce the incidence 
of restenosis.
The use of drug-eluting stents that locally deliver antiproliferative 
drugs can reduce restenosis to much less than 10%. Advances in PCI, 
especially the availability of drug-eluting stents, have vastly extended 
the use of this revascularization option in patients with IHD. Of note, 
however, the delayed endothelial healing in the region of a drug-eluting 
stent also extends the period during which the patient is at risk for 
subacute stent thrombosis. Aspirin administered indefinitely and a 
P2Y12 antagonist daily (dual antiplatelet therapy [DAPT]) for at least 
1 year after implantation of a drug-eluting stent. Evidence exists of a 
benefit of continuing DAPT for up to 30 months, albeit at the cost of 
a higher risk of bleeding. When a situation arises in which temporary 
discontinuation of antiplatelet therapy is necessary, the clinical circum-
stances should be reviewed with the operator who performed the PCI 
and a coordinated plan should be established for minimizing the risk 
of late stent thrombus; central to this plan is the discontinuation of 
antiplatelet therapy for the shortest acceptable period. The risk of stent 
thrombosis is dependent on stent size and length, complexity of the 
lesions, age, diabetes, and technique. However, compliance with DAPT 
and individual responsiveness to platelet inhibition are very important 
factors as well.
Successful PCI produces effective relief of angina in >95% of cases. 
The majority of patients with symptomatic IHD who require revascu-
larization can be treated initially by PCI. Successful PCI is less invasive 
and expensive than CABG and permits savings in the initial cost of 
care. Successful PCI avoids the risk of stroke associated with CABG 
surgery, allows earlier return to work, and allows the resumption of 
an active life. However, the early health-related and economic benefit 
of PCI is reduced over time because of the greater need for follow-up 
and the increased need for repeat procedures. When directly compared 
in patients with diabetes or three-vessel or left main CAD, CABG was 
MANAGEMENT OF THE PATIENT WITH IHD
Initiate medical therapy:
1. Decrease demand ischemia
2. Minimize IHD risk factors
3. ASA (clopidogrel if ASA intolerant)
Any high-risk features?
Low exercise capacity or ischemia at low workload, large
area of ischemic myocardium, EF <40%, ACS presentation
No
Yes
Are exertional
symptoms controlled?
Refer for coronary
arteriography
Yes
No
Yes
No
Single vessel
disease
LM +/or multi
vessel disease
PCI
Assess:
PCI vs CABG
Consider
unconventional
treatments
Continue medical therapy periodic stress assessment
(see Fig. 267-3)
Anatomy suitable
for revascularization?
FIGURE 267-4  Algorithm for management of a patient with ischemic heart 
disease. All patients should receive the core elements of medical therapy as 
shown at the top of the algorithm. If high-risk features are present, as established 
by the clinical history, exercise test data, and imaging studies, the patient should 
be referred for coronary arteriography. Based on the number and location of the 
diseased vessels and their suitability for revascularization, the patient is treated 
with a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or coronary artery bypass graft 
(CABG) surgery or should be considered for unconventional treatments. See text 
for further discussion. ACS, acute coronary syndrome; ASA, aspirin; EF, ejection 
fraction; IHD, ischemic heart disease; LM, left main.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1864 superior to PCI in preventing major adverse cardiac or cerebrovascular 
events over a 12-month follow-up.
■
■CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS GRAFTING
Anastomosis of one or both of the internal mammary arteries or a 
radial artery to the coronary artery distal to the obstructive lesion is 
the preferred procedure. For additional obstructions that cannot be 
bypassed by an artery, a section of a vein (usually the saphenous) is 
used to form a venous bypass conduit between the aorta and the coro-
nary artery distal to the obstructive lesion.
Although some indications for CABG are controversial, certain areas 
of agreement exist:
1.	 The operation is relatively safe, with mortality rates <1% in patients 
without serious comorbid disease and normal LV function and 
when the procedure is performed by an experienced surgical team.
2.	 Intraoperative and postoperative mortality rates increase with the 
severity of ventricular dysfunction, comorbidities, age >80 years, 
and lack of surgical experience. The effectiveness and risk of CABG 
vary widely depending on case selection and the skill and experi-
ence of the surgical team.
3.	 Occlusion of venous grafts is observed in 10–20% of patients during 
the first postoperative year and in ~2% per year during 5- to 7-year 
follow-up and 4% per year thereafter. Long-term patency rates 
are considerably higher for internal mammary and radial artery 
implantations than for saphenous vein grafts. In patients with left 
anterior descending coronary artery obstruction, survival is better 
when coronary bypass involves the internal mammary artery rather 
than a saphenous vein. Graft patency and outcomes are improved 
by meticulous treatment of risk factors, particularly dyslipidemia.
4.	 Angina is abolished or greatly reduced in ~90% of patients after 
complete revascularization. Although this usually is associated with 
graft patency and restoration of blood flow, the pain may also have 
been alleviated as a result of infarction of the ischemic segment or a 
placebo effect. Within 3 years, angina recurs in about one-fourth of 
patients but is rarely severe.
5.	 Survival may be improved by operation in patients with stenosis 
of the left main coronary artery as well as in patients with three- or 
two-vessel disease with significant obstruction of the proximal left 
anterior descending coronary artery. The survival benefit is greater 
in patients with abnormal LV function (ejection fraction <50%). 
Survival may also be improved in the following patients: (a) patients 
with obstructive CAD who have survived sudden cardiac death or 
sustained ventricular tachycardia; (b) patients who have undergone 
previous CABG and have multiple saphenous vein graft stenoses, 
especially of a graft supplying the left anterior descending coronary 
artery; and (c) patients with recurrent stenosis after PCI and high-
risk criteria on noninvasive testing.
6.	 Minimally invasive CABG through a small thoracotomy and/or off-
pump surgery can reduce morbidity and shorten convalescence in 
suitable patients but does not appear to reduce significantly the risk 
of neurocognitive dysfunction postoperatively.
7.	 Among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and multivessel 
coronary disease, CABG surgery plus optimal medical therapy 
is superior to optimal medical therapy alone in preventing major 
cardiovascular events, a benefit mediated largely by a significant 
reduction in nonfatal myocardial infarction. The benefits of CABG 
are especially evident in diabetic patients treated with an insulin-
sensitizing strategy as opposed to an insulin-providing strategy. 
CABG has also been shown to be superior to PCI (including the use 
of drug-eluting stents) in preventing death, myocardial infarction, 
and repeat revascularization in patients with diabetes mellitus and 
multivessel IHD.
Indications for CABG usually are based on the severity of symp-
toms, coronary anatomy, and ventricular function. The ideal candidate 
is male, <80 years of age, has no other complicating disease, and has 
troublesome or disabling angina that is not adequately controlled by 
medical therapy or does not tolerate medical therapy. Great symptom-
atic benefit can be anticipated if a patient wishes to lead a more active 
life and has severe stenoses of two or three epicardial coronary arteries 
with objective evidence of myocardial ischemia as a cause of the chest 
discomfort. Congestive heart failure and/or LV dysfunction, advanced 
age (>80 years), reoperation, urgent need for surgery, and the presence 
of diabetes mellitus are all associated with a higher perioperative mor-
tality rate.
LV dysfunction can be due to noncontractile or hypocontractile 
segments that are viable but are chronically ischemic (hibernating myo-
cardium). As a consequence of chronic reduction in myocardial blood 
flow, these segments downregulate their contractile function. They can 
be detected by using radionuclide scans of myocardial perfusion and 
metabolism, PET, cardiac MRI, or delayed scanning with thallium-201 
or by improvement of regional functional impairment provoked by 
low-dose dobutamine. In such patients, revascularization improves 
myocardial blood flow, can return function, and can improve survival.
The Choice Between PCI and CABG  All the clinical character-
istics of each individual patient must be used to decide on the method 
of revascularization (e.g., LV function, diabetes, lesion complexity). A 
number of randomized clinical trials have compared PCI and CABG in 
patients with multivessel CAD who were suitable technically for both 
procedures. The redevelopment of angina requiring repeat coronary 
angiography and repeat revascularization is higher with PCI. This is 
a result of restenosis in the stented segment (a problem largely solved 
with drug-eluting stents) and the development of new stenoses in 
unstented portions of the coronary vasculature. It has been argued that 
PCI with stenting focuses on culprit lesions, whereas a bypass graft to 
the target vessel also provides a conduit around future culprit lesions 
proximal to the anastomosis of the graft to the native vessel (Fig. 267-5). 
By contrast, stroke rates are lower with PCI.
Based on available evidence, it is now recommended that patients 
with an unacceptable level of angina despite optimal medical man-
agement be considered for coronary revascularization. Patients with 
single- or two-vessel disease with normal LV function and anatomically 
suitable lesions ordinarily are advised to undergo PCI (Chap. 270). 
Patients with three-vessel disease (or two-vessel disease that includes 
the proximal left descending coronary artery) and impaired global LV 
function (LV ejection fraction <50%) or diabetes mellitus and those 
with left main CAD or other lesions unsuitable for catheter-based 
procedures should be considered for CABG as the initial method of 
revascularization. In light of the complexity of the decision-making, it 
is desirable to have a multidisciplinary team, including a cardiologist 
and a cardiac surgeon in conjunction with the patient’s primary care 
physician, provide input along with ascertaining the patient’s prefer-
ences before committing to a particular revascularization option.
■
■UNCONVENTIONAL TREATMENTS FOR IHD
On occasion clinicians will encounter a patient who has persistent 
disabling angina despite maximally tolerated medical therapy and for 
whom revascularization is not an option (e.g., small diffusely diseased 
vessels not amenable to stent implantation or acceptable targets for 
bypass grafting). In such situations, unconventional treatments should 
be considered.
Enhanced external counterpulsation utilizes pneumatic cuffs on the 
lower extremities to provide diastolic augmentation and systolic 
unloading of blood pressure to decrease cardiac work and oxygen 
consumption while enhancing coronary blood flow. Clinical trials have 
shown that regular application improves angina, exercise capacity, and 
regional myocardial perfusion. Experimental approaches, such as stem 
cell therapies and cardiac repair with small non-coding RNA molecules 
(miRNA), are also under active study.
ASYMPTOMATIC (SILENT) ISCHEMIA
Obstructive CAD, acute myocardial infarction, and transient myo-
cardial ischemia are frequently asymptomatic. During continuous 
ambulatory ECG monitoring, the majority of ambulatory patients with 
typical chronic stable angina are found to have objective evidence 
of myocardial ischemia (ST-segment depression) during episodes of 
chest discomfort while they are active outside the hospital. In addi-
tion, many of these patients also have more frequent episodes of 
CHAPTER 267 Ischemic Heart Disease
1865
Stent
Coronary
artery
Bypass
graft
Lesion
Lesion
Future
culprit
lesion
Future
culprit
lesion
A
B
PCI
CABG
FIGURE 267-5  Difference in the approach to the lesion with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). PCI is targeted at 
the “culprit” lesion or lesions, whereas CABG is directed at the epicardial vessel, including the culprit lesion or lesions and future culprits, proximal to the insertion of 
the vein graft, a difference that may account for the superiority of CABG, at least in the intermediate term, in patients with multivessel disease. (Reproduced from BJ 
Gersh, RL Frye: N Engl J Med 352:2235, 2005.)
asymptomatic ischemia. Frequent episodes of ischemia (symptomatic 
and asymptomatic) during daily life appear to be associated with an 
increased likelihood of adverse coronary events (death and myocardial 
infarction). In addition, patients with asymptomatic ischemia after a 
myocardial infarction are at greater risk for a second coronary event. 
The widespread use of exercise ECG during routine examinations 
has also identified some of these previously unrecognized patients 
with asymptomatic CAD. Longitudinal studies have demonstrated an 
increased incidence of coronary events in asymptomatic patients with 
positive exercise tests.
TREATMENT
Asymptomatic Ischemia
The management of patients with asymptomatic ischemia must be 
individualized. When coronary disease has been confirmed, the 
aggressive treatment of hypertension and dyslipidemia is essential 
and will decrease the risk of infarction and death. In addition, the 
physician should consider the following: (1) the degree of positivity of 
the stress test, particularly the stage of exercise at which ECG signs 
of ischemia appear; the magnitude and number of the ischemic zones 
of myocardium on imaging; and the change in LV ejection fraction 
that occurs on radionuclide ventriculography or echocardiography 
during ischemia and/or during exercise; (2) the ECG leads showing a 
positive response, with changes in the anterior precordial leads indi-
cating a less favorable prognosis than changes in the inferior leads; 
and (3) the patient’s age, occupation, and general medical condition.
Most would agree that an asymptomatic 45-year-old commercial 
airline pilot with significant (0.4-mV) ST-segment depression in 
leads V1 to V4 during mild exercise should undergo coronary arte-
riography, whereas an asymptomatic, sedentary 85-year-old retiree 
with 0.1-mV ST-segment depression in leads II and III during 
maximal activity need not. However, there is no consensus about 
the most appropriate approach in the large majority of patients for 
whom the situation is less extreme. Asymptomatic patients with 
silent ischemia, three-vessel CAD, and impaired LV function may be 
considered appropriate candidates for CABG.
The treatment of risk factors, particularly lipid lowering and 
blood pressure control as described above, and the use of aspirin, 
statins, and beta blockers after infarction have been shown to reduce 
events and improve outcomes in asymptomatic as well as symp-
tomatic patients with ischemia and proven CAD. Although the inci-
dence of asymptomatic ischemia can be reduced by treatment with 
beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, and long-acting nitrates, it 
is not clear whether this is necessary or desirable in patients who 
have not had a myocardial infarction.
■
■FURTHER READING
De Bruyne B et al: Microvascular (dys)function and clinical outcome in 
stable coronary disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 67:1170, 2016.
Fihn SD et al: 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS 
guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable 
ischemic heart disease: A report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy Foundation/American Heart Association task force on practice 
guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Asso-
ciation for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Asso-
ciation, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, 
and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation 126:e354, 2012.
Levine GN et al: 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on dura-
tion of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery 
disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines: An 
Update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Percutaneous 
Coronary Intervention, 2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline for Coronary 
Artery Bypass Graft Surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/
SCAI/STS Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Patients 
with Stable Ischemic Heart Disease, 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1866
for the Management of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction, 2014 
AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients with Non-ST- 
Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes, and 2014 ACC/AHA Guide-
line on Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation and Management of 
Patients Undergoing Noncardiac Surgery. Circulation 134:e123, 2016.
Mody P et al: Antianginal agents for the management of stable ischemic 
heart disease: A review. Cardiol Rev 24:177, 2016.
Mozaffarian D et al: Heart disease and stroke statistics—2016 
update: A report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 
2016;133:e38, 2016.
Omland T, White HD: State of the art: Blood biomarkers for risk strat-
ification in patients with stable ischemic heart disease. Clin Chem 
63:165, 2017.
Singh M, Arora R: Newer therapies for management of stable 
ischemic heart disease with focus on refractory angina. Am J Ther 
23:e1842, 2016.
Patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) commonly are classified 
into two groups to facilitate evaluation and management, namely patients 
with acute myocardial infarction with ST-segment elevation (STEMI) on 
their presenting electrocardiogram (ECG) (Chap. 269) and those with non- 
ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome (NSTE-ACS). The latter 
include patients with non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction 
268 Non-ST-Segment Elevation 
Acute Coronary Syndrome 
(Non-ST-Segment Elevation 
Myocardial Infarction and 
Unstable Angina)
Robert P. Giugliano, Christopher P. Cannon,  
Eugene Braunwald 
Low likelihood
1. Presentation
2. ECG
3. Troponin
4. Diagnosis
Non-cardiac
Other
cardiac
UA
NSTEMI
STEMI
High likelihood
FIGURE 268-1  Assessment of patients with suspected acute coronary syndromes. The initial assessment is based on the integration of low-likelihood and/or high-
likelihood features derived from clinical presentation (i.e., symptoms, vital signs), 12-lead electrocardiogram and cardiac troponin. The proportion of the final diagnoses 
derived from the integration of these parameters is visualized by the size of the respective boxes. (From Roffi M et al: 2015 European Society of Cardiology Guidelines 
for the management of acute coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J 37:267, 2016.)
(NSTEMI), who, by definition, have evidence of myocyte necrosis, and 
those with unstable angina (UA), who do not (Fig. 268-1).
The relative incidence of NSTEMI is rising due to the increasing 
burden of diabetes and chronic kidney disease in an aging population, 
while STEMI is declining due to greater use of aspirin, statins, and 
less smoking. Among patients with NSTE-ACS, the proportion with 
NSTEMI is rising while that with UA is falling because of the wider use 
of troponin assays with higher sensitivity to detect myocyte necrosis, 
thereby reclassifying UA as NSTEMI.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
NSTE-ACS is caused by an imbalance between myocardial oxygen 
supply and demand resulting from one or more of the following 
four processes that lead to thrombus formation : (1) disruption of an 
unstable coronary plaque due to plaque rupture, erosion, or a calcified 
protruding nodule that leads to intracoronary thrombus formation 
(Fig. 268-2) and an inflammatory response; (2) coronary arterial vaso-
constriction; (3) gradual intraluminal narrowing; and (4) increased 
myocardial oxygen demand produced by conditions such as fever, 
tachycardia, and thyrotoxicosis in the presence of fixed epicardial 
coronary obstruction. While plaque rupture remains the most common 
etiology of coronary thrombosis, erosion of an intracoronary plaque is 
increasing in frequency, perhaps related to the above mentioned shifts 
in the underlying risk factors for ACS.
Among patients with NSTE-ACS studied at angiography, ~10% 
have stenosis of the left main coronary artery, 35% have three-vessel 
CAD, 20% have two-vessel disease, 20% have single-vessel disease, 
and 15% have no apparent critical epicardial coronary artery stenosis; 
some of the latter may have obstruction of the coronary microcircula-
tion and/or spasm of the epicardial vessels. The so-called “vulnerable 
plaques” responsible for ischemia may show an eccentric stenosis with 
scalloped or overhanging edges and a narrow neck on coronary angi-
ography. Vulnerable plaques are composed of a lipid-rich core with a 
thin fibrous cap. Patients with NSTE-ACS frequently have multiple 
such plaques that are at risk of disruption.
■
■CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Diagnosis  The diagnosis of NSTE-ACS is based largely on the clin-
ical presentation (Fig. 268-3).
CHAPTER 268 Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute Coronary Syndrome (Non-ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction and Unstable Angina)
1867
C
D
A
Thrombus
Plaque rupture
Plaque erosion
Calcified nodule
B
*
*
*
*
FIGURE 268-2  Intracoronary thrombosis and the three most common plaque morphologies resulting in acute coronary syndrome as visualized by optical coherence 
tomography. A. Thrombus (arrow) is identified as a protruding mass attached to the arterial wall. B. Plaque rupture is identified as lipid plaque with fibrous cap 
discontinuity (arrow) and cavity formation inside the plaque. C. Plaque erosion is confirmed by the presence of attached thrombus (arrows) overlying an intact and 
visualized plaque. D. Calcified nodule appears on optical coherence tomography as a site with fibrous cap disruption (dotted arrow) and underlying plaque characterized 
by protruding calcification, superficial calcium, and significant calcium adjacent to the lesion (arrows). The asterisks denote guidewire shadow artifact. (Modified from H 
Jia et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 62:1748, 2013 and I Jang, D Ong: Optical coherence tomography and other emerging diagnostic procedures for vulnerable plaque, in D Morrow 
(ed): Myocardial Infarction: A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease. Philadelphia, Elsevier Health Sciences, 2017.)
Definite ACS
Possible ACS
See Chap. 269
Outpatient follow-up
Chronic stable angina
See Chap. 267
Noncardiac diagnosis
Treatment as indicated
by alternative diagnosis
Observe 12 h or more
from symptom onset
Nondiagnostic ECG
Normal initial cTn
No recurrent pain;
negative
follow-up studies
Recurrent ischemic pain or
positive follow-up studies
Diagnosis of ACS confirmed
Stress study to provoke ischemia
Consider evaluation of LV function
if ischemia is present
Negative
Potential diagnoses: nonischemic
discomfort; low-risk ACS
Positive
Diagnosis of ACS confirmed or
highly likely
Admit to hospital
Manage via acute
ischemia pathway
ST- and/or T-
wave changes
Ongoing pain
or elevated cTn
Hemodynamic
abnormalities
No ST-segment
elevation
ST-segment
elevation
Symptoms suggestive of ACS
FIGURE 268-3  Algorithm for evaluation and management of patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome (ACS). Follow-up studies refer to ST deviation and 
elevation of troponin levels. cTn, cardiac troponin; ECG, electrocardiogram; LV, left ventricular. (Modified from J Anderson et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 61:e179, 2013.)
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1868
TABLE 268-1  Causes of Elevated Cardiac Troponin Reflecting Direct 
Myocardial Damage Other Than Spontaneous Myocardial Infarction 
(Type 1)
CARDIAC
NON-CARDIAC OR SYSTEMIC
Tachyarrhythmias
Pulmonary embolism/pulmonary 
hypertension
Congestive heart failure
Trauma (e.g., electrical shock, burns, 
blunt chest wall)
Hypertensive emergencies
Hypo or hyperthyroidism
Infection/inflammation (e.g., 
myocarditis, pericarditis)
Toxicity (e.g., anthracyclines, snake 
venom)
Stress cardiomyopathy (Tako-Tsubo 
cardiomyopathy)
Renal failure
Structural heart disease (e.g., aortic 
stenosis)
Sepsis, shock
Aortic dissection
Stroke or other acute neurologic  
event
Coronary spasm
Extreme endurance efforts (e.g., 
ultra-marathon)
Cardiac procedures (endomyocardial 
biopsy, ablation, CABG, PCI)
Rhabdomyolysis
Infiltrative diseases (e.g., amyloidosis, 
hemochromatosis, malignancy)
Source: Data from LK Newby et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 60:2427, 2012 and M Roffi: 
Eur Heart J 37:267, 2016.
History and Physical Examination  Typically, chest discom-
fort is severe and has at least one of three features: (1) occurrence 
at rest (or with minimal exertion), lasting >10 min; (2) of relatively 
recent onset (i.e., within the prior 2 weeks); and/or (3) a crescendo 
pattern, i.e., distinctly more severe, prolonged, or frequent than pre-
vious episodes. The diagnosis of NSTEMI is established if a patient 
with any of these features (without electrocardiographic ST segment 
elevations) develops evidence of myocardial necrosis, as reflected 
in abnormally elevated levels of biomarkers (see below). The chest 
discomfort is typically located in the substernal region and radiates 
to the left arm, left shoulder, and/or superiorly to the neck and jaw. 
Anginal equivalents such as dyspnea, epigastric discomfort, nausea, 
or weakness may occur instead of chest discomfort. They appear to 
be more frequent in women, the elderly, and patients with diabetes 
mellitus. The physical examination resembles that in patients with 
stable angina (Chap. 267) and may be unremarkable. However, if the 
patient has a large area of myocardial ischemia or a large NSTEMI, 
the physical findings can include diaphoresis; pale, cool skin; sinus 
tachycardia; a third and/or fourth heart sound; basilar rales; and, 
sometimes, hypotension.
Electrocardiogram  New ST-segment depression occurs in about 
one-third of patients with NSTE-ACS. It may be transient but may 
persist for several days following NSTEMI. T-wave changes are more 
common but are less specific signs of ischemia, unless they are new and 
deep T-wave inversions (≥0.3 mV).
Cardiac Biomarkers 
Patients with NSTEMI have elevated 
biomarkers of necrosis, such as cardiac troponin (cTn) I or T, which are 
specific, sensitive, and the preferred markers of myocardial necrosis. 
The MB isoform of creatine kinase (CK-MB) is a less sensitive alter-
native. Elevated levels of any of these markers distinguish patients 
with NSTEMI from those with UA. There is a characteristic temporal 
rise and fall peaking 12–24 h post onset of symptoms of the plasma 
concentration of these markers and a direct relationship between the 
degree of elevation and mortality. However, in patients without a clear 
clinical history of myocardial ischemia, minor cTn elevations have been 
reported and can be caused by heart failure, myocarditis, or pulmonary 
embolism, or with high-sensitivity assays (hs cTn) may be observed in 
ostensibly normal subjects. Thus, in patients with an unclear history, 
small elevations of cTn, especially if they are persistent, may not be 
diagnostic of an ACS. In such cases, both cardiac and non-cardiac 
causes of an elevated cTn should be considered (Table 268-1).
■
■DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
In addition to the clinical examination, three major noninvasive tools 
are used in the evaluation of NSTEMI-ACS: the ECG, cardiac biomark-
ers, and stress testing. In equivocal cases, coronary computed tomo-
graphic angiography (CCTA) may be useful to improve the accuracy 
and speed of the diagnostic evaluation. The goals are to: (1) recognize 
or exclude myocardial infarction (MI) using cardiac biomarkers, pref-
erably cTn; (2) detect rest ischemia (using serial or continuous ECGs); 
and (3) detect significant coronary obstruction at rest with CCTA and/
or myocardial ischemia using stress testing (Chap. 236).
Patients with a low likelihood of ischemia are usually managed in 
an emergency department or a dedicated “chest pain unit” follow-
ing a critical pathway. Evaluation of such patients includes clinical 
monitoring for recurrent ischemic discomfort and continuous mon-
itoring of ECGs and cardiac markers, typically obtained at baseline 
and at 4–6 h and 12 h after presentation. If new elevations in cardiac 
markers or ST-T-wave changes on the ECG are noted, the patient 
should be admitted to the hospital. Patients who remain pain-free 
with negative markers may proceed to stress testing to determine the 
presence of ischemia or CCTA to detect coronary luminal obstruction 
(Fig. 268-3).
The hs cTn assays permit a more rapid (3-h and even 1-h) rule-out 
MI determination and have been adopted by the 2015 European Guide-
lines for the management of NSTE-ACS.
■
■RISK STRATIFICATION
Patients with documented NSTE-ACS exhibit a wide spectrum of early 
(30 days) risk of death, ranging from 1 to 10%, and a recurrent ACS rate 
of 5–15% during the first year. Assessment of risk can be accomplished 
by clinical risk scoring systems such as that developed from the Throm-
bolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) Trials, which includes seven 
independent risk factors (age ≥ 65 years, 3 or more of the traditional 
risk factors for coronary heart disease, known history of coronary 
artery disease or coronary stenosis of at least 50%, daily aspirin use 
in the prior week, more than one anginal episode in the past 24 h, 
ST segment deviation of at least 0.5 mm, and an elevated cardiac spe-
cific biomarker above the upper limit of normal). Additional risk factors 
include diabetes mellitus, left ventricular dysfunction, renal dysfunc-
tion, and elevated levels of B-type natriuretic peptides. Multibiomarker 
strategies are now gaining favor, both to define more fully the patho-
physiologic mechanisms underlying a given patient’s presentation and 
to stratify the patient’s risk further. Patients with ACS without elevated 
levels of cTn (infrequently encountered with the new sensitive troponin 
assays) are considered to have UA and have a more favorable prognosis 
than those with cTn elevations (NSTEMI).
Early risk assessment is useful in identifying patients who would 
derive the greatest benefit from an early invasive strategy (see below). 
For example, in the TACTICS-TIMI 18 Trial, an early invasive strategy 
conferred a 40% reduction in recurrent cardiac events in patients with 
an elevated cTn level, whereas no benefit was observed in those with-
out detectable troponin.
TREATMENT
Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute Coronary 
Syndrome (Non-ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial 
Infarction and Unstable Angina)
MEDICAL TREATMENT
Patients should be placed at bed rest with continuous ECG moni-
toring for ST-segment deviation and cardiac arrhythmias, preferably 
on a specialized cardiac unit. Ambulation is permitted if the patient 
shows no recurrence of ischemia (symptoms or ECG changes) and 
does not develop an elevation of a biomarker of necrosis for 12–24 h.
Medical therapy consists of an acute phase focused on the clinical 
symptoms and stabilization of the culprit lesion(s) and a longer-term 
phase that involves therapies directed at the prevention of disease 
progression and future plaque rupture/erosion.
CHAPTER 268 Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute Coronary Syndrome (Non-ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction and Unstable Angina)
1869
TABLE 268-2  Drugs Commonly Used in Intensive Medical Management of Patients with Unstable Angina and Non-ST-Segment Elevation 
Myocardial Infarction
DRUG CATEGORY
CLINICAL CONDITION
WHEN TO AVOIDa
DOSAGE
Nitrates
Patients with ACS who have chest 
discomfort or an anginal equivalent
Hypotension 
Right ventricular infarction
Severe aortic stenosis
Initially administer via sublingual or buccal route, and, 
if symptoms persist, intravenously.
Topical or oral nitrates are acceptable alternatives for 
patients without ongoing or refractory symptoms
Patient receiving a PDE-5 inhibitor
5–10 μg/min by continuous infusion titrated up to 
75–100 μg/min until relief of symptoms or limiting 
side effects (headache or hypotension with a 
systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg or >30% below 
starting mean arterial pressure levels if significant 
hypertension is present)
Beta blockersb
All patients with ACS
PR interval (ECG) >0.24 s
Metoprolol 25–50 mg by mouth every 6 h
If needed, and no heart failure, 5-mg increments by 
slow (over 1–2 min) IV administration
2° or 3° atrioventricular block
Heart rate <50 beats/min
Systolic pressure <90 mmHg
Shock
Left ventricular failure
Severe reactive airway disease
Calcium channel 
blockers
Patients whose symptoms are not 
relieved by adequate doses of nitrates 
and beta blockers, or in patients 
unable to tolerate adequate doses 
of one or both of these agents, or in 
patients with variant angina
Pulmonary edema
Evidence of left ventricular dysfunction 
(for diltiazem or verapamil)
Dependent on specific agent
Morphine sulfate
Patients whose symptoms are not 
relieved after three serial sublingual 
nitroglycerin tablets or whose 
symptoms recur with adequate anti-
ischemic therapy
Hypotension
Respiratory depression
Confusion
Obtundation
2–5 mg IV dose
May be repeated every 5–30 min as needed to relieve 
symptoms and maintain patient comfort
aAllergy or prior intolerance is a contraindication for all categories of drugs listed in this chart. bChoice of the specific agent is not as important as ensuring that 
appropriate candidates receive this therapy.
Source: Modified from J Anderson et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 61:e179, 2013.
ANTI-ISCHEMIC TREATMENT (TABLE 268-2)
To provide relief and prevention of recurrence of ischemic dis-
comfort, initial treatment should include bed rest, nitrates, beta 
adrenergic blockers, and inhaled oxygen in patients with arterial O2 
saturation (<90%) and/or in those with heart failure and rales.
Nitrates  These should first be given sublingually or by buccal 
spray (0.3–0.6 mg) if the patient is experiencing ischemic discomfort. 
If symptoms persists after three doses given 5 min apart, intrave-
nous nitroglycerin (5–10 μg/min using nonabsorbing tubing) is rec-
ommended. The rate of the infusion may be increased by 10 μg/min 
every 3–5 min until symptoms are relieved, systolic arterial pressure 
falls to <90 mmHg, or the dose reaches 200 μg/min. Topical or oral 
nitrates (Chap. 267) can be used when the pain has resolved, or they 
may replace intravenous nitroglycerin when the patient has been 
symptom-free for 12–24 h. The only absolute contraindications to 
the use of nitrates are hypotension or the recent use of a phosphodi-
esterase type 5 (PDE-5) inhibitor, sildenafil or vardenafil (within  
24 h), or tadalafil (within 48 h).
Beta-Adrenergic Blockers and Other Agents  Beta blockers are the 
other mainstay of anti-ischemic treatment. They may be started by 
the intravenous route in patients with severe ischemia, but should 
be avoided in the presence of acute or severe heart failure, low car-
diac output, hypotension, or contraindications to beta-blocker ther-
apy (e.g., high-degree atrioventricular block, active bronchospasm). 
Ordinarily, oral beta blockade targeted to a heart rate of 50–60 beats/
min is recommended. Heart rate–slowing calcium channel block-
ers, e.g., verapamil or diltiazem, are recommended for patients 
who have persistent symptoms or ECG signs of ischemia after 
treatment with full-dose nitrates and beta blockers and in patients 
with contraindications to either class of these agents. Additional 
medical therapy includes angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers. Early administration 
of intensive HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), such as ator-
vastatin 80 mg/d, prior to percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI), and continued thereafter, has been shown to reduce peri- 
procedural MI and recurrences of ACS. In patients who do not 
have an adequate response to maximally tolerated statin (i.e., <50% 
decrease in LDL-C from untreated baseline or LDL-C on treatment 
>70 mg/dL), addition of ezetimibe 10 mg daily to reduce further 
the LDL-C has been shown to reduce future cardiovascular events.
ANTITHROMBOTIC THERAPY (FIG. 268-4 AND TABLE 268-3)
Antithrombotic therapy consisting of antiplatelet and anticoagulant 
drugs represent the second major cornerstone of treatment.
Antiplatelet Drugs (See Chap. 114)  Initial treatment should begin 
with the cyclooxygenase inhibitor aspirin with a dose of at least  
162 mg of a rapidly acting preparation (oral non-enteric coated 
or intravenous). Lower doses (75–100 mg/d) are recommended 
thereafter, since they maintain efficacy while causing less bleeding. 
Contraindications are severe active bleeding or aspirin allergy.
In the absence of a high risk for bleeding, patients with NSTE-
ACS, irrespective of whether an invasive or conservative strategy 
(see below) is selected, also should receive a platelet P2Y12 receptor 
blocker to inhibit platelet activation. There are now four oral and 
one intravenous P2Y12 inhibitors to choose from (although the first in 
class, ticlopidine, is rarely used due to poor tolerability); advantages 
for each of the others are noted below.
 The thienopyridine clopidogrel is an inactive prodrug that is 
converted into an active metabolite that causes irreversible blockade 
of the platelet P2Y12 receptor. The loading dose of clopidogrel is 600 
or 300 mg while the maintenance dose is 75 mg daily. When clopido-
grel is added to aspirin, so-called dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT), 
has been shown to confer a 20% relative reduction in cardiovascular 
death, MI, or stroke, compared to aspirin alone, but to be associated 
with a moderate (absolute 1%) increase in major bleeding.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1870
Initial Treatment
DAPT and Anticoagulant therapy:
1. Aspirin (COR I, LOE A).
2. P2Y 12 inhibitor: clopidogrel or ticagrelor (COR I, LOE B).
3. Anticoagulant:
 
Enoxaparin (COR I, LOE A) or UFH (COR l, LOE B) or fondaparinux (COR I, LOE B)
 
or bivalirudin (for early invasive strategy, COR I, LOE B).
4. Can consider GP Ilb/llla receptor inhibitors in high-risk patients stratified to early invasive
 
strategy (eptifibatide or tirofiban; COR IIb, LOE B).
Medically treated patients:
1. Aspirin (COR I, LOE A).
2. P2Y 12 inhibitor: either ticagrelor or
 
clopidogrel (COR I, LOE B).
3. Anticoagulant:
 
Enoxaparin (COR I, LOE A) or UFH
 
(COR l, LOE B) or fondaparinux (COR I,
 
LOE B).
Medically treated patients:
1. Aspirin indefinitely (COR I, LOE A).
2. P2Y 12 inhibitor: clopidogrel or ticagrelor 
 
for up to 12 months (COR I, LOE B)
PCI treated patients:
1. Aspirin indefinitely (COR I, LOE A).
2. P2Y 12 inhibitor: clopidogrel or ticagrelor or prasugrel
 
for at least 12 months (COR I, LOE B).
PCI treated patients:
1. Aspirin (COR I. LOE A).
2. P2Y 12: inhibitor: clopidogrel or ticagrelor or prasugrel
 
(COR I, LOE B).
3. Anticoagulant:
 
Enoxaparin (COR I, LOE A) or UFH (COR l, LOE B)
 
or fondaparinux* (COR I, LOE B) or bivalirudin (COR I,
 
LOE B).
4. Can consider GP Ilb/llla receptor inhibitors in high-
 
risk patients not adequately per-treated with
 
clopidogrel (COR I, LOE A) or in high-risk patients
 
adequately pre-treated with clopidogrel
 
(COR IIa, LOE B).
During
Hospitalization
Long-term
(*Supplemental UFH or bivalirudin is required during PCI to prevent procedure-related thrombosis in patients treated with fondaparinux.)
FIGURE 268-4  Antiplatelet and anticoagulation treatment summary for NSTE-ACS according to the 2014 American Heart Association/American College of 
Cardiology Practice Guideline. COR, classes of recommendation; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; GP IIb/IIIa, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa; LOE, levels of evidence; NSTE-ACS, 
non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; UFH, unfractionated heparin. (From A Eisen, RP Giugliano: Cardiol Rev 
24;170, 2016.)
TABLE 268-3  Clinical Use of Antithrombotic Therapy
Oral Antiplatelet Therapy
Aspirin
Initial dose of 325 mg nonenteric formulation followed by 
75–100 mg/d of an enteric or a nonenteric formulation
Clopidogrel
Loading dose of 300–600 mg followed by 75 mg/d
Prasugrel
Pre-PCI: Loading dose 60 mg followed by 10 mg/d
Ticagrelor
Loading dose of 180 mg followed by 90 mg twice daily
Intravenous Antiplatelet Therapy
Abciximab
0.25 mg/kg bolus followed by infusion of 0.125 μg/kg per 
min (maximum 10 μg/min) for 12–24 h
Eptifibatide
180 μg/kg bolus followed 10 min later by second bolus 
of 180 μg with infusion of 2.0 μg/kg per min for 72–96 h 
following first bolus
Tirofiban
25 μg/kg per min followed by infusion of 0.15 μg/kg per 
min for 48–96 h
Cangrelor
30 μg/kg bolus followed immediately by a 4 μg/kg per min 
infusion
Anticoagulantsa
Unfractionated 
heparin (UFH)
bBolus 70–100 U/kg (maximum 5000 U) IV followed by 
infusion of 12–15 U/kg per h (initial maximum 1000 U/h) 
titrated to ACT 250–300 s
Enoxaparin
1 mg/kg SC every 12 h; the first dose may be preceded by 
a 30-mg IV bolus; renal adjustment to 1 mg/kg once daily 
if creatine clearance <30 mL/min
Fondaparinux
2.5 mg SC qd
Bivalirudin
Initial IV bolus of 0.75 mg/kg and an infusion of  
1.75 mg/kg per h
aOther low-molecular-weight heparins have been studied other than enoxaparin; 
however there are less data to support their use. bIf no glycoprotein IIb/IIIa 
inhibitor planned.
Abbreviations: ACT, activated clotting time for HemoTec; IV, intravenous; SC, 
subcutaneous.
Source: Modified from J Anderson et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 61:e179, 2013.
Two newer P2Y12 inhibitors (prasugrel, ticagrelor) have been found 
to be superior to clopidogrel in preventing recurrent cardiac ischemic 
events in randomized double-blind studies although both increase 
bleeding. Prasugrel, also a thienopyridine, achieves a more rapid 
onset and higher level of platelet inhibition than clopidogrel. It has 
been approved for ACS patients following angiography when PCI 
is planned. It should be administered at a loading dose of 60 mg  
followed by 10 mg/d. Compared to clopidogrel, prasugrel was 
shown to significantly reduce by 19% the combined risk of cardio-
vascular death, MI, or stroke, and reduced stent thrombosis by 50%. 
Prasugrel is contraindicated in patients with prior stroke or transient 
ischemic attack or at high risk for bleeding. It has not been found to 
be effective in patients treated by a conservative strategy prior to 
coronary angiography (see below).
Ticagrelor is a novel, potent, reversible platelet P2Y12 inhibitor that 
was shown to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death, total mortality 
or MI compared to clopidogrel across a broad spectrum patients with 
ACS. After a loading dose of 180 mg, 90 mg bid is administered as main-
tenance. Unlike prasugrel, ticagrelor demonstrated benefit whether 
patients were managed conservatively or with an early invasive strat-
egy. Some patients may develop dyspnea early after administration 
of ticagrelor, although the symptoms are most often transient and 
infrequently serious, and are not associated with clinical exacerbations 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or congestive heart failure.
DAPT should continue for at least 1 year in patients with NSTE-
ACS, especially those with a drug-eluting stent, to prevent stent 
thrombosis. Up to one-third of patients have an inadequate response 
to clopidogrel, and a substantial proportion of these cases are related 
to a genetic variant of the cytochrome P450 system involving the 2C19 
gene that leads to reduced conversion of clopidogrel into its active 
metabolite. Thus, alternate P2Y12 blockers should be considered in 
patients with NSTE-ACS who develop a coronary event while receiv-
ing clopidogrel and aspirin, who are hyporesponsive to clopidogrel, 
or are at high risk for ischemic complications. Clinicians should select 
CHAPTER 268 Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute Coronary Syndrome (Non-ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction and Unstable Angina)
1871
TABLE 268-4  Factors Associated with Appropriate Selection of Early 
Invasive Strategy or Ischemia-Guided Strategy in Patients with 
NSTE-ACS
Immediate invasive 
(within 2 h)
Refractory angina
Signs or symptoms of heart failure or new or worsening 
mitral regurgitation
Hemodynamic instability
Recurrent angina or ischemia at rest or with low-level 
activities despite intensive medical therapy
Sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation
Early invasive  
(within 24 h)
None of the above, but GRACEa risk score >140
Temporal change in troponin
New or presumably new ST segment depression
Delayed invasive 
(within 25–72 h)
None of the above but diabetes mellitus
Renal insufficiency (eGFR <60 mL/min per 1.73 m2)
Reduced left ventricular systolic function (ejection 
fraction <0.40)
Early postinfarction angina
Percutaneous coronary intervention within 6 months prior
Prior coronary artery bypass graft surgery
GRACEa risk score 109–140 or TIMIb risk score ≥2
Ischemia-guided 
strategy
Low-risk score (e.g., TIMIb [0 or 1], GRACEa [<109])
Low-risk, troponin-negative female patients
Patient or clinician preference in the absence of high-
risk features
aSee CB Granger (Arch Intern Med 163:2345, 2003). bSee EM Antman (JAMA 
284:835, 2000).
Abbreviations: eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; GRACE, Global Registry 
of Acute Coronary Events; TIMI, Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction.
Source: Modified from EA Amsterdam et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 64:e139, 2014.
the antiplatelet regimen that provides the best balance of efficacy 
and safety based on the individual patient characteristics and clinical 
scenario.
More recently, an intravenous, direct and rapidly acting, P2Y12 
inhibitor, cangrelor, was evaluated in three large outcome studies in 
>25,000 patients undergoing PCI across a broad spectrum of clini-
cal presentations (stable angina, UA, NSTEMI, STEMI). Among the 
14,282 patients who underwent PCI following a NSTE-ACS, cangrelor 
reduced the risk of the primary composite outcome of death, MI, 
ischemia-driven revascularization, and stent thrombosis at 48 h by 18% 
relative to control. There was an excess of 3 per 1000 major bleeding 
events with cangrelor. This drug is approved as an adjunct to PCI for 
reducing the risk of periprocedural MI, repeat coronary revasculariza-
tion, and stent thrombosis in patients who have not been treated with 
a P2Y12 platelet inhibitor and are not being given a GP IIb/III inhibitor.
In the 1990s and early 2000s several trials had shown the benefit of 
intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in patients with NSTE-
ACS, with the majority of studies performed without concomitant 
P2Y12 inhibition. The benefits, however, were modest (i.e., an ~1% 
absolute reduction in death or MI at 30 day) and counterbalanced 
by a 1% absolute increase in the rate of major bleeding. Two recent 
studies failed to show a benefit of routine early initiation of a drug 
in this class compared with their use only in patients who undergo 
PCI. The addition of these agents to aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibitor 
(i.e., triple antiplatelet therapy) should be reserved for unstable 
patients undergoing PCI. These include patients with recurrent rest 
pain, elevated cTn, and ECG changes, as well as those who have a 
coronary thrombus evident on angiography.
Anticoagulants (See Chap. 114)  Four options are available for 
anticoagulant therapy to be added to antiplatelet agents: (1) unfrac-
tionated heparin (UFH), long the mainstay of therapy; (2) the 
low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), enoxaparin, which has 
been shown to be superior to UFH in reducing recurrent cardiac 
events, especially in patients managed by a conservative strategy. 
However, it is accompanied by a slight increase in bleeding com-
pared to UFH; (3) bivalirudin, a direct thrombin inhibitor that is 
similar in efficacy to either UFH or LMWH but causes less bleeding 
and is used just prior to and/or during PCI; and (4) the indirect 
factor Xa inhibitor, fondaparinux, which is equivalent in efficacy 
to enoxaparin but has a lower risk of major bleeding. While UFH 
and enoxaparin have been widely studied in patients managed 
either with an early conservative or invasive strategy, the role of 
bivalirudin in conservatively managed patients is less clear, while 
fondaparinux requires supplemental UFH or bivalirudin during 
PCI to prevent procedure-related thrombosis.
Excessive bleeding is the most important adverse effect of all 
antithrombotic agents, including both antiplatelet agents and antico-
agulants. Therefore, attention must be directed to the doses of antith-
rombotic agents, accounting for body weight, creatinine clearance, 
and a previous history of excessive bleeding, as a means of reducing 
the risk of bleeding. Patients who have experienced a stroke are at 
higher risk of intracranial bleeding with potent antiplatelet agents 
and combinations of antithrombotic drugs.
INVASIVE VERSUS CONSERVATIVE STRATEGY
In an invasive strategy, following initiation of anti-ischemic and 
antithrombotic agents, coronary arteriography is carried out within 
~48 h of presentation, followed by coronary revascularization (PCI 
or coronary artery bypass grafting), depending on the coronary 
anatomy. Multiple clinical trials have demonstrated the benefit of 
this strategy in high-risk patients (i.e., patients with multiple clinical 
risk factors, ST-segment deviation, and/or positive biomarkers) 
(Table 268-4). In patients at low risk, the outcomes from an invasive 
strategy are similar to those obtained from a conservative strategy. 
The latter consists of anti-ischemic and antithrombotic therapy 
followed by a “selective invasive approach,” in which the patient 
is closely observed and coronary arteriography is carried out if rest 
pain or ST-segment changes recur, a biomarker of necrosis becomes 
positive, or there is evidence of severe ischemia on a stress test.
■
■LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT
The time of hospital discharge is a “teachable moment” for the patient 
with NSTE-ACS, when the physician can review and optimize the 
medical regimen. Risk-factor modification is key, and the caregiver 
should discuss with the patient the importance of smoking cessation, 
achieving optimal weight, daily exercise, blood-pressure control, 
following an appropriate diet, control of hyperglycemia (in diabetic 
patients), and lipid management as recommended for patients with 
chronic stable angina (Chap. 267).
There is evidence of benefit with long-term therapy with five classes 
of drugs that are directed at different components of the atherothrom-
botic process. Beta blockers, lipid lowering therapy (statins at high 
dose, e.g., atorvastatin 80 mg/d, with ezetimibe if needed to achieve an 
LDL-C below 70 mg/dL), and ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor 
blockers are recommended. The recommended antiplatelet regimen 
consists of the combination of low-dose (75–100 mg/d) aspirin and a 
P2Y12 inhibitor (clopidogrel, prasugrel, or ticagrelor) for 1 year, with 
aspirin continued thereafter. In selected patients at high ischemic risk 
(e.g., those with prior MI, diabetes mellitus, vein graft stent, congestive 
heart failure) who are also at low risk of bleeding, continuation of 
DAPT out to 3 years has been shown to be beneficial. These measures, 
taken together, reduce the incidence of recurrent ACS.
Registries have shown that women and racial minorities, as well 
as patients with NSTE-ACS at high risk, including the elderly and 
patients with diabetes or chronic kidney disease, are less likely to 
receive evidence-based pharmacologic and interventional therapies 
with resultant poorer clinical outcomes and quality of life. Special 
attention should be directed to these groups.
■
■PRINZMETAL’S VARIANT ANGINA
In 1959, Prinzmetal et al. described a syndrome of severe ischemic pain 
that usually occurs at rest and is associated with transient ST-segment ele-
vation. Prinzmetal’s variant angina (PVA) is caused by focal spasm of an 
epicardial coronary artery with resultant transmural ischemia and abnor-
malities in left ventricular function that may lead to acute MI, ventricular 
tachycardia or fibrillation, and sudden cardiac death. The cause of the 
spasm is not well defined, but it may be related to hypercontractility of 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1872
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is a most common diagnosis in 
hospitalized patients in industrialized countries. In the United States, 
~660,000 patients experience a new AMI, and 305,000 experience a 
recurrent AMI each year. About half of AMI-related deaths occur before 
the stricken individual reaches the hospital. Of note, the in-hospital 
ST-Segment Elevation 
Myocardial Infarction
Elliott M. Antman, Joseph Loscalzo 
269
vascular smooth muscle due to adrenergic vasoconstrictors, leukotrienes, 
or serotonin. For reasons that are not clear, the prevalence of PVA has 
decreased substantially during the past few decades, although it remains 
more frequent in Japan than in North America or Western Europe.
Clinical and Angiographic Manifestations  Patients with 
PVA are generally younger and, with the exception of cigarette smok-
ing, have fewer coronary risk factors than do patients with NSTE-ACS. 
Cardiac examination is usually unremarkable in the absence of ische-
mia. However, a minority of patients have a generalized vasospastic 
disorder associated with migraine and/or Raynaud’s phenomenon. 
The clinical diagnosis of PVA is made by the detection of transient 
ST-segment elevation with rest pain, although many patients may also 
exhibit episodes of silent ischemia.
Coronary angiography demonstrates transient coronary spasm as 
the diagnostic hallmark of PVA. Atherosclerotic plaques in at least 
one proximal coronary artery occur in about half of patients. Hyper-
ventilation or intracoronary acetylcholine has been used to provoke 
focal coronary stenosis on angiography or to provoke rest angina with 
ST-segment elevation to establish the diagnosis.
TREATMENT
Prinzmetal’s Variant Angina
Nitrates and calcium channel blockers are the main therapeutic 
agents. Aspirin may actually increase the severity of ischemic epi-
sodes, possibly as a result of the sensitivity of coronary tone to mod-
est changes in the synthesis of prostacyclin. Statin therapy has been 
shown to reduce the risk of major adverse events, although the pre-
cise mechanism is not established. The response to beta blockers is 
variable. Coronary revascularization may be helpful in patients who 
also have discrete, flow-limiting, proximal fixed obstructive lesions. 
Patients who have had ischemia-associated ventricular fibrillation 
despite maximal medical therapy should receive an implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator.
Prognosis  Many patients with PVA pass through an acute, active 
phase, with frequent episodes of angina and cardiac events during 
the first 6 months after presentation. Survival at 5 years is excellent 
(~90–95%), but as many as 20% of patients experience an MI. Patients 
with no or mild fixed coronary obstruction experience a low rate of car-
diac death or MI compared to patients with associated severe obstruc-
tive lesions, although about half of the patients without obstructive 
CAD still experience frequent angina at rest. Patients with PVA who 
develop serious arrhythmias during spontaneous episodes of pain are at 
a higher risk for sudden cardiac death. In most patients who survive an 
infarction or the initial 3- to 6-month period of frequent episodes, there 
is a tendency for symptoms and cardiac events to diminish over time.
■
■GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
Ischemic heart disease (IHD), and its most dangerous manifes-
tation, ACS, remains the most frequent cause of death and 
disability worldwide. In the mid-twentieth century these con-
ditions were most common in high income countries. The elucidation 
of risk factors leading to IHD and the development of therapies to 
reduce the deleterious consequences of ACS were responsible for dra-
matic reductions in these events, and in cardiovascular and all cause 
mortality. Although these achievements were most prominent in North 
America, Western Europe, and Japan, they have not affected all popu-
lation groups equally. In Europe, there remains a northeast to south-
west gradient, with higher prevalence in northern Russia and the Baltic 
nations, and considerably lower prevalence in France, Italy, and Spain.
Simultaneous with these important advances in the high income 
countries, the low and middle income countries have moved in the oppo-
site direction. The improvements in agriculture, nutrition, sanitation, 
prevention and treatment of infections, management of maternal-early 
childhood disorders, as well as urbanization, and a reduction of physi-
cal labor have, in combination, led to marked increases in coronary risk 
factors—hypertension, cigarette smoking, obesity, diabetes mellitus, 
and elevations of circulating low density lipoprotein cholesterol. These, 
in turn, have been responsible for marked increases in ACS events and 
in premature mortality. The region in which these changes have been 
most prominent are central Asia, India, and Pakistan, as well as in the 
more developed regions of sub-Saharan Africa.
However, while there are many similarities, there are major differences 
between the rise of IHD which occurred in the high income countries 
in mid-twentieth century, and that which is now taking place in low 
and middle income countries. When the former occurred, the coronary 
risk factors had not yet been clearly defined and treatments of ACS 
were primitive by current standards. It was the successful application 
of prevention of IHD and therapy of ACS in high income countries 
that was responsible for the above-mentioned striking improvements 
in life expectancy. The current challenge is to apply what was learned 
in high-income countries to the vast populations in the low and middle 
income countries that are now at high risk. This will require large edu-
cational efforts directed at both the populations and their caregivers. An 
additional challenge will be to provide the trained specialized personnel, 
facilities, drugs, and devices to deal with these threats. The successful 
implementation of measures to reduce threats in the developing world 
is now principally a socio-politico-economic issue. One mitigating factor 
is that many of the important drugs to prevent and treat these disorders, 
such as statins, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, diuretics, beta 
blockers, and calcium antagonists are off patent and are now inexpensive.
■
■FURTHER READING
Amsterdam EA et al: 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of 
Patients with Non-ST-Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes: A report 
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 64:e139, 2014.
Bohula EA et al: Atherothrombotic risk stratification and ezetimibe for 
secondary prevention. J Am Coll Cardiol 69:911, 2017.
Cannon CP et al: Ezetimibe added to statin therapy after acute coro-
nary syndromes. N Engl J Med 372:2387, 2015.
de Luna AB et al: Prinzmetal angina: ECG changes and clinical consider-
ations: A consensus paper. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol 19:442, 2014.
Eisen A et al: Updates on acute coronary syndrome: A review. JAMA 
Cardiol 1:718, 2016.
Fuster V, Kovacic JC (eds): Acute Coronary Syndrome Compendium. 
Circ Res 114:1847, 2014.
Kolte D et al: Trends in Coronary Angiography, Revascularization, 
and Outcomes of Cardiogenic Shock Complicating Non-ST-Elevation 
Myocardial Infarction. Am J Cardiol 117:1, 2016.
Lloyd-Jones DM et al: 2016 ACC Expert Consensus Decision Pathway 
on the Role of Non-Statin Therapies for LDL-Cholesterol Lowering 
in the Management of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 68:92, 2016.
Roffi M et al: 2015 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coro-
nary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment 
elevation: Task Force for the Management of Acute Coronary Syn-
dromes in Patients Presenting without Persistent ST-Segment Eleva-
tion of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J 37:267, 2016.
Steg PG et al: Effect of cangrelor on periprocedural outcomes in per-
cutaneous coronary interventions: A pooled analysis of patient-level 
data. Lancet 382:1981, 2013.
CHAPTER 269 ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
1873
Acute coronary syndrome
Presentation
Working Dx
ECG
Biochem.
marker
Final Dx
Myocardial infarction
Unstable angina
NQMI
Qw MI
No ST elevation
NSTEMI
ST elevation
Ischemic Discomfort
FIGURE 269-1  Acute coronary syndromes. Following disruption of a vulnerable 
plaque, patients experience ischemic discomfort resulting from a reduction of 
flow through the affected epicardial coronary artery. The flow reduction may 
be caused by a completely occlusive thrombus (right) or subtotally occlusive 
thrombus (left). Patients with ischemic discomfort may present with or without 
ST-segment elevation. Of patients with ST-segment elevation, the majority (wide 
red arrow) ultimately develop a Q wave on the ECG (Qw MI), while a minority 
(thin red arrow) do not develop Q wave and, in older literature, were said to have 
sustained a non-Q-wave MI (NQMI). Patients who present without ST-segment 
elevation are suffering from either unstable angina or a non-ST-segment elevation 
MI (NSTEMI) (wide green arrows), a distinction that is ultimately made based 
on the presence or absence of a serum cardiac biomarker such as CK-MB or a 
cardiac troponin detected in the blood. The majority of patients presenting with 
NSTEMI do not develop a Q wave on the ECG; a minority develop a Qw MI (thin 
green arrow). Dx, diagnosis; ECG, electrocardiogram; MI, myocardial infarction. 
(Adapted from CW Hamm et al: Lancet 358:1533, 2001, and MJ Davies: Heart 
83:361, 2000; with permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.)
are those with a rich lipid core and a thin fibrous cap (Chap. 291e from 
the 19th edition of Harrison’s). After an initial platelet monolayer forms 
at the site of the disrupted plaque, various agonists (collagen, ADP, 
epinephrine, serotonin) promote platelet activation. After agonist stim-
ulation of platelets, thromboxane A2 (a potent local vasoconstrictor) is 
released, further platelet activation occurs, and potential resistance to 
fibrinolysis develops.
In addition to the generation of thromboxane A2, activation of plate-
lets by agonists promotes a conformational change in the glycoprotein 
IIb/IIIa receptor (Chap. 111). Once converted to its functional state, 
this receptor develops a high affinity for soluble adhesive proteins (i.e., 
integrins) such as fibrinogen. Since fibrinogen is a multivalent mole-
cule, it can bind to two different platelets simultaneously, resulting in 
platelet cross-linking and aggregation.
The coagulation cascade is activated on exposure of tissue factor in 
damaged endothelial cells at the site of the disrupted plaque. Factors VII 
and X are activated, ultimately leading to the conversion of prothrombin 
to thrombin, which then converts fibrinogen to fibrin (Chap. 112). 
Fluid-phase and clot-bound thrombin participate in an autoamplifica-
tion reaction leading to further activation of the coagulation cascade. 
The culprit coronary artery eventually becomes occluded by a throm-
bus containing platelet aggregates and fibrin strands (Fig. 269-2).
In rare cases, STEMI may be due to coronary artery occlusion caused 
by coronary emboli, congenital abnormalities, coronary spasm, and a 
mortality rate after admission for AMI has declined from 10 to about 
5% over the past decade. The 1-year mortality rate after AMI is about 
15%. Mortality is approximately fourfold higher in elderly patients 
(aged >75) as compared with younger patients.
When patients with prolonged ischemic discomfort at rest are first 
seen, the working clinical diagnosis is that they are suffering from an 
acute coronary syndrome (Fig. 269-1). The 12-lead electrocardiogram 
(ECG) is a pivotal diagnostic and triage tool because it is at the center 
of the decision pathway for management; it permits distinction of those 
patients presenting with ST-segment elevation from those presenting 
without ST-segment elevation. Serum cardiac biomarkers are obtained 
to distinguish unstable angina (UA) from non-ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) and to assess the magnitude of an 
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). Epidemiologic 
studies indicate there is a shift in the pattern of AMI over the last 
15 years with more patients with NSTEMI than STEMI. This chapter 
focuses on the evaluation and management of patients with STEMI, 
while Chap. 268 discusses UA/NSTEMI.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY: ROLE OF ACUTE 
PLAQUE RUPTURE
STEMI usually occurs when coronary blood flow decreases abruptly 
after a thrombotic occlusion of a coronary artery previously affected 
by atherosclerosis. Slowly developing, high-grade coronary artery ste-
noses do not typically precipitate STEMI because of the development 
of a rich collateral network over time. Instead, STEMI occurs when a 
coronary artery thrombus develops rapidly at a site of vascular injury. 
This injury is produced or facilitated by factors such as cigarette smok-
ing, hypertension, and lipid accumulation. In most cases, STEMI occurs 
when the surface of an atherosclerotic plaque becomes disrupted 
(exposing its contents to the blood) and conditions (local or systemic) 
favor thrombogenesis. A mural thrombus forms at the site of plaque 
disruption, and the involved coronary artery becomes occluded. His-
tologic studies indicate that the coronary plaques prone to disruption 
Cardiomyocyte
swelling
Interstitial
edema
Thrombus
debris
Endothelial
dysfunction
Leukocyte and platelet
activation/interaction
Vulnerable plaque
• inflammation
• extension
• severity
• location
plaque
ion
Thrombogenic blood
• inflammation
• comorbidities
• environmental factors
• genetic background
Vulnerable myocardium
• inflammation
• ischemia duration/extent
• individual susceptibility
FIGURE 269-2  Critical determinants of myocardial infarction injury. The 
overlapping of vulnerable plaque and thrombogenic blood are critical determinants 
for myocardial infarction occurrence and extension. In addition, myocardial 
vulnerability, which is largely due to coronary microvascular dysfunction, 
contributes to extension and severity of ischemic injury. In the most severe 
form (known as no-reflow), structural and functional impairment sustain vascular 
obstruction. Endothelial dysfunction triggers leukocyte and platelet activation/
interaction, whereas thrombotic debris may worsen the obstruction. Furthermore, 
cardiomyocyte swelling, interstitial edema, and tissue inflammation promote 
extravascular compression. (Reproduced from F Montecucco et al: Eur Heart J 
37:1268, 2016. Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All 
rights reserved. © The Author 2015.)
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1874
within the first hour of STEMI, about one-fourth of patients with 
anterior infarction have manifestations of sympathetic nervous system 
hyperactivity (tachycardia and/or hypertension), and up to one-half 
with inferior infarction show evidence of parasympathetic hyperactiv-
ity (bradycardia and/or hypotension).
The precordium is usually quiet, and the apical impulse may 
be difficult to palpate. In patients with anterior wall infarction, an 
abnormal systolic pulsation caused by dyskinetic bulging of infarcted 
myocardium may develop in the periapical area within the first days 
of the illness and then may resolve. Other physical signs of ventricular 
dysfunction include fourth and third heart sounds, decreased intensity 
of the first heart sound, and paradoxical splitting of the second heart 
sound (Chap. 234). A transient midsystolic or late systolic apical sys-
tolic murmur due to dysfunction of the mitral valve apparatus may 
be present. A pericardial friction rub may be heard in patients with 
transmural STEMI at some time in the course of the illness, if they are 
examined frequently. The carotid pulse is often decreased in volume, 
reflecting reduced stroke volume. Temperature elevations up to 38°C 
may be observed during the first week after STEMI. The arterial pres-
sure is variable; in most patients with transmural infarction, systolic 
pressure declines by ~10–15 mmHg from the preinfarction state.
LABORATORY FINDINGS
STEMI progresses through the following temporal stages: (1) acute 
(first few hours–7 days), (2) healing (7–28 days), and (3) healed 
(≥29 days). When evaluating the results of diagnostic tests for STEMI, 
the temporal phase of the infarction must be considered. The labora-
tory tests of value in confirming the diagnosis may be divided into four 
groups: (1) ECG, (2) serum cardiac biomarkers, (3) cardiac imaging, 
and (4) nonspecific indices of tissue necrosis and inflammation.
■
■ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
The electrocardiographic manifestations of STEMI are described in 
Chap. 235. During the initial stage, total occlusion of an epicardial 
coronary artery produces ST-segment elevation. Most patients initially 
presenting with ST-segment elevation ultimately evolve Q waves on 
the ECG. However, Q waves in the leads overlying the infarct zone may 
vary in magnitude and even appear only transiently, depending on 
the reperfusion status of the ischemic myocardium and restoration of 
transmembrane potentials over time. A small proportion of patients ini-
tially presenting with ST-segment elevation will not develop Q waves 
when the obstructing thrombus is not totally occlusive, obstruction 
is transient, or if a rich collateral network is present. Among patients 
presenting with ischemic discomfort but without ST-segment eleva-
tion, if a serum cardiac biomarker of necrosis (see below) is detected, 
the diagnosis of NSTEMI is ultimately made (Fig. 269-1). A minority 
of patients who present initially without ST-segment elevation may 
develop a Q-wave MI. Previously, it was believed that transmural 
myocardial infarction (MI) is present if the ECG demonstrates Q waves 
or loss of R waves, and nontransmural MI may be present if the ECG 
shows only transient ST-segment and T-wave changes. However, 
electrocardiographic-pathologic correlations are far from perfect and 
terms such as Q-wave MI, non-Q-wave MI, transmural MI, and 
nontransmural MI have been replaced by STEMI and NSTEMI 
(Fig. 269-1). Contemporary studies using magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) suggest that the development of a Q wave on the ECG is more 
dependent on the volume of infarcted tissue rather than the transmu-
rality of infarction.
■
■SERUM CARDIAC BIOMARKERS
Certain proteins, referred to as serum cardiac biomarkers, are released 
from necrotic heart muscle after STEMI. The rate of liberation of spe-
cific proteins differs depending on their intracellular location, their 
molecular weight, and the local blood and lymphatic flow. Cardiac 
biomarkers become detectable in the peripheral blood once the capac-
ity of the cardiac lymphatics to clear the interstitium of the infarct zone 
is exceeded and spillover into the venous circulation occurs. The tem-
poral pattern of protein release is of diagnostic importance. The criteria 
for AMI require a rise and/or fall in cardiac biomarker values with at 
wide variety of systemic—particularly inflammatory—diseases. The 
amount of myocardial damage caused by coronary occlusion depends 
on (1) the territory supplied by the affected vessel, (2) whether or 
not the vessel becomes totally occluded, (3) the duration of coronary 
occlusion, (4) the quantity of blood supplied by collateral vessels to the 
affected tissue, (5) the demand for oxygen of the myocardium whose 
blood supply has been suddenly limited, (6) endogenous factors that 
can produce early spontaneous lysis of the occlusive thrombus, and (7) 
the adequacy of myocardial perfusion in the infarct zone when flow is 
restored in the occluded epicardial coronary artery.
Patients at increased risk for developing STEMI include those with 
multiple coronary risk factors and those with UA (Chap. 268). Less 
common underlying medical conditions predisposing patients to 
STEMI include hypercoagulability, collagen vascular disease, cocaine 
abuse, and intracardiac thrombi or masses that can produce coronary 
emboli.
There have been major advances in the management of STEMI with 
recognition that the “chain of survival” involves a highly integrated 
system starting with prehospital care and extending to early hospital 
management so as to provide expeditious implementation of a reper-
fusion strategy.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
In up to one-half of cases, a precipitating factor appears to be present 
before STEMI, such as vigorous physical exercise, emotional stress, or 
a medical or surgical illness. Although STEMI may commence at any 
time of the day or night, circadian variations have been reported such 
that clusters are seen in the morning within a few hours of awakening.
Pain is the most common presenting complaint in patients with 
STEMI. The pain is deep and visceral; adjectives commonly used to 
describe it are heavy, squeezing, and crushing; although, occasionally, it 
is described as stabbing or burning (Chap. 11). It is similar in character 
to the discomfort of angina pectoris (Chap. 267) but commonly occurs 
at rest, is usually more severe, and lasts longer. Typically, the pain 
involves the central portion of the chest and/or the epigastrium, and, 
on occasion, it radiates to the arms. Less common sites of radiation 
include the abdomen, back, lower jaw, and neck. The frequent location 
of the pain beneath the xiphoid and epigastrium and the patients’ 
denial that they may be suffering a heart attack are chiefly responsible 
for the common mistaken impression of indigestion. The pain of STEMI 
may radiate as high as the occipital area but not below the umbilicus. 
It is often accompanied by weakness, sweating, nausea, vomiting, anx-
iety, and a sense of impending doom. The pain may commence when 
the patient is at rest, but when it begins during a period of exertion, it 
does not usually subside with cessation of activity, in contrast to angina 
pectoris.
The pain of STEMI can simulate pain from acute pericarditis 
(Chap. 265), pulmonary embolism (Chap. 273), acute aortic dissection 
(Chap. 274), costochondritis, and gastrointestinal disorders. These 
conditions should therefore be considered in the differential diagnosis. 
Radiation of discomfort to the trapezius is not seen in patients with 
STEMI and may be a useful distinguishing feature that suggests peri-
carditis is the correct diagnosis. However, pain is not uniformly present 
in patients with STEMI. The proportion of painless STEMIs is greater in 
patients with diabetes mellitus, and it increases with age. In the elderly, 
STEMI may present as sudden-onset breathlessness, which may prog-
ress to pulmonary edema. Other less common presentations, with or 
without pain, include sudden loss of consciousness, a confusional state, 
a sensation of profound weakness, the appearance of an arrhythmia, 
evidence of peripheral embolism, or merely an unexplained drop in 
arterial pressure.
■
■PHYSICAL FINDINGS
Most patients are anxious and restless, attempting unsuccessfully to 
relieve the pain by moving about in bed, altering their position, and 
stretching. Pallor associated with perspiration and coolness of the 
extremities occurs commonly. The combination of substernal chest 
pain persisting for >30 min and diaphoresis strongly suggests STEMI. 
Although many patients have a normal pulse rate and blood pressure 
CHAPTER 269 ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
1875
least one value above the 99th percentile of the upper reference limit 
for normal individuals.
Cardiac-specific troponin T (cTnT) and cardiac-specific troponin I (cTnI) 
have amino-acid sequences different from those of the skeletal muscle 
forms of these proteins. These differences permitted the development 
of quantitative assays for cTnT and cTnI with highly specific mono-
clonal antibodies. cTnT and cTnI may increase after STEMI to levels 
many times higher than the upper reference limit (the highest value 
seen in 99% of a reference population not suffering from MI), the mea-
surement of cTnT or cTnI is of considerable diagnostic usefulness, and 
they are now the preferred biochemical markers for MI (Fig. 269-3). 
With improvements in the assays for the cardiac-specific troponins, it 
is now possible to detect concentrations <1 ng/L in patients without 
ischemic-type chest discomfort. The cardiac troponins are particularly 
valuable when there is clinical suspicion of either skeletal muscle 
injury or a small MI that may be below the detection limit for creatine 
phosphokinase (CK) and its MB isoenzyme (CK-MB) measurements, 
and they are, therefore, of particular value in distinguishing UA from 
NSTEMI. In practical terms, the high-sensitivity troponin assays are of 
less immediate value in patients with STEMI. Contemporary urgent 
reperfusion strategies necessitate making a decision (based largely on 
a combination of clinical and ECG findings) before the results of blood 
tests have returned from the laboratory. Levels of cTnI and cTnT may 
remain elevated for 7–10 days after STEMI.
CK rises within 4–8 h and generally returns to normal by 48–72 h 
(Fig. 269-3). An important drawback of total CK measurement is its 
lack of specificity for STEMI, as CK may be elevated with skeletal 
muscle disease or trauma, including intramuscular injection. The MB 
isoenzyme of CK has the advantage over total CK that it is not present 
in significant concentrations in extracardiac tissue and, therefore, is 
considerably more specific. However, cardiac surgery, myocarditis, and 
electrical cardioversion often result in elevated serum levels of the MB 
isoenzyme. A ratio (relative index) of CK-MB mass to CK activity ≥2.5 
suggests but is not diagnostic of a myocardial rather than a skeletal 
muscle source for the CK-MB elevation.
Many hospitals are using cTnT or cTnI rather than CK-MB as the 
routine serum cardiac marker for diagnosis of STEMI, although any 
of these analytes remains clinically acceptable. It is not cost-effective to 
measure both a cardiac-specific troponin and CK-MB at all time points 
in every patient.
While it has long been recognized that the total quantity of protein 
released correlates with the size of the infarct, the peak protein con-
centration correlates only weakly with infarct size. Recanalization of 
a coronary artery occlusion (either spontaneously or by mechanical 
or pharmacologic means) in the early hours of STEMI causes earlier 
peaking of biomarker measurements (Fig. 269-3) because of a rapid 
washout from the interstitium of the infarct zone, quickly overwhelm-
ing lymphatic clearance of the proteins.
The nonspecific reaction to myocardial injury is associated with poly-
morphonuclear leukocytosis, which appears within a few hours after 
the onset of pain and persists for 3–7 days; the white blood cell count 
often reaches levels of 12,000–15,000/μL. The erythrocyte sedimenta-
tion rate rises more slowly than the white blood cell count, peaking dur-
ing the first week and sometimes remaining elevated for 1 or 2 weeks.
■
■CARDIAC IMAGING
Abnormalities of wall motion on two-dimensional echocardiography 
(Chap. 236) are almost universally present. Although acute STEMI 
cannot be distinguished from an old myocardial scar or from acute 
severe ischemia by echocardiography, the ease and safety of the pro-
cedure make its use appealing as a screening tool in the Emergency 
Department setting. When the ECG is not diagnostic of STEMI, early 
detection of the presence or absence of wall motion abnormalities by 
echocardiography can aid in management decisions, such as whether 
the patient should receive reperfusion therapy (e.g., fibrinolysis or a 
percutaneous coronary intervention [PCI]). Echocardiographic estima-
tion of left ventricular (LV) function is useful prognostically; detection 
of reduced function serves as an indication for therapy with an inhib-
itor of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Echocardiography 
Zone of necrosing
myocardium
Troponin free
in cytoplasm
Cardiomyocyte
Myosin
Actin
Troponin complex
bound to actin filament
Lymphatic system
Venous system
0
0
1
2
5
10
20
50
1
2
3
Myoglobin and
CK isoforms
Troponin
(large MI)
Troponin
(small MI)
10% CV/99th percentile
CKMB
Days after onset of AMI
Multiples of the AMI cutoff limit
4
5
6
7
8
9
FIGURE 269-3  The zone of necrosing myocardium is shown at the top of the 
figure, followed in the middle portion of the figure by a diagram of a cardiomyocyte 
that is in the process of releasing biomarkers. The biomarkers that are released 
into the interstitium are first cleared by lymphatics followed subsequently by 
spillover into the venous system. After disruption of the sarcolemmal membrane of 
the cardiomyocyte, the cytoplasmic pool of biomarkers is released first (left-most 
arrow in bottom portion of figure). Markers such as myoglobin and CK isoforms 
are rapidly released, and blood levels rise quickly above the cutoff limit; this is 
then followed by a more protracted release of biomarkers from the disintegrating 
myofilaments that may continue for several days. Cardiac troponin levels rise 
to about 20–50 times the upper reference limit (the 99th percentile of values 
in a reference control group) in patients who have a “classic” acute myocardial 
infarction (MI) and sustain sufficient myocardial necrosis to result in abnormally 
elevated levels of the MB fraction of creatine kinase (CK-MB). Clinicians can 
now diagnose episodes of microinfarction by sensitive assays that detect cardiac 
troponin elevations above the upper reference limit, even though CK-MB levels 
may still be in the normal reference range (not shown). CV, coefficient of variation. 
(Modified from EM Antman: Decision making with cardiac troponin tests. N Engl 
J Med 346:2079, 2002 and AS Jaffe, L Babiun, FS Apple: Biomarkers in acute 
cardiac disease: The present and the future. J Am Coll Cardiol 48:1, 2006.)
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1876 may also identify the presence of right ventricular (RV) infarction, ven-
tricular aneurysm, pericardial effusion, and LV thrombus. In addition, 
Doppler echocardiography is useful in the detection and quantitation 
of a ventricular septal defect and mitral regurgitation, two serious 
complications of STEMI.
Several radionuclide imaging techniques (Chap. 236) are available for 
evaluating patients with suspected STEMI. However, these imaging 
modalities are used less often than echocardiography because they are 
more cumbersome and lack sensitivity and specificity in many clinical 
circumstances. Myocardial perfusion imaging with [201Tl] or [99mTc]- 
sestamibi, which are distributed in proportion to myocardial blood 
flow and concentrated by viable myocardium (Chap. 267), reveals a 
defect (“cold spot”) in most patients during the first few hours after 
development of a transmural infarct. Although perfusion scanning is 
extremely sensitive, it cannot distinguish acute infarcts from chronic 
scars and, thus, is not specific for the diagnosis of acute MI. Radionu-
clide ventriculography, carried out with [99mTc]-labeled red blood cells, 
frequently demonstrates wall motion disorders and reduction in the 
ventricular ejection fraction in patients with STEMI. While of value 
in assessing the hemodynamic consequences of infarction and in aid-
ing in the diagnosis of RV infarction when the RV ejection fraction is 
depressed, this technique is nonspecific, as many cardiac abnormalities 
other than MI alter the radionuclide ventriculogram.
MI can be detected accurately with high-resolution cardiac MRI 
(Chap. 236) using a technique referred to as late enhancement. A 
standard imaging agent (gadolinium) is administered and images are 
obtained after a 10-min delay. Since little gadolinium enters normal 
myocardium, where there are tightly packed myocytes, but does per-
colate into the expanded intercellular region of the infarct zone, there 
is a bright signal in areas of infarction that appears in stark contrast to 
the dark areas of normal myocardium.
An Expert Consensus Task Force for the Universal Definition of Myo-
cardial Infarction has provided a comprehensive set of criteria for the 
definition of MI that integrates the clinical and laboratory findings dis-
cussed earlier (Table 269-1) as well as a classification of MI into five types 
that reflect the clinical circumstances in which it may occur (Table 269-2).
INITIAL MANAGEMENT
■
■PREHOSPITAL CARE
The prognosis in STEMI is largely related to the occurrence of two general 
classes of complications: (1) electrical complications (arrhythmias) and 
(2) mechanical complications (“pump failure”). Most out-of-hospital 
deaths from STEMI are due to the sudden development of ventricular 
fibrillation. The vast majority of deaths due to ventricular fibrillation 
occur within the first 24 h of the onset of symptoms, and of these, over 
half occur in the first hour. Therefore, the major elements of prehos-
pital care of patients with suspected STEMI include (1) recognition of 
symptoms by the patient and prompt seeking of medical attention; (2) 
rapid deployment of an emergency medical team capable of perform-
ing resuscitative maneuvers, including defibrillation; (3) expeditious 
transportation of the patient to a hospital facility that is continuously 
staffed by physicians and nurses skilled in managing arrhythmias and 
providing advanced cardiac life support; and (4) expeditious imple-
mentation of reperfusion therapy. The greatest delay usually occurs not 
during transportation to the hospital but, rather, between the onset of 
pain and the patient’s decision to call for help. This delay can best be 
reduced by health care professionals educating the public concerning 
the significance of chest discomfort and the importance of seeking early 
medical attention. Regular office visits with patients having a history of, 
or who are at risk for ischemic heart disease are important “teachable 
moments” for clinicians to review the symptoms of STEMI and the 
appropriate action plan.
Increasingly, monitoring and treatment are carried out by trained 
personnel in the ambulance, further shortening the time between the 
onset of the infarction and appropriate treatment. General guidelines 
for initiation of fibrinolysis in the prehospital setting include the ability 
to transmit 12-lead ECGs to confirm the diagnosis, the presence of para-
medics in the ambulance, training of paramedics in the interpretation 
TABLE 269-1  Definition of Myocardial Infarction
Criteria for Acute Myocardial Infarction
The term acute myocardial infarction (MI) should be used when there is 
evidence of myocardial necrosis in a clinical setting consistent with acute 
myocardial ischemia. Under these conditions, any one of the following criteria 
meets the diagnosis for MI:
•  Detection of a rise and/or fall of cardiac biomarker values (preferably 
cardiac troponin [cTn]) with at least one value above the 99th percentile 
upper reference limit (URL) and with at least one of the following:
–  Symptoms of ischemia
–  New or presumed new significant ST-segment T-wave (ST-T) changes or 
new left bundle branch block (LBBB)
–  Development of pathologic Q waves in the electrocardiogram (ECG)
–  Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall 
motion abnormality
–  Identification of an intracoronary thrombus by angiography or autopsy
•  Cardiac death with symptoms suggestive of myocardial ischemia and 
presumed new ischemic ECG changes of new LBBB, but death occurred 
before cardiac biomarkers were obtained or before cardiac biomarker 
values would be increased.
•  Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)–related MI is arbitrarily defined 
by elevation of cTn values (>5 × 99th percentile URL) in patients with 
normal baseline values (≤99th percentile URL) or a rise of cTn values 
>20% if the baseline values are elevated and are stable or falling. In 
addition, either (i) symptoms suggestive of myocardial ischemia, or (ii) 
new ischemic ECG changes, or (iii) angiographic findings consistent with a 
procedural complication, or (iv) imaging demonstration of new loss of viable 
myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality are required.
•  Stent thrombosis associated with MI when detected by coronary 
angiography or autopsy in the setting of myocardial ischemia and with a rise 
and/or fall of cardiac biomarker values with at least one value above the 
99th percentile URL.
•  Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)–related MI is arbitrarily defined 
by elevation of cardiac biomarker values (>10 × 99th percentile URL) 
in patients with normal baseline cTn values (≤99th percentile URL). In 
addition, either (i) new pathologic Q waves or new LBBB, or (ii) angiographic 
documented new graft or new native coronary artery occlusion, or (iii) 
imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall 
motion abnormality.
Criteria for Prior Myocardial Infarction
Any one of the following criteria meets the diagnosis for prior MI:
•  Pathologic Q waves with or without symptoms in the absence of 
nonischemic causes.
•  Imaging evidence of a region of loss of viable myocardium that is thinned 
and fails to contract, in the absence of a nonischemic cause.
•  Pathologic findings of a prior MI.
Source: Data from K Thygesen: Eur Heart J 33:2551, 2012.
of ECGs and management of STEMI, and online medical command and 
control that can authorize the initiation of treatment in the field.
MANAGEMENT IN THE EMERGENCY 
DEPARTMENT
In the Emergency Department, the goals for the management of 
patients with suspected STEMI include control of cardiac discomfort, 
rapid identification of patients who are candidates for urgent reperfu-
sion therapy, triage of lower-risk patients to the appropriate location 
in the hospital, and avoidance of inappropriate discharge of patients 
with STEMI. Many aspects of the treatment of STEMI are initiated in 
the Emergency Department and then continued during the in-hospital 
phase of management (Fig. 269-4). The overarching goal is to minimize 
the time from first medical contact to initiation of reperfusion therapy. 
This may involve transfer from a non-PCI hospital to one that is PCI 
capable, with a goal of initiating PCI within 120 min of first medical 
contact (Fig. 269-4).
Aspirin is essential in the management of patients with suspected 
STEMI and is effective across the entire spectrum of acute coronary 
syndromes (Fig. 269-1). Rapid inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1 in platelets 
followed by a reduction of thromboxane A2 levels is achieved by buccal 
absorption of a chewed 160–325-mg tablet in the Emergency Department. 
CHAPTER 269 ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
1877
TABLE 269-2  Classification of Myocardial Infarction
Type I: Spontaneous Myocardial Infarction
Spontaneous myocardial infarction related to atherosclerotic plaque rupture, 
ulceration, fissuring, erosion, or dissection with resulting intraluminal 
thrombus in one or more of the coronary arteries leading to decreased 
myocardial blood flow or distal platelet emboli with ensuing myocyte necrosis. 
The patient may have underlying severe coronary artery disease (CAD) but on 
occasion nonobstructive or no CAD.
Type 2: Myocardial Infarction Secondary to an Ischemic Imbalance
In instances of myocardial injury with necrosis where a condition other than 
CAD contributes to an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and/
or demand, e.g., coronary endothelial dysfunction, coronary artery spasm, 
coronary embolism, tachy-brady-arrhythmias, anemia, respiratory failure, 
hypotension, and hypertension with or without left ventricular hypertrophy.
Type 3: Myocardial Infarction Resulting in Death When Biomarker 
Values Are Unavailable
Cardiac death with symptoms suggestive of myocardial ischemia and 
presumed new ischemic electrocardiogram (ECG) changes or new left bundle 
branch block (LBBB), but death occurring before blood samples could be 
obtained or before cardiac biomarker could rise, or in rare cases, cardiac 
biomarkers were not collected.
Type 4a: Myocardial Infarction Related to Percutaneous Coronary 
Intervention (PCI)
Myocardial infarction associated with PCI is arbitrarily defined by elevation of 
cardiac troponin (cTn) values >5 × 99th percentile upper reference limit (URL) 
in patients with normal baseline values (≤99th percentile URL) or a rise of 
cTn values >20% if the baseline values are elevated and are stable or falling. 
In addition, either (i) symptoms suggestive of myocardial ischemia, or (ii) 
new ischemic ECG changes or new LBBB, or (iii) angiographic loss of patency 
of a major coronary artery or a side branch or persistent slow or no flow or 
embolization, or (iv) imaging demonstration of new loss of viable myocardium 
or new regional wall motion abnormality is required.
Type 4b: Myocardial Infarction Related to Stent Thrombosis
Myocardial infarction associated with stent thrombosis is detected by coronary 
angiography or autopsy in the setting of myocardial ischemia and with a rise 
and/or fall of cardiac biomarker values with at least one value above the  
99th percentile URL.
Type 5: Myocardial Infarction Related to Coronary Artery Bypass 
Grafting (CABG)
Myocardial infarction associated with CABG is arbitrarily defined by elevation 
of cardiac biomarker values >10 × 99th percentile URL in patients with 
normal baseline cTn values (≤99th percentile URL). In addition, either (i) new 
pathologic Q waves or new LBBB, or (ii) angiographic documented new graft or 
new native coronary artery occlusion, or (iii) imaging evidence of new loss of 
viable myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality.
Source: K Thygesen: Eur Heart J 33:2551, 2012.
This measure should be followed by daily oral administration of aspi-
rin in a dose of 75–162 mg.
In patients whose arterial O2 saturation is normal, supplemental O2 
is of limited if any clinical benefit and therefore is not cost-effective. 
However, when hypoxemia is present, O2 should be administered by 
nasal prongs or face mask (2–4 L/min) for the first 6–12 h after infarc-
tion; the patient should then be reassessed to determine if there is a 
continued need for such treatment.
CONTROL OF DISCOMFORT
Sublingual nitroglycerin can be given safely to most patients with STEMI. 
Up to three doses of 0.4 mg should be administered at about 5-min 
intervals. In addition to diminishing or abolishing chest discomfort, 
nitroglycerin may be capable of both decreasing myocardial oxygen 
demand (by lowering preload) and increasing myocardial oxygen sup-
ply (by dilating infarct-related coronary vessels or collateral vessels). In 
patients whose initially favorable response to sublingual nitroglycerin 
is followed by the return of chest discomfort, particularly if accompa-
nied by other evidence of ongoing ischemia such as further ST-segment 
or T-wave shifts, the use of intravenous nitroglycerin should be consid-
ered. Therapy with nitrates should be avoided in patients who present 
with low systolic arterial pressure (<90 mmHg) or in whom there is 
clinical suspicion of RV infarction (inferior infarction on ECG, elevated 
jugular venous pressure, clear lungs, and hypotension). Nitrates should 
not be administered to patients who have taken a phosphodiesterase-5 
inhibitor for erectile dysfunction within the preceding 24 h, because it 
may potentiate the hypotensive effects of nitrates. An idiosyncratic reac-
tion to nitrates, consisting of sudden marked hypotension, sometimes 
occurs but can usually be reversed promptly by the rapid administra-
tion of intravenous atropine.
Morphine is a very effective analgesic for the pain associated with 
STEMI. However, it may reduce sympathetically mediated arteriolar 
and venous constriction, and the resulting venous pooling may reduce 
cardiac output and arterial pressure. These hemodynamic disturbances 
usually respond promptly to elevation of the legs, but in some patients, 
volume expansion with intravenous saline is required. The patient may 
experience diaphoresis and nausea, but these events usually pass and 
are replaced by a feeling of well-being associated with the relief of pain. 
Morphine also has a vagotonic effect and may cause bradycardia or 
advanced degrees of heart block, particularly in patients with inferior 
infarction. These side effects usually respond to atropine (0.5 mg intra-
venously). Morphine is routinely administered by repetitive (every 
5 min) intravenous injection of small doses (2–4 mg), rather than by the 
subcutaneous administration of a larger quantity, because absorption 
may be unpredictable by the latter route.
Intravenous beta blockers are also useful in the control of the pain of 
STEMI. These drugs control pain effectively in some patients, presum-
ably by diminishing myocardial O2 demand and hence ischemia. More 
important, there is evidence that intravenous beta blockers reduce the 
risks of reinfarction and ventricular fibrillation (see “Beta-Adrenoceptor 
Blockers” below). A commonly employed regimen is metoprolol, 5 mg 
every 2–5 min for a total of three doses, provided the patient has a heart 
rate >60 beats/min, systolic pressure >100 mmHg, a PR interval <0.24 s, 
and rales that are no higher than 10 cm up from the diaphragm. Fifteen 
minutes after the last intravenous dose, an oral regimen is initiated of 
50 mg every 6 h for 48 h, followed by 100 mg every 12 h.
Patient selection is important when considering beta blockers for 
STEMI. Oral beta blocker therapy should be initiated in the first 24 h 
for patients who do not have any of the following: (1) signs of heart 
failure, (2) evidence of a low-output state, (3) increased risk for cardio-
genic shock, or (4) other relative contraindications to beta blockade (PR 
interval >0.24 s, second- or third-degree heart block, active asthma, or 
reactive airway disease).
Unlike beta blockers, calcium antagonists are of little value in the 
acute setting, and there is evidence that short-acting dihydropyridines 
may be associated with an increased mortality risk.
MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
The primary tool for screening patients and making triage decisions is 
the initial 12-lead ECG. When ST-segment elevation of at least 2 mm in 
two contiguous precordial leads and 1 mm in two adjacent limb leads 
is present, a patient should be considered a candidate for reperfusion 
therapy (Figs. 269-1 and 269-4). The process of selecting patients for 
fibrinolysis versus primary PCI (angioplasty or stenting; Chap. 270) is 
discussed below. In the absence of ST-segment elevation, fibrinolysis 
is not helpful, and evidence exists suggesting that it may be harmful.
LIMITATION OF INFARCT SIZE
The quantity of myocardium that becomes necrotic as a consequence of 
a coronary artery occlusion is determined by factors other than just the 
site of occlusion. While the central zone of the infarct contains necrotic 
tissue that is irretrievably lost, the fate of the surrounding ischemic 
myocardium (ischemic penumbra) may be improved by timely res-
toration of coronary perfusion, reduction of myocardial O2 demands, 
prevention of the accumulation of noxious metabolites, and blunting 
of the impact of mediators of reperfusion injury (e.g., calcium overload 
and oxygen-derived free radicals). Up to one-third of patients with 
STEMI may achieve spontaneous reperfusion of the infarct-related cor-
onary artery within 24 h and experience improved healing of infarcted 
tissue. Reperfusion, either pharmacologically (by fibrinolysis) or by 
PCI, accelerates the opening of infarct-related arteries in those patients 
in whom spontaneous fibrinolysis ultimately would have occurred and 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1878
also greatly increases the number of patients in whom restoration of 
flow in the infarct-related artery is accomplished. Timely restoration of 
flow in the epicardial infarct–related artery combined with improved 
perfusion of the downstream zone of infarcted myocardium results in 
a limitation of infarct size. Protection of the ischemic myocardium by 
the maintenance of an optimal balance between myocardial O2 supply 
and demand through pain control, treatment of congestive heart fail-
ure (CHF), and minimization of tachycardia and hypertension extends 
the “window” of time for the salvage of myocardium by reperfusion 
strategies.
Glucocorticoids and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, with 
the exception of aspirin, should be avoided in patients with STEMI. 
They can impair infarct healing and increase the risk of myocardial 
rupture, and their use may result in a larger infarct scar. In addition, 
they can increase coronary vascular resistance, thereby potentially 
reducing flow to ischemic myocardium.
■
■PRIMARY PERCUTANEOUS CORONARY 
INTERVENTION
(See also Chap. 270) PCI, usually angioplasty and/or stenting without 
preceding fibrinolysis, referred to as primary PCI, is effective in restor-
ing perfusion in STEMI when carried out on an emergency basis in 
the first few hours of MI. It has the advantage of being applicable to 
patients who have contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy (see below) 
but otherwise are considered appropriate candidates for reperfusion. 
It appears to be more effective than fibrinolysis in opening occluded 
coronary arteries and, when performed by experienced operators in dedicated 
medical centers, is associated with better short-term and long-term clin-
ical outcomes. Compared with fibrinolysis, primary PCI is generally 
preferred when the diagnosis is in doubt, cardiogenic shock is present, 
bleeding risk is increased, or symptoms have been present for at least 
2–3 h when the clot is more mature and less easily lysed by fibrinolytic 
drugs. However, PCI is expensive in terms of personnel and facilities, 
and its applicability is limited by its availability, around the clock, in 
only a minority of hospitals (Fig. 269-4).
■
■FIBRINOLYSIS
If no contraindications are present (see below), fibrinolytic therapy 
should ideally be initiated within 30 min of presentation (i.e., door-to-
needle time ≤30 min). The principal goal of fibrinolysis is prompt res-
toration of full coronary arterial patency. The fibrinolytic agents tissue 
plasminogen activator (tPA), streptokinase, tenecteplase (TNK), and 
reteplase (rPA) have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration for intravenous use in patients with STEMI. These drugs all 
act by promoting the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, which 
subsequently lyses fibrin thrombi. Although considerable emphasis 
was first placed on a distinction between more fibrin-specific agents, 
such as tPA, and non-fibrin-specific agents, such as streptokinase, it is 
now recognized that these differences are only relative, as some degree 
of systemic fibrinolysis occurs with the former agents. TNK and rPA 
are referred to as bolus fibrinolytics since their administration does not 
require a prolonged intravenous infusion.
When assessed angiographically, flow in the culprit coronary artery 
is described by a simple qualitative scale called the Thrombolysis in 
Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) grading system: grade 0 indicates complete 
occlusion of the infarct-related artery; grade 1 indicates some pene-
tration of the contrast material beyond the point of obstruction, but 
without perfusion of the distal coronary bed; grade 2 indicates perfu-
sion of the entire infarct vessel into the distal bed, but with flow that is 
delayed compared with that of a normal artery; and grade 3 indicates 
full perfusion of the infarct vessel with normal flow. The latter is the 
goal of reperfusion therapy, because full perfusion of the infarct-related 
STEMI patient who is a
candidate for reperfusion
Diagnostic angiogram
Medical
therapy only
*Patients with cardiogenic shock or severe heart failure initially seen at a non–PCI-capable hospital should be transferred for cardiac
catheterization and revascularization as soon as possible, irrespective of time delay from myocardial infarction (MI) onset (Class I, LOE: B).
†Angiography and revascularization should not be performed within the first 2–3 h after administration of fibrinolytic therapy.
PCI
CABG
Initially seen at a
PCI-capable
hospital
Initially seen at a
non-PCI-capable
hospital*
Send to cath lab
for primary PCI
FMC-device time
≤90 min
(Class I, LOE: A)
Transfer for
angiography and
revascularization
within 3–24 h for
other patients as
part of an
invasive strategy†
(Class IIa, LOE: B)
Transfer for
primary PCI
FMC-device
time as soon as
possible and
≤120 min
(Class I, LOE: B)
Administer fibrinolytic
agent within 30 min of
arrival when
anticipated FMC-
device >120 min
(Class I, LOE: B)
Urgent transfer for
PCI for patients
with evidence of
failed reperfusion
or reocclusion
(Class IIa, LOE: B)
DIDO time ≤30 min
FIGURE 269-4  Reperfusion therapy for patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). The bold arrows and boxes are the preferred strategies. 
Performance of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is dictated by an anatomically appropriate culprit stenosis. CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; DIDO, 
door-in–door-out; FMC, first medical contact; LOE, level of evidence; STEMI, ST-elevation myocardial infarction. (Adapted with permission from P O’Gara et al: Circulation 
127:e362, 2013.)
CHAPTER 269 ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
1879
coronary artery yields far better results in terms of limiting infarct size, 
maintenance of LV function, and reduction of both short- and long-
term mortality rates. Additional methods of angiographic assessment 
of the efficacy of fibrinolysis include counting the number of frames 
on the cine film required for dye to flow from the origin of the infarct- 
related artery to a landmark in the distal vascular bed (TIMI frame count) 
and determining the rate of entry and exit of contrast dye from the 
microvasculature in the myocardial infarct zone (TIMI myocardial per-
fusion grade). These methods have an even tighter correlation with out-
comes after STEMI than the more commonly employed TIMI flow grade.
tPA and the other relatively fibrin-specific plasminogen activators, 
rPA and TNK, are more effective than streptokinase at restoring full 
perfusion—i.e., TIMI grade 3 coronary flow—and have a small edge in 
improving survival as well. The current recommended regimen of tPA 
consists of a 15-mg bolus followed by 50 mg intravenously over the first 
30 min, followed by 35 mg over the next 60 min. Streptokinase is admin-
istered as 1.5 million units (MU) intravenously over 1 h. rPA is adminis-
tered in a double-bolus regimen consisting of a 10-MU bolus given over 
2–3 min, followed by a second 10-MU bolus 30 min later. TNK is given 
as a single weight-based intravenous bolus of 0.53 mg/kg over 10 s. In 
addition to the fibrinolytic agents discussed earlier, pharmacologic 
reperfusion typically involves adjunctive antiplatelet and antithrom-
botic drugs, as discussed subsequently.
Clear contraindications to the use of fibrinolytic agents include 
a history of cerebrovascular hemorrhage at any time, a nonhemor-
rhagic stroke or other cerebrovascular event within the past year, 
marked hypertension (a reliably determined systolic arterial pressure 
>180 mmHg and/or a diastolic pressure >110 mmHg) at any time 
during the acute presentation, suspicion of aortic dissection, and active 
internal bleeding (excluding menses). While advanced age is associated 
with an increase in hemorrhagic complications, the benefit of fibrino-
lytic therapy in the elderly appears to justify its use if no other con-
traindications are present and the amount of myocardium in jeopardy 
appears to be substantial.
Relative contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy, which require assess-
ment of the risk-to-benefit ratio, include current use of anti-coagulants 
(international normalized ratio ≥2), a recent (<2 weeks) invasive or 
surgical procedure or prolonged (>10 min) cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion, known bleeding diathesis, pregnancy, a hemorrhagic ophthalmic 
condition (e.g., hemorrhagic diabetic retinopathy), active peptic ulcer 
disease, and a history of severe hypertension that is currently ade-
quately controlled. Because of the risk of an allergic reaction, patients 
should not receive streptokinase if that agent had been received within 
the preceding 5 days to 2 years.
Allergic reactions to streptokinase occur in ~2% of patients who 
receive it. While a minor degree of hypotension occurs in 4–10% of 
patients given this agent, marked hypotension occurs, although rarely, 
in association with severe allergic reactions.
Hemorrhage is the most frequent and potentially the most serious 
complication. Because bleeding episodes that require transfusion are 
more common when patients require invasive procedures, unnecessary 
venous or arterial interventions should be avoided in patients receiving 
fibrinolytic agents. Hemorrhagic stroke is the most serious compli-
cation and occurs in ~0.5–0.9% of patients being treated with these 
agents. This rate increases with advancing age, with patients >70 years 
experiencing roughly twice the rate of intracranial hemorrhage as those 
<65 years. Large-scale trials have suggested that the rate of intracranial 
hemorrhage with tPA or rPA is slightly higher than with streptokinase.
■
■INTEGRATED REPERFUSION STRATEGY
Evidence has emerged that suggests PCI plays an increasingly impor-
tant role in the management of STEMI. Prior approaches that segre-
gated the pharmacologic and catheter-based approaches to reperfusion 
have now been replaced with an integrated approach to triage and 
transfer of STEMI patients to receive PCI (Fig. 269-4). To achieve the 
degree of integration required to care for a patient with STEMI, all 
communities should create and maintain a regional system of STEMI 
care that includes assessment and continuous quality improvement of 
emergency medical services and hospital-based activities.
Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography should be car-
ried out after fibrinolytic therapy if there is evidence of either (1) 
failure of reperfusion (persistent chest pain and ST-segment elevation 
>90 min), in which case a rescue PCI should be considered; or (2) coro-
nary artery reocclusion (re-elevation of ST segments and/or recurrent 
chest pain) or the development of recurrent ischemia (such as recurrent 
angina in the early hospital course or a positive exercise stress test 
before discharge), in which case an urgent PCI should be considered. 
Routine angiography and elective PCI even in asymptomatic patients 
following administration of fibrinolytic therapy are used with less fre-
quency, given the numerous technologic advances that have occurred 
in the catheterization laboratory and the increasing number of skilled 
interventionalists. Coronary artery bypass surgery should be reserved 
for patients whose coronary anatomy is unsuited to PCI but in whom 
revascularization appears to be advisable because of extensive jeopar-
dized myocardium or recurrent ischemia.
HOSPITAL PHASE MANAGEMENT
■
■CORONARY CARE UNITS
These units are routinely equipped with a system that permits con-
tinuous monitoring of the cardiac rhythm of each patient and hemo-
dynamic monitoring in selected patients. Defibrillators, respirators, 
noninvasive transthoracic pacemakers, and facilities for introducing 
pacing catheters and flow-directed balloon-tipped catheters are also 
usually available. Equally important is the organization of a highly 
trained team of nurses who can recognize arrhythmias; adjust the 
dosage of antiarrhythmic, vasoactive, and anticoagulant drugs; and 
perform cardiac resuscitation, including electroshock, when necessary.
Patients should be admitted to a coronary care unit early in their 
illness when it is expected that they will derive benefit from the 
sophisticated and expensive care provided. The availability of electro-
cardiographic monitoring and trained personnel outside the coronary 
care unit has made it possible to admit lower-risk patients (e.g., those 
not hemodynamically compromised and without active arrhythmias) 
to “intermediate care units.”
The duration of stay in the coronary care unit is dictated by the 
ongoing need for intensive care. If symptoms are controlled with oral 
therapy, patients may be transferred out of the coronary care unit. Also, 
patients who have a confirmed STEMI but who are considered to be at 
low risk (no prior infarction and no persistent chest discomfort, CHF, 
hypotension, or cardiac arrhythmias) may be safely transferred out of 
the coronary care unit within 24 h.
Activity  Factors that increase the work of the heart during the ini-
tial hours of infarction may increase the size of the infarct. Therefore, 
patients with STEMI should be kept at bed rest for the first 6–12 h. 
However, in the absence of complications, patients should be encour-
aged, under supervision, to resume an upright posture by dangling 
their feet over the side of the bed and sitting in a chair within the first 
24 h. This practice is psychologically beneficial and usually results in 
a reduction in the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. In the absence 
of hypotension and other complications, by the second or third day, 
patients typically are ambulating in their room with increasing dura-
tion and frequency, and they may shower or stand at the sink to bathe. 
By day 3 after infarction, patients should be increasing their ambula-
tion progressively to a goal of 185 m (600 ft) at least three times a day.
Diet  Because of the risk of emesis and aspiration soon after STEMI, 
patients should receive either nothing or only clear liquids by mouth 
for the first 4–12 h. The typical coronary care unit diet should pro-
vide ≤30% of total calories as fat and have a cholesterol content of 
≤300 mg/d. Complex carbohydrates should make up 50–55% of total 
calories. Portions should not be unusually large, and the menu should 
be enriched with foods that are high in potassium, magnesium, and 
fiber, but low in sodium. Diabetes mellitus and hypertriglyceridemia 
are managed by restriction of concentrated sweets in the diet.
Bowel Management  Bed rest and the effect of the narcotics used 
for the relief of pain often lead to constipation. A bedside commode 
rather than a bedpan, a diet rich in bulk, and the routine use of a stool 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1880 softener such as dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (200 mg/d) are recom-
mended. If the patient remains constipated despite these measures, a 
laxative can be prescribed. Contrary to prior belief, it is safe to perform 
a gentle rectal examination on patients with STEMI.
Sedation  Many patients require sedation during hospitalization to 
withstand the period of enforced inactivity with tranquility. Diazepam 
(5 mg), oxazepam (15–30 mg), or lorazepam (0.5–2 mg), given three to 
four times daily, is usually effective. An additional dose of any of the 
above medications may be given at night to ensure adequate sleep. 
Attention to this problem is especially important during the first few 
days in the coronary care unit, where the atmosphere of 24-h vigi-
lance may interfere with the patient’s sleep. However, sedation is no 
substitute for reassuring, quiet surroundings. Many drugs used in the 
coronary care unit, such as atropine, H2 blockers, and narcotics, can 
produce delirium, particularly in the elderly. This effect should not be 
confused with agitation, and it is wise to conduct a thorough review 
of the patient’s medications before arbitrarily prescribing additional 
doses of anxiolytics.
PHARMACOTHERAPY
■
■ANTITHROMBOTIC AGENTS
The use of antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy during the initial 
phase of STEMI is based on extensive laboratory and clinical evidence 
that thrombosis plays an important role in the pathogenesis of this 
condition. The primary goal of treatment with antiplatelet and antico-
agulant agents is to maintain patency of the infarct-related artery, in 
conjunction with reperfusion strategies. A secondary goal is to reduce 
the patient’s tendency to thrombosis and, thus, the likelihood of mural 
thrombus formation or deep-venous thrombosis, either of which could 
result in pulmonary embolization. The degree to which antiplatelet 
and anticoagulant therapy achieves these goals partly determines how 
effectively it reduces the risk of mortality from STEMI.
As noted previously (see “Management in the Emergency 
Department” earlier), aspirin is the standard antiplatelet agent for 
patients with STEMI. The most compelling evidence for the benefits 
of antiplatelet therapy (mainly with aspirin) in STEMI is found in the 
comprehensive overview by the Antiplatelet Trialists’ Collaboration. 
Data from nearly 20,000 patients with MI enrolled in 15 randomized 
trials were pooled and revealed a relative reduction of 27% in the mor-
tality rate, from 14.2% in control patients to 10.4% in patients receiving 
antiplatelet agents.
Inhibitors of the P2Y12 ADP receptor prevent activation and aggre-
gation of platelets. The addition of the P2Y12 inhibitor clopidogrel to 
background treatment with aspirin to STEMI patients reduces the 
risk of clinical events (death, reinfarction, stroke) and, in patients 
receiving fibrinolytic therapy, has been shown to prevent reocclusion 
of a successfully reperfused infarct artery. New P2Y12 ADP receptor 
antagonists, such as prasugrel and ticagrelor, are more effective than 
clopidogrel in preventing ischemic complications in STEMI patients 
undergoing PCI, but are associated with an increased risk of bleeding. 
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors appear useful for preventing 
thrombotic complications in patients with STEMI undergoing PCI.
The standard anticoagulant agent used in clinical practice is unfrac-
tionated heparin (UFH). The available data suggest that when UFH is 
added to a regimen of aspirin and a non-fibrin-specific thrombolytic 
agent such as streptokinase, additional mortality benefit occurs (about 
5 lives saved per 1000 patients treated). It appears that the immediate 
administration of intravenous UFH, in addition to a regimen of aspirin 
and relatively fibrin-specific fibrinolytic agents (tPA, rPA, or TNK), 
helps to maintain patency of the infarct-related artery. This effect is 
achieved at the cost of a small increased risk of bleeding. The recom-
mended dose of UFH is an initial bolus of 60 U/kg (maximum 4000 U) 
followed by an initial infusion of 12 U/kg per h (maximum 1000 U/h). 
The activated partial thromboplastin time during maintenance therapy 
should be 1.5–2 times the control value.
Alternatives to UFH for anticoagulation of patients with STEMI are 
the low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) preparations, a synthetic 
version of the critical pentasaccharide sequence (fondaparinux), and the 
direct antithrombin bivalirudin. Advantages of LMWHs include high 
bioavailability permitting administration subcutaneously, reliable anti-
coagulation without monitoring, and greater antiXa:IIa activity. Enoxa-
parin has been shown to reduce significantly the composite endpoints 
of death/nonfatal reinfarction and death/nonfatal reinfarction/urgent 
revascularization compared with UFH in STEMI patients who receive 
fibrinolysis. Treatment with enoxaparin is associated with higher rates 
of serious bleeding, but net clinical benefit—a composite endpoint 
that combines efficacy and safety—still favors enoxaparin over UFH. 
Interpretation of the data on fondaparinux is difficult because of the 
complex nature of the pivotal clinical trial evaluating it in STEMI 
(OASIS-6). Fondaparinux appears superior to placebo in STEMI 
patients not receiving reperfusion therapy, but its relative efficacy and 
safety compared with UFH is less certain. Owing to the risk of cathe-
ter thrombosis, fondaparinux should not be used alone at the time of 
coronary angiography and PCI but should be combined with another 
anticoagulant with antithrombin activity such as UFH or bivalirudin. 
Contemporary trials of bivalirudin used an open-label design to evaluate 
its efficacy and safety compared with UFH plus a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa 
inhibitor. Bivalirudin was associated with a lower rate of bleeding, 
largely driven by reductions in vascular access site hematomas ≥5 cm 
or the administration of blood transfusions.
Patients with an anterior location of the infarction, severe LV dys-
function, heart failure, a history of embolism, two-dimensional echoc-
ardiographic evidence of mural thrombus, or atrial fibrillation are at 
increased risk of systemic or pulmonary thromboembolism. Such indi-
viduals should receive full therapeutic levels of anticoagulant therapy 
(LMWH or UFH) while hospitalized, followed by at least 3 months of 
warfarin therapy.
■
■BETA-ADRENOCEPTOR BLOCKERS
The benefits of beta blockers in patients with STEMI can be divided into 
those that occur immediately when the drug is given acutely and those 
that accrue over the long term when the drug is given for secondary pre-
vention after an infarction. Acute intravenous beta blockade improves 
the myocardial O2 supply-demand relationship, decreases pain, reduces 
infarct size, and decreases the incidence of serious ventricular arrhyth-
mias. In patients who undergo fibrinolysis soon after the onset of chest 
pain, no incremental reduction in mortality rate is seen with beta block-
ers, but recurrent ischemia and reinfarction are reduced.
Thus, beta-blocker therapy after STEMI is useful for most patients 
(including those treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme 
[ACE] inhibitor) except those in whom it is specifically contraindicated 
(patients with heart failure or severely compromised LV function, heart 
block, orthostatic hypotension, or a history of asthma) and perhaps 
those whose excellent long-term prognosis (defined as an expected 
mortality rate of <1% per year, patients <55 years, no previous MI, 
with normal ventricular function, no complex ventricular ectopy, and 
no angina) markedly diminishes any potential benefit.
■
■INHIBITION OF THE RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN-
ALDOSTERONE SYSTEM
ACE inhibitors reduce the mortality rate after STEMI, and the mortality 
benefits are additive to those achieved with aspirin and beta blockers. 
The maximum benefit is seen in high-risk patients (those who are 
elderly or who have an anterior infarction, a prior infarction, and/or 
globally depressed LV function), but evidence suggests that a short-
term benefit occurs when ACE inhibitors are prescribed unselectively 
to all hemodynamically stable patients with STEMI (i.e., those with a 
systolic pressure >100 mmHg). The mechanism involves a reduction in 
ventricular remodeling after infarction (see “Ventricular Dysfunction” 
later) with a subsequent reduction in the risk of CHF. The rate of recur-
rent infarction may also be lower in patients treated chronically with 
ACE inhibitors after infarction.
Before hospital discharge, LV function should be assessed with an 
imaging study. ACE inhibitors should be continued indefinitely in 
patients who have clinically evident CHF, in patients in whom an imag-
ing study shows a reduction in global LV function or a large regional 
wall motion abnormality, or in those who are hypertensive.
CHAPTER 269 ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
1881
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be administered 
to STEMI patients who are intolerant of ACE inhibitors and who 
have either clinical or radiologic signs of heart failure. Long-term 
aldosterone blockade should be prescribed for STEMI patients with-
out significant renal dysfunction (creatinine ≥2.5 mg/dL in men and 
≥2.0 mg/dL in women) or hyperkalemia (potassium ≥5.0 mEq/L) who 
are already receiving therapeutic doses of an ACE inhibitor, have an 
LV ejection fraction ≤40%, and have either symptomatic heart failure 
or diabetes mellitus. A multidrug regimen for inhibiting the renin- 
angiotensin-aldosterone system has been shown to reduce both heart 
failure–related and sudden cardiac death–related cardiovascular mor-
tality after STEMI, but has not been as thoroughly explored as ACE 
inhibitors in STEMI patients.
■
■OTHER AGENTS
Favorable effects on the ischemic process and ventricular remodeling 
(see below) previously led many physicians to routinely use intravenous 
nitroglycerin (5–10 μg/min initial dose and up to 200 μg/min as long 
as hemodynamic stability is maintained) for the first 24–48 h after the 
onset of infarction. However, the benefits of routine use of intravenous 
nitroglycerin are less in the contemporary era where beta-adrenoceptor 
blockers and ACE inhibitors are routinely prescribed for patients with 
STEMI.
Results of multiple trials of different calcium antagonists have failed 
to establish a role for these agents in the treatment of most patients with 
STEMI. Therefore, the routine use of calcium antagonists cannot be 
recommended. Strict control of blood glucose in diabetic patients with 
STEMI has been shown to reduce the mortality rate. Serum magnesium 
should be measured in all patients on admission, and any demon-
strated deficits should be corrected to minimize the risk of arrhythmias.
COMPLICATIONS AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
■
■VENTRICULAR DYSFUNCTION
After STEMI, the left ventricle undergoes a series of changes in shape, 
size, and thickness in both the infarcted and noninfarcted segments. 
This process is referred to as ventricular remodeling and generally pre-
cedes the development of clinically evident CHF in the months to years 
after infarction. Soon after STEMI, the left ventricle begins to dilate. 
Acutely, this results from expansion of the infarct, i.e., slippage of 
muscle bundles, disruption of normal myocardial cells, and tissue loss 
within the necrotic zone, resulting in disproportionate thinning and 
elongation of the infarct zone. Later, lengthening of the noninfarcted 
segments occurs as well. The overall chamber enlargement that occurs 
is related to the size and location of the infarct, with greater dilation 
following infarction of the anterior wall and apex of the left ventricle 
and causing more marked hemodynamic impairment, more frequent 
heart failure, and a poorer prognosis. Progressive dilation and its clin-
ical consequences may be ameliorated by therapy with ACE inhibitors 
and other vasodilators (e.g., nitrates). In patients with an ejection frac-
tion <40%, regardless of whether or not heart failure is present, ACE 
inhibitors or ARBs should be prescribed (see “Inhibition of the Renin- 
Angiotensin-Aldosterone System” earlier).
■
■HEMODYNAMIC ASSESSMENT
Pump failure is now the primary cause of in-hospital death from 
STEMI. The extent of infarction correlates well with the degree of pump 
failure and with mortality, both early (within 10 days of infarction) and 
later. The most common clinical signs are pulmonary rales and S3 and 
S4 gallop sounds. Pulmonary congestion is also frequently seen on the 
chest roentgenogram. Elevated LV filling pressure and elevated pulmo-
nary artery pressure are the characteristic hemodynamic findings, but 
these findings may result from a reduction of ventricular compliance 
(diastolic failure) and/or a reduction of stroke volume with secondary 
cardiac dilation (systolic failure) (Chap. 252).
A classification originally proposed by Killip divides patients into 
four groups: class I, no signs of pulmonary or venous congestion; 
class II, moderate heart failure as evidenced by rales at the lung bases, 
S3 gallop, tachypnea, or signs of failure of the right side of the heart, 
including venous and hepatic congestion; class III, severe heart failure, 
pulmonary edema; and class IV, shock with systolic pressure <90 mmHg 
and evidence of peripheral vasoconstriction, peripheral cyanosis, men-
tal confusion, and oliguria. When this classification was established in 
1967, the expected hospital mortality rate of patients in these classes 
was as follows: class I, 0–5%; class II, 10–20%; class III, 35–45%; and 
class IV, 85–95%. With advances in management, the mortality rate in 
each class has fallen, perhaps by as much as one-third to one-half.
Hemodynamic evidence of abnormal global LV function appears 
when contraction is seriously impaired in 20–25% of the left ventricle. 
Infarction of ≥40% of the left ventricle usually results in cardiogenic 
shock (Chap. 298). Positioning of a balloon flotation (Swan-Ganz) cath-
eter in the pulmonary artery permits monitoring of LV filling pressure; 
this technique is useful in patients who exhibit hypotension and/or 
clinical evidence of CHF. Cardiac output can also be determined with 
a pulmonary artery catheter. With the addition of intraarterial pressure 
monitoring, systemic vascular resistance can be calculated as a guide 
to adjusting vasopressor and vasodilator therapy. Some patients with 
STEMI have markedly elevated LV filling pressures (>22 mmHg) 
and normal cardiac indices (2.6–3.6 L/[min/m2]), while others have 
relatively low LV filling pressures (<15 mmHg) and reduced cardiac 
indices. The former patients usually benefit from diuresis, while the 
latter may respond to volume expansion.
■
■HYPOVOLEMIA
This is an easily corrected condition that may contribute to the 
hypotension and vascular collapse associated with STEMI in some 
patients. It may be secondary to previous diuretic use, to reduced fluid 
intake during the early stages of the illness, and/or to vomiting asso-
ciated with pain or medications. Consequently, hypovolemia should 
be identified and corrected in patients with STEMI and hypotension 
before more vigorous forms of therapy are begun. Central venous pres-
sure reflects RV rather than LV filling pressure and is an inadequate 
guide for adjustment of blood volume, because LV function is almost 
always affected much more adversely than RV function in patients 
with STEMI. The optimal LV filling or pulmonary artery wedge pres-
sure may vary considerably among patients. Each patient’s ideal level 
(generally ~20 mmHg) is reached by cautious fluid administration dur-
ing careful monitoring of oxygenation and cardiac output. Eventually, 
the cardiac output plateaus, and further increases in LV filling pressure 
only increase congestive symptoms and decrease systemic oxygenation 
without raising arterial pressure.
TREATMENT
Congestive Heart Failure
The management of CHF in association with STEMI is similar to 
that of acute heart failure secondary to other forms of heart disease 
(avoidance of hypoxemia, diuresis, afterload reduction, inotropic 
support) (Chap. 252), except that the benefits of digitalis admin-
istration to patients with STEMI are unimpressive. By contrast, 
diuretic agents are extremely effective, as they diminish pulmonary 
congestion in the presence of systolic and/or diastolic heart failure. 
LV filling pressure falls and orthopnea and dyspnea improve after 
the intravenous administration of furosemide or other loop diuret-
ics. These drugs should be used with caution, however, as they can 
result in a massive diuresis with associated decreases in plasma 
volume, cardiac output, systemic blood pressure, and, hence, coro-
nary perfusion. Nitrates in various forms may be used to decrease 
preload and congestive symptoms. Oral isosorbide dinitrate, topical 
nitroglycerin ointment, and intravenous nitroglycerin all have the 
advantage over a diuretic of lowering preload through venodilation 
without decreasing the total plasma volume. In addition, nitrates 
may improve ventricular compliance if ischemia is present, as ische-
mia causes an elevation of LV filling pressure. Vasodilators must be 
used with caution to prevent serious hypotension. As noted earlier, 
ACE inhibitors are an ideal class of drugs for management of ven-
tricular dysfunction after STEMI, especially for the long term. (See 
“Inhibition of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System” earlier.)
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1882
■
■CARDIOGENIC SHOCK
Prompt reperfusion, efforts to reduce infarct size and treatment of 
ongoing ischemia and other complications of MI appear to have 
reduced the incidence of cardiogenic shock from 20 to about 7%. Only 
10% of patients with this condition present with it on admission, while 
90% develop it during hospitalization. Typically, patients who develop 
cardiogenic shock have severe multivessel coronary artery disease 
with evidence of “piecemeal” necrosis extending outward from the 
original infarct zone. The evaluation and management of cardiogenic 
shock and severe power failure after STEMI are discussed in detail 
in Chap. 298.
■
■RIGHT VENTRICULAR INFARCTION
Approximately one-third of patients with inferior infarction demon-
strate at least a minor degree of RV necrosis. An occasional patient with 
inferoposterior LV infarction also has extensive RV infarction, and rare 
patients present with infarction limited primarily to the RV. Clinically 
significant RV infarction causes signs of severe RV failure (jugular 
venous distention, Kussmaul’s sign, hepatomegaly [Chap. 234]) with or 
without hypotension. ST-segment elevations of right-sided precordial 
ECG leads, particularly lead V4R, are frequently present in the first 24 h 
in patients with RV infarction. Two-dimensional echocardiography is 
helpful in determining the degree of RV dysfunction. Catheterization of 
the right side of the heart often reveals a distinctive hemodynamic pat-
tern resembling constrictive pericarditis (steep right atrial “y” descent 
and an early diastolic dip and plateau in RV waveforms) (Chap. 265). 
Therapy consists of volume expansion to maintain adequate RV pre-
load and efforts to improve LV performance with attendant reduction 
in pulmonary capillary wedge and pulmonary arterial pressures.
■
■ARRHYTHMIAS
(See also Chaps. 239 and 241) The incidence of arrhythmias after 
STEMI is higher in patients seen early after the onset of symptoms. 
The mechanisms responsible for infarction-related arrhythmias include 
autonomic nervous system imbalance, electrolyte disturbances, ische-
mia, and slowed conduction in zones of ischemic myocardium. An 
arrhythmia can usually be managed successfully if trained personnel 
and appropriate equipment are available when it develops. Since 
most deaths from arrhythmia occur during the first few hours after 
infarction, the effectiveness of treatment relates directly to the speed 
with which patients come under medical observation. The prompt 
management of arrhythmias constitutes a significant advance in the 
treatment of STEMI.
Ventricular Premature Beats  Infrequent, sporadic ventricular 
premature depolarizations occur in almost all patients with STEMI and 
do not require therapy. Whereas in the past, frequent, multifocal, or 
early diastolic ventricular extrasystoles (so-called warning arrhythmias) 
were routinely treated with antiarrhythmic drugs to reduce the risk of 
development of ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation, 
pharmacologic therapy is now reserved for patients with sustained 
ventricular arrhythmias. Prophylactic antiarrhythmic therapy (either 
intravenous lidocaine early or oral agents later) is contraindicated 
for ventricular premature beats in the absence of clinically important 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias, because such therapy may actually 
increase the mortality rate. Beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents are effec-
tive in abolishing ventricular ectopic activity in patients with STEMI 
and in the prevention of ventricular fibrillation. As described earlier 
(see “Beta-Adrenoceptor Blockers”), they should be used routinely in 
patients without contraindications. In addition, hypokalemia and hypo-
magnesemia are risk factors for ventricular fibrillation in patients with 
STEMI; to reduce the risk, the serum potassium concentration should be 
adjusted to ~4.5 mmol/L and magnesium to about 2.0 mmol/L.
Ventricular Tachycardia and Fibrillation  Within the first 
24 h of STEMI, ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation can occur with-
out prior warning arrhythmias. The occurrence of ventricular fibril-
lation can be reduced by prophylactic administration of intravenous 
lidocaine. However, prophylactic use of lidocaine has not been shown 
to reduce overall mortality from STEMI. In fact, in addition to causing 
possible noncardiac complications, lidocaine may predispose to an 
excess risk of bradycardia and asystole. For these reasons, and with 
earlier treatment of active ischemia, more frequent use of beta-blocking 
agents, and the nearly universal success of electrical cardioversion or 
defibrillation, routine prophylactic antiarrhythmic drug therapy is no 
longer recommended.
Sustained ventricular tachycardia that is well tolerated hemodynami-
cally should be treated with an intravenous regimen of amiodarone (bolus 
of 150 mg over 10 min, followed by infusion of 1.0 mg/min for 6 h and 
then 0.5 mg/min). A less desirable but alternative regimen is procain-
amide (bolus of 15 mg/kg over 20–30 min; infusion of 1–4 mg/min). If 
ventricular tachycardia does not stop promptly, electroversion should 
be used (Chap. 241). An unsynchronized discharge of 200–300 J (mono-
phasic waveform; ~50% of these energies with biphasic waveforms) 
is used immediately in patients with ventricular fibrillation or when 
ventricular tachycardia causes hemodynamic deterioration. Ventric-
ular tachycardia or fibrillation that is refractory to electroshock may 
be more responsive after the patient is treated with epinephrine (1 mg 
intravenously or 10 mL of a 1:10,000 solution via the intracardiac route) 
or amiodarone (a 75–150-mg bolus).
Ventricular arrhythmias, including the unusual form of ventricular 
tachycardia known as torsades des pointes (Chaps. 247 and 249), may 
occur in patients with STEMI as a consequence of other concurrent 
problems (such as hypoxia, hypokalemia, or other electrolyte distur-
bances) or of the toxic effects of an agent being administered to the 
patient (such as digoxin or quinidine). A search for such secondary 
causes should always be undertaken.
Although the in-hospital mortality rate is increased, the long-term 
survival is excellent in patients who survive to hospital discharge after 
primary ventricular fibrillation; i.e., ventricular fibrillation that is a pri-
mary response to acute ischemia that occurs during the first 48 h and 
is not associated with predisposing factors such as CHF, shock, bundle 
branch block, or ventricular aneurysm. This result is in sharp contrast 
to the poor prognosis for patients who develop ventricular fibrillation 
secondary to severe pump failure. For patients who develop ventricular 
tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation late in their hospital course (i.e., 
after the first 48 h), the mortality rate is increased both in-hospital 
and during long-term follow-up. Such patients should be considered 
for electrophysiologic study and implantation of a cardioverter- 
defibrillator (ICD) (Chap. 247). A more challenging issue is the pre-
vention of sudden cardiac death from ventricular fibrillation late 
after STEMI in patients who have not exhibited sustained ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias during their index hospitalization. An algorithm for 
selection of patients who warrant prophylactic implantation of an ICD 
is shown in Fig. 269-5.
Accelerated Idioventricular Rhythm  Accelerated idioven-
tricular rhythm (AIVR, “slow ventricular tachycardia”), a ventricular 
rhythm with a rate of 60–100 beats/min, often occurs transiently 
during fibrinolytic therapy at the time of reperfusion. For the most 
part, AIVR, whether it occurs in association with fibrinolytic therapy 
or spontaneously, is benign and does not presage the development of 
classic ventricular tachycardia. Most episodes of AIVR do not require 
treatment if the patient is monitored carefully, as degeneration into a 
more serious arrhythmia is rare.
Supraventricular Arrhythmias  Sinus tachycardia is the most 
common supraventricular arrhythmia. If it occurs secondary to another 
cause (such as anemia, fever, heart failure, or a metabolic derange-
ment), the primary problem should be treated first. However, if it 
appears to be due to sympathetic overstimulation (e.g., as part of a 
hyperdynamic state), then treatment with a beta blocker is indicated. 
Other common arrhythmias in this group are atrial flutter and atrial 
fibrillation, which are often secondary to LV failure. Digoxin is usu-
ally the treatment of choice for supraventricular arrhythmias if heart 
failure is present. If heart failure is absent, beta blockers, verapamil, or 
diltiazem are suitable alternatives for controlling the ventricular rate, 
as they may also help to control ischemia. If the abnormal rhythm per-
sists for >2 h with a ventricular rate >120 beats/min, or if tachycardia 
induces heart failure, shock, or ischemia (as manifested by recurrent 
CHAPTER 269 ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
1883
Any
cardiomyopathy
Not on optimal
medical therapy
Any
cardiomyopathy
Beyond ICD waiting period
on Optimal Medical Therapy
Post-MI or Ischemic
cardiomyopathy
With revascularization
(PCI or CAB)
ICD waiting period >3 months
Post-MI
Without revascularization
ICD waiting period >40 days
Ejection fraction  ≤35% for Nonischemic cardiomyopathy
40% for Ischemic cardiomyopathy
Sudden cardiac death
primary prevention protocols
Learn more at
www. HRSonline.org
Initiate or titrate medical therapy
Beta blocker — ACE/ARB — Aldosterone antagonist
Reassess EF @ 3 months
Nonischemic
cardiomyopathy
EF ≤35%
Refer for consultation with Heart Rhythm specialist
* Buxton AE, Lee KL, Fisher JD, Josephson ME, Prystowsky EN, Hafley G.A randomized study of the prevention of sudden death in patients with coronary artery disease.
 Multicenter Unsustained Tachycardia Trial Investigators. N Engl J Med. December 16, 1999;341(25):1882–1890.
 Recommended by SCA Prevention Protocols Working Group (Version 2; Revised; 9/10/2012; Review date: 9/10/2013) All rights reserved. Copyright ©2012 Heart Rhythm Society
Consider further risk stratification/
Consultation with heart rhythm
specialist*
EF ≤35%
Ischemic
cardio-
myopathy
EF = 36–40%
Discharge home; Continue optimization of medical therapy
Consider consultation  with heart rhythm specialist/consider wearable cardioverter defibrillator
Reassess EF @ 40 days
FIGURE 269-5  Algorithm for assessment of need for implantation of a cardioverter-defibrillator. The appropriate management is selected based on measurement 
of left ventricular ejection fraction, the timing following infarction, and whether revascularization has been performed. (Reproduced from data at www.hrsonline.org.)
pain or ECG changes), a synchronized electroshock (100–200 J mono-
phasic waveform) should be used.
Accelerated junctional rhythms have diverse causes but may occur 
in patients with inferoposterior infarction. Digitalis excess must be 
ruled out. In some patients with severely compromised LV function, 
the loss of appropriately timed atrial systole results in a marked reduc-
tion of cardiac output. Right atrial or coronary sinus pacing is indicated 
in such instances.
Sinus Bradycardia  Treatment of sinus bradycardia is indicated 
if hemodynamic compromise results from the slow heart rate. Atro-
pine is the most useful drug for increasing heart rate and should be 
given intravenously in doses of 0.5 mg initially. If the rate remains 
<50–60 beats/min, additional doses of 0.2 mg, up to a total of 2.0 mg, 
may be given. Persistent bradycardia (<40 beats/min) despite atropine 
may be treated with electrical pacing. Isoproterenol should be avoided.
Atrioventricular and Intraventricular Conduction Distur-
bances  (See also Chap. 239) Both the in-hospital mortality rate 
and the postdischarge mortality rate of patients who have complete 
atrioventricular (AV) block in association with anterior infarction are 
markedly higher than those of patients who develop AV block with 
inferior infarction. This difference is related to the fact that heart block 
in inferior infarction is commonly a result of increased vagal tone and/
or the release of adenosine and therefore is transient. In anterior wall 
infarction, however, heart block is usually related to ischemic malfunc-
tion of the conduction system, which is commonly associated with 
extensive myocardial necrosis.
Temporary electrical pacing provides an effective means of increas-
ing the heart rate of patients with bradycardia due to AV block. How-
ever, acceleration of the heart rate may have only a limited impact on 
prognosis in patients with anterior wall infarction and complete heart 
block in whom the large size of the infarct is the major factor determin-
ing outcome. It should be carried out if it improves hemodynamics. 
Pacing does appear to be beneficial in patients with inferoposterior 
infarction who have complete heart block associated with heart failure, 
hypotension, marked bradycardia, or significant ventricular ectopic 
activity. A subgroup of these patients, those with RV infarction, often 
respond poorly to ventricular pacing because of the loss of the atrial 
contribution to ventricular filling. In such patients, dual-chamber AV 
sequential pacing may be required.
External noninvasive pacing electrodes should be positioned 
in a “demand” mode for patients with sinus bradycardia (rate 
<50 beats/min) that is unresponsive to drug therapy, Mobitz II second- 
degree AV block, third-degree heart block, or bilateral bundle branch 
block (e.g., right bundle branch block plus left anterior fascicular 
block). Retrospective studies suggest that permanent pacing may 
reduce the long-term risk of sudden death due to bradyarrhythmias 
in the rare patient who develops combined persistent bifascicular and 
transient third-degree heart block during the acute phase of MI.
■
■OTHER COMPLICATIONS
Recurrent Chest Discomfort  Because recurrent or persistent 
ischemia often heralds extension of the original infarct or reinfarction 
in a new myocardial zone and is associated with a near tripling of mor-
tality after STEMI, patients with these symptoms should be referred 
for prompt coronary arteriography and mechanical revascularization. 
Administration of a fibrinolytic agent is an alternative to early mechan-
ical revascularization.
Pericarditis  (See also Chap. 265) Pericardial friction rubs and/
or pericardial pain are frequently encountered in patients with STEMI 
involving the epicardium. This complication can usually be managed 
with aspirin (650 mg four times daily). It is important to diagnose the 
chest pain of pericarditis accurately, because failure to recognize it 
may lead to the erroneous diagnosis of recurrent ischemic pain and/
or infarct extension, with resulting inappropriate use of anticoagulants, 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1884 nitrates, beta blockers, or coronary arteriography. When it occurs, com-
plaints of pain radiating to either trapezius muscle is helpful, because 
such a pattern of discomfort is typical of pericarditis but rarely occurs 
with ischemic discomfort. Anticoagulants potentially could cause tam-
ponade in the presence of acute pericarditis (as manifested by either 
pain or persistent rub) and therefore should not be used unless there is 
a compelling indication.
Thromboembolism  Clinically apparent thromboembolism com-
plicates STEMI in ~10% of cases, but embolic lesions are found in 20% 
of patients in necropsy series, suggesting that thromboembolism is 
often clinically silent. Thromboembolism is considered to be an impor-
tant contributing cause of death in 25% of patients with STEMI who die 
after admission to the hospital. Arterial emboli originate from LV mural 
thrombi, while most pulmonary emboli arise in the leg veins.
Thromboembolism typically occurs in association with large 
infarcts (especially anterior), CHF, and an LV thrombus detected by 
echocardiography. The incidence of arterial embolism from a clot 
originating in the ventricle at the site of an infarction is small but real. Two- 
dimensional echocardiography reveals LV thrombi in about one-third 
of patients with anterior wall infarction but in few patients with infe-
rior or posterior infarction. Arterial embolism often presents as a major 
complication, such as hemiparesis when the cerebral circulation is 
involved or hypertension if the renal circulation is compromised. When 
a thrombus has been clearly demonstrated by echocardiographic or 
other techniques or when a large area of regional wall motion abnor-
mality is seen even in the absence of a detectable mural thrombus, 
systemic anticoagulation should be undertaken (in the absence of 
contraindications), as the incidence of embolic complications appears 
to be markedly lowered by such therapy. The appropriate duration of 
therapy is unknown, but 3–6 months is probably prudent.
Left Ventricular Aneurysm  The term ventricular aneurysm is 
usually used to describe dyskinesis or local expansile paradoxical wall 
motion. Normally functioning myocardial fibers must shorten more 
if stroke volume and cardiac output are to be maintained in patients 
with ventricular aneurysm; if they cannot, overall ventricular function 
is impaired. True aneurysms are composed of scar tissue and neither 
predispose to nor are associated with cardiac rupture.
The complications of LV aneurysm do not usually occur for weeks 
to months after STEMI; they include CHF, arterial embolism, and 
ventricular arrhythmias. Apical aneurysms are the most common and 
the most easily detected by clinical examination. The physical finding 
of greatest value is a double, diffuse, or displaced apical impulse. 
Ventricular aneurysms are readily detected by two-dimensional echoc-
ardiography, which may also reveal a mural thrombus in an aneurysm.
Rarely, myocardial rupture may be contained by a local area of 
pericardium, along with organizing thrombus and hematoma. Over 
time, this pseudoaneurysm enlarges, maintaining communication with 
the LV cavity through a narrow neck. Because a pseudoaneurysm often 
ruptures spontaneously, it should be surgically repaired if recognized.
POSTINFARCTION RISK STRATIFICATION 
AND MANAGEMENT
Many clinical and laboratory factors have been identified that are asso-
ciated with an increase in cardiovascular risk after initial recovery from 
STEMI. Some of the most important factors include persistent ischemia 
(spontaneous or provoked), depressed LV ejection fraction (<40%), 
rales above the lung bases on physical examination or congestion on 
chest radiograph, and symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias. Other 
features associated with increased risk include a history of previous 
MI, age >75, diabetes mellitus, prolonged sinus tachycardia, hypoten-
sion, ST-segment changes at rest without angina (“silent ischemia”), an 
abnormal signal-averaged ECG, nonpatency of the infarct-related cor-
onary artery (if angiography is undertaken), and persistent advanced 
heart block or a new intraventricular conduction abnormality on the 
ECG. Therapy must be individualized on the basis of the relative 
importance of the risk(s) present.
The goal of preventing reinfarction and death after recovery from 
STEMI has led to strategies to evaluate risk after infarction. In stable 
patients, submaximal exercise stress testing may be carried out before 
hospital discharge to detect residual ischemia and ventricular ectopy 
and to provide the patient with a guideline for exercise in the early 
recovery period. Alternatively, or in addition, a maximal (symptom- 
limited) exercise stress test may be carried out 4–6 weeks after infarction. 
Evaluation of LV function is usually warranted as well. Recognition of 
a depressed LV ejection fraction by echocardiography or radionuclide 
ventriculography identifies patients who should receive medications 
to inhibit the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Patients in whom 
angina is induced at relatively low workloads, those who have a large 
reversible defect on perfusion imaging or a depressed ejection frac-
tion, those with demonstrable ischemia, and those in whom exercise 
provokes symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias should be considered 
at high risk for recurrent MI or death from arrhythmia (Fig. 269-5). 
Cardiac catheterization with coronary angiography and/or invasive 
electrophysiologic evaluation is advised.
Exercise tests also aid in formulating an individualized exercise pre-
scription, which can be much more vigorous in patients who tolerate 
exercise without any of the previously mentioned adverse signs. In 
addition, predischarge stress testing may provide an important psy-
chological benefit, building the patient’s confidence by demonstrating 
a reasonable exercise tolerance.
In many hospitals, a cardiac rehabilitation program with progres-
sive exercise is initiated in the hospital and continued after discharge. 
Ideally, such programs should include an educational component that 
informs patients about their disease and its risk factors.
The usual duration of hospitalization for an uncomplicated STEMI 
is about 3–5 days. The remainder of the convalescent phase may be 
accomplished at home. During the first 1–2 weeks, the patient should 
be encouraged to increase activity by walking about the house and out-
doors in good weather. Normal sexual activity may be resumed during 
this period. After 2 weeks, the physician must regulate the patient’s 
activity on the basis of exercise tolerance. Most patients will be able to 
return to work within 2–4 weeks.
SECONDARY PREVENTION
Various secondary preventive measures are at least partly responsible 
for the improvement in the long-term mortality and morbidity rates 
after STEMI. Long-term treatment with an antiplatelet agent (usually 
aspirin) after STEMI is associated with a 25% reduction in the risk 
of recurrent infarction, stroke, or cardiovascular mortality (36 fewer 
events for every 1000 patients treated). An alternative antiplatelet 
agent that may be used for secondary prevention in patients intolerant 
of aspirin is clopidogrel (75 mg orally daily). ACE inhibitors or ARBs 
and, in appropriate patients, aldosterone antagonists should be used 
indefinitely by patients with clinically evident heart failure, a moder-
ate decrease in global ejection fraction, or a large regional wall motion 
abnormality to prevent late ventricular remodeling and recurrent 
ischemic events.
The chronic routine use of oral beta-adrenoceptor blockers for at 
least 2 years after STEMI is supported by well-conducted, placebo-
controlled trials.
Evidence suggests that warfarin lowers the risk of late mortality 
and the incidence of reinfarction after STEMI. Most physicians pre-
scribe aspirin routinely for all patients without contraindications 
and add warfarin for patients at increased risk of embolism (see 
“Thromboembolism” earlier). Several studies suggest that in patients 
<75 years old a low dose of aspirin (75–81 mg/d) in combination with 
warfarin administered to achieve an international normalized ratio 
>2.0 is more effective than aspirin alone for preventing recurrent MI 
and embolic cerebrovascular accident. However, there is an increased 
risk of bleeding and a high rate of discontinuation of warfarin that 
has limited clinical acceptance of combination antithrombotic therapy. 
There is an increased risk of bleeding when warfarin is added to dual 
antiplatelet therapy (see Chap. 267). However, patients who have had 
a stent implanted and have an indication for anticoagulation should 
receive dual antiplatelet therapies in combination with warfarin. Such 
patients should also receive a proton pump inhibitor to minimize the 
risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and should have regular monitoring 
CHAPTER 270 Percutaneous Coronary Interventions and Other Interventional Procedures
1885
of their hemoglobin levels and stool hematest while on combination 
antithrombotic therapy.
Finally, risk factors for atherosclerosis (Chap. 232) should be dis-
cussed with the patient and, when possible, favorably modified.
■
■FURTHER READING
Al-Khatib SM et al: Defibrillators: Selecting the right device for the 
right patient. Circulation 134:1390, 2016.
Claeys MJ: Is primary percutaneous coronary intervention still the 
superior reperfusion strategy? JAMA Intern Med 175:216, 2015.
Hollander JE et al: State-of-the-art evaluation of emergency depart-
ment patients presenting with potential acute coronary syndromes. 
Circulation 134:547, 2016.
Kidambi A, Plein S: Risk stratification in acute myocardial infarction 
with multiparametric cardiac magnetic resonance imaging: Getting to 
the core of the matter. Eur Heart J 37:1060, 2016.
Levine GN et al: 2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI focused update on primary 
percutaneous coronary intervention for patients with ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction: An update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention and the 2013 
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myo-
cardial infarction: A report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guide-
lines and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions. Circulation 133:1135, 2016.
Mannsverk J et al: Trends in modifiable risk factors are associated with 
declining incidence of hospitalized and nonhospitalized acute coro-
nary heart disease in a population. Circulation 133:7, 2016.
Montecucco F et al: Pathophysiology of ST-segment elevation myo-
cardial infarction: Novel mechanisms and treatments. Eur Heart J 
37:1268, 2016.
Mozaffarian D et al: Heart disease and stroke statistics—2016 update: 
A report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 133:e3, 
2016.
Sugiyama T et al: Differential time trends of outcomes and costs of care 
for acute myocardial infarction hospitalizations by ST elevation and 
type of intervention in the United States, 2001–2011. JAMA 4:e001445, 
2015.
270 Percutaneous Coronary 
Interventions and Other 
Interventional Procedures
David P. Faxon, Deepak L. Bhatt 
Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) was first 
introduced by Andreas Gruentzig in 1977 as an alternative to coronary 
bypass surgery. The concept was initially demonstrated by Charles 
Dotter in 1964 in peripheral vessels. The development of a small inelas-
tic balloon catheter by Gruentzig allowed expansion of the technique 
into smaller peripheral and coronary vessels. Initial coronary experi-
ence was limited to single-vessel coronary disease and discrete proxi-
mal lesions due to the technical limitations of the equipment. Advances 
in technology and greater operator experience allowed the procedure 
to grow rapidly with expanded use in patients with more complex 
lesions and multivessel disease. The introduction of coronary stents in 
1994 was one of the major advances in the field. These devices reduced 
acute complications and reduced by half the significant problems of 
acute thrombosis and late restenosis (or recurrence of the stenosis). 
Further reductions in restenosis were achieved by the introduction of 
drug-eluting stents in 2003. These stents slowly release antiprolifera-
tive drugs directly into the plaque over a few months. Percutaneous 
coronary intervention (PCI) is the most common revascularization 
procedure in the United States and is performed more than twice as 
often as coronary artery bypass surgery: nearly 900,000 patients a year.
Interventional cardiology is a separate discipline in cardiology 
that requires a dedicated 1-year interventional cardiology fellowship 
following a 3-year general cardiology fellowship in order to obtain 
a separate board certification. The discipline has also expanded to 
include interventions for structural heart disease including treatment 
of congenital heart disease and valvular heart disease; it also includes 
interventions to treat peripheral vascular disease, including atheroscle-
rotic and nonatherosclerotic lesions in the carotid, renal, aortic, and 
peripheral arterial and venous circulations.
TECHNIQUE
The initial procedure is performed in a similar manner as a diagnostic 
cardiac catheterization (Chap. 237). Arterial access is obtained via the 
femoral or radial artery. To prevent thrombotic complications during 
the procedure, patients who are anticipated to need an angioplasty 
are given aspirin (325 mg) and may be given a platelet P2Y12 inhibitor 
such as clopidogrel (loading dose of 600 mg), prasugrel (loading dose 
of 60 mg), or ticagrelor (loading dose of 180 mg) before the procedure. 
Cangrelor, an IV P2Y12 inhibitor, is approved for use in patients who 
have not received an oral agent prior to the procedure. During the 
procedure, anticoagulation is achieved by administration of unfrac-
tionated heparin, enoxaparin (a low-molecular-weight heparin), or 
bivalirudin (a direct thrombin inhibitor). In patients with ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction, high-risk acute coronary syndrome, or a large 
thrombus in the coronary artery, an intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa 
inhibitor (abciximab, tirofiban, or eptifibatide) may also be given, 
though cangrelor may be as effective with less bleeding risk.
Following placement of an introducing sheath into the artery, pre-
formed guiding catheters are used to cannulate selectively the origins 
of the coronary arteries. Through the guiding catheter, a flexible, 
steerable guidewire is negotiated down the coronary artery lumen 
using fluoroscopic guidance; it is then advanced through the stenosis 
and into the vessel beyond. This guidewire then serves as a “rail” over 
which angioplasty balloons, stents, or other therapeutic devices can 
be advanced to enlarge the narrowed segment of coronary artery. The 
artery is usually dilated with a balloon catheter followed by placement 
of a stent. The catheters and introducing sheath are removed and the 
artery manually held or in the case of radial access use of an inflatable 
cuff. One of several femoral arterial closure devices can also be used to 
achieve hemostasis. Because PCI is performed under local anesthesia 
and mild sedation, it requires only a short (1-day) hospitalization or 
less.
Angioplasty works by stretching the artery and displacing the 
plaque away from the lumen, enlarging the entire vessel (Figs. 270-1 
and 270-2). The procedure rarely results in embolization of atheroscle-
rotic material. Owing to inelastic elements in the plaque, the stretching 
of the vessel by the balloon results in small localized dissections that 
can protrude into the lumen and be a nidus for acute thrombus forma-
tion. If the dissections are severe, then they can obstruct the lumen or 
induce a thrombotic occlusion of the artery (acute closure). Stents have 
largely prevented this complication by holding the dissection flaps up 
against the vessel wall (Fig. 270-1).
Stents are currently used in >90% of coronary angioplasty proce-
dures. Stents are wire meshes (usually made of stainless steel or other 
metals, such as cobalt chromium or nitinol) that are compressed over 
a deflated angioplasty balloon. When the balloon is inflated, the stent 
is enlarged to approximate the “normal” vessel lumen. The balloon is 
then deflated and removed, leaving the stent behind to provide a per-
manent scaffold in the artery. Owing to the design of the struts, these 
devices are flexible, allowing their passage through diseased and tor-
tuous coronary vessels. Stents are rigid enough to prevent elastic recoil 
of the vessel and have dramatically improved the success and safety of 
the procedure as a result.
Drug-eluting stents further enhanced the efficacy of PCI. An anti- 
proliferative agent is attached to the metal stent by use of a thin poly-
mer coating. The antiproliferative drug elutes from the stent over a 1- to 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1886
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 270-1  Schematic diagram of the primary mechanisms of balloon angioplasty and stenting. A. A balloon angioplasty catheter is positioned into the stenosis 
over a guidewire under fluoroscopic guidance. B. The balloon is inflated, temporarily occluding the vessel. C. The lumen is enlarged primarily by stretching the vessel, 
often resulting in small dissections in the neointima. D. A stent mounted on a deflated balloon is placed into the lesion and pressed against the vessel wall with balloon 
inflation (not shown). The balloon is deflated and removed, leaving the stent permanently against the wall acting as a scaffold to hold the dissections against the wall 
and prevent vessel recoil. (Adapted from EJ Topol: Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2002.)
A
B
FIGURE 270-2  Pathology of acute effects of balloon angioplasty with intimal 
dissection and vessel stretching (A) and an example of neointimal hyperplasia 
and restenosis showing renarrowing of the vessel (B). (Panel A from M Ueda et al: 
Eur Heart J 12:937, 1991; with permission. Panel B from CE Essed et al: Br Heart 
J 49:393, 1983; with permission.)
3-month period or longer after implantation. Drug-eluting stents have 
been shown to reduce clinical restenosis by 50%, so that in uncompli-
cated lesions symptomatic restenosis occurs in 5–10% of patients. Not 
surprisingly, this led to the rapid acceptance of these devices; currently 
80–90% of all stents implanted are drug-eluting. The first-generation 
devices were coated with either sirolimus or paclitaxel. Second-generation 
drug-eluting stents use newer agents such as everolimus, biolimus, 
and zotarolimus. These second-generation drug-eluting stents appear 
to be more effective with fewer complications, such as early or late 
stent thrombosis, than the first-generation devices and, therefore, have 
replaced the first-generation stents. Biodegradable polymers that are 
used to attach the drugs to the stents may be theoretically superior to 
permanent polymers in preventing late stent thrombosis. In addition, 
the everolimus-eluting biodegradable vascular scaffold (BVS) stent has 
been shown to be reasonably safe with gradual degradation over sev-
eral years with improvement in vessel function. Additional bioresorb-
able stents are under investigation. Drug-coated balloons are covered 
with an antiproliferative drug that can also reduce restenosis, and are 
used primarily to treat in-stent restenosis.
Other interventional devices include atherectomy devices and 
thrombectomy catheters. These devices are designed to remove athero-
sclerotic plaque or thrombus and are used in conjunction with balloon 
dilatation and stent placement. Rotational atherectomy is the most 
commonly used adjunctive device and is modeled after a dentist’s drill, 
with small round burrs of 1.25–2.5 mm at the tip of a flexible wire shaft. 
The burr is passed over the guidewire up to the stenosis and drills 
away atherosclerotic material. Because the atherosclerotic particles are 
≤25 μm, they pass through the coronary microcirculation and rarely 
cause problems. The device is particularly useful in heavily calcified 
plaques that are resistant to balloon dilatation. Given the current 
advances in stents, rotational atherectomy is infrequently used. Orbital 
atherectomy is a newer approach to calcified lesions that also relies 
on a spinning burr. Directional atherectomy catheters that slice off the 
plaque and remove it are not used in the coronaries any longer but are 
used in peripheral artery disease. In acute ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction, specialized catheters without a balloon are used to aspirate 
thrombus in order to prevent embolization down the coronary vessel 
and to improve blood flow before angioplasty and stent placement. 
Current studies suggest that manual catheter thrombus aspiration 
should not be used routinely, but in certain cases of a large thrombus 
burden, can improve blood flow in primary PCI.
PCI of degenerated saphenous vein graft lesions has been associated 
with a significant incidence of distal embolization of atherosclerotic 
material, unlike PCI of native vessel disease. A number of distal pro-
tection devices have been shown to significantly reduce embolization 
and myocardial infarction in this setting. Most devices work by using a 
collapsible wire filter at the end of a guidewire that is expanded in the 
distal vessel before PCI. If atherosclerotic debris is dislodged, the bas-
ket captures the material, and at the end of the PCI, the basket is pulled 
into a delivery catheter and the debris safely removed from the patient.
SUCCESS AND COMPLICATIONS
A successful procedure (angiographic success), defined as a reduction 
of the stenosis to less than a 20% diameter narrowing, occurs in 95–99% 
of patients. Lower success rates are seen in patients with tortuous, 
small, or calcified vessels or chronic total occlusions. Chronic total 
CHAPTER 270 Percutaneous Coronary Interventions and Other Interventional Procedures
1887
occlusions have the lowest success rates and their recanalization is sig-
nificantly better if the occlusion is recent (within 3 months) or there are 
favorable anatomic features. Improvements in equipment and complex 
antegrade and retrograde techniques have increased the success rates 
of recanalization of chronic total occlusions to 70–80%.
Serious complications are rare but include a mortality rate of 
0.1–0.3% for elective cases, a large myocardial infarction in <3%, and 
stroke in <0.1%. Patients who are elderly (>65 years), undergoing an 
emergent or urgent procedure, have chronic kidney disease, present 
with an ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), or are 
in shock have significantly higher risk. Scoring systems can help to 
estimate the risk of the procedure. Myocardial infarction during PCI 
can occur for multiple reasons including an acute occluding thrombus, 
severe coronary dissection, embolization of thrombus or atherosclerotic 
material, or closure of a side branch vessel at the site of angioplasty 
or stent placement. Most myocardial infarctions are small and only 
detected by a rise in the creatine phosphokinase (CPK) or troponin 
level after the procedure. Only those with significant enzyme eleva-
tions (more than five times the upper limit of normal) are associated 
with a less favorable long-term outcome. Coronary stents have largely 
prevented coronary dissections due to the scaffolding effect of the stent.
All types of stents are prone to stent thrombosis (1–3%), either acute 
(<24 h) or subacute (1–30 days), which can be ameliorated by greater 
attention to full initial stent deployment and the use of dual antiplate-
let therapy (DAPT) (aspirin, plus a platelet P2Y12 receptor blocker 
[clopidogrel, prasugrel, or ticagrelor]). Late (30 days–1 year) and very 
late stent thromboses (>1 year) occur very infrequently with stents but 
are slightly more common with first-generation drug-eluting stents, 
necessitating DAPT for up to 1 year or longer. Use of the second- 
generation stents is associated with lower rates of late and very late 
stent thromboses, and shorter durations of DAPT (6 months) are recom-
mended. Premature discontinuation of DAPT, particularly in the first 
month after implantation, is associated with a significantly increased 
risk for stent thrombosis (three- to ninefold greater). Stent thrombosis 
results in death in 10–20% and myocardial infarction in 30–70% of 
patients. Elective surgery that requires discontinuation of antiplatelet 
therapy after drug-eluting stent implantation should be postponed until 
after 3 months and preferably after 6 months, if at all possible.
Restenosis, or renarrowing of the dilated coronary stenosis, is the 
most common complication of angioplasty and occurs in 20–50% of 
patients with balloon angioplasty alone, 10–30% of patients with bare 
metal stents, and 5–15% of patients with drug-eluting stents within 
the first year. The fact that stent place-
ment provides a larger acute luminal area 
than balloon angioplasty alone reduces 
the incidence of subsequent restenosis. 
Drug-eluting stents further reduce resteno-
sis through a reduction in excessive neoin-
timal growth over the stent. If restenosis 
does not occur, the long-term outcome is 
excellent (Fig. 270-3). Clinical restenosis 
is recognized by recurrence of angina or 
symptoms within 12 months of the pro-
cedure. Less frequently, patients with res-
tenosis can present with non-ST-segment 
elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) 
(10%) or STEMI (2%) as well. Very late 
stent thrombosis and restenosis after 1 year 
is more likely to be due to neoatheroscle-
rosis than intimal hyperplasia seen within 
the first year. Clinical restenosis requires 
confirmation of a significant stenosis at the 
site of the prior PCI. Target lesion revascu-
larization (TLR) or target vessel revascular-
ization (TVR) is defined as angiographic 
restenosis with repeat PCI or coronary 
artery bypass grafting (CABG). By angi-
ography, the incidence of restenosis is 
significantly higher than clinical restenosis 
(TLR or TVR) because many patients have mild restenosis that does 
not result in a recurrence of symptoms. The management of clinical 
restenosis is usually to repeat the PCI with balloon dilatation and 
placement of another drug-eluting stent. Once a patient has had res-
tenosis, the risk of a second restenosis is further increased. The risk 
factors for restenosis are diabetes, myocardial infarction, long lesions, 
small-diameter vessels, and suboptimal initial PCI result.
INDICATIONS
The American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Associ-
ation (AHA) guidelines extensively review the indications for PCI in 
patients with stable angina, unstable angina, NSTEMI, and STEMI and 
should be referred to for a comprehensive discussion of the indications. 
Briefly, the two principal indications for coronary revascularization in 
patients with chronic stable angina (Chap. 267) are (1) to improve angina 
symptoms in patients who remain symptomatic despite adequate med-
ical therapy and (2) to reduce mortality rates in patients with severe 
and extensive coronary disease. In patients with stable angina who are 
well controlled on medical therapy, studies such as the Clinical Out-
comes Utilizing Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation 
(COURAGE) and Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 
2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trials have shown that initial revascularization 
does not lead to better outcomes (death or MI) and can be safely 
delayed until symptoms worsen or evidence of severe ischemia on non-
invasive testing occurs. When revascularization is indicated, the choice 
of PCI or CABG depends on a number of clinical and anatomic factors. 
The Synergy between Percutaneous Coronary Intervention with Taxus 
and Cardiac Surgery (SYNTAX) trial compared PCI with the paclitaxel 
drug-eluting stent to CABG in 1800 patients with three-vessel coronary 
disease or left main disease. The study found no difference in death or 
myocardial infarction at 1 year, but repeat revascularization was sig-
nificantly higher in the stent-treated group (13.5 vs 5.9%), while stroke 
was significantly higher in the surgical group (2.2 vs 0.6%). The pri-
mary endpoint of death, myocardial infarction, stroke, or revasculari-
zation was significantly better with CABG, particularly in those with 
the most extensive coronary artery disease such as three-vessel disease. 
The 5-year results confirm these findings. The Future Revascularization 
Evaluation in Patients With Diabetes Mellitus: Optimal Management 
of Multivessel Disease (FREEDOM) trial randomized 1900 patients 
with diabetes and multivessel disease and found a significantly lower 
primary endpoint of death, myocardial infarction, or stroke with CABG 
than PCI. Recent trials comparing PCI with CABG have shown similar 
FIGURE 270-3  Long-term results from one of the first patients to receive a sirolimus-eluting stent from early 
Sao Paulo experience. (From GW Stone, in D Baim [ed]: Cardiac Catheterization, Angiography and Intervention, 
7th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006; with permission.)
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1888 outcomes for those with less extensive disease, but a better outcome 
when the coronary disease is severe and extensive. These studies sup-
port CABG for those with the most severe left main and three-vessel 
disease or those with diabetes. Lesser degrees of multivessel disease 
in patients with or without diabetes have an equal outcome with PCI, 
including left main disease with favorable angiographic characteristics.
The choice of PCI versus CABG is also related to the anticipated 
procedural success and complications of PCI and the risks of CABG. 
For PCI, the characteristics of the coronary anatomy are critically 
important. The location of the lesion in the vessel (proximal or distal), 
the degree of tortuosity, and the size of the vessel are considered. In 
addition, the lesion characteristics, including the degree of the steno-
sis, the presence of calcium, lesion length, and presence of thrombus, 
are assessed. The most common reason to decide not to do PCI is that 
the lesion(s) felt to be responsible for the patient’s symptoms are not 
treatable. This is most commonly due to the presence of a chronic total 
occlusion (>3 months in duration) with unfavorable characteristics. A 
lesion classification to characterize the likelihood of success or failure 
of PCI has been developed by the ACC/AHA. Lesions with the highest 
success are called type A lesions (such as proximal non-calcified subto-
tal lesions), and those with the lowest success or highest complication 
rate are type C lesions (such as chronic total occlusions). Intermediate 
lesions are classified as type B1 or B2 depending on the number of 
unfavorable characteristics. Approximately 25–30% of patients will not 
be candidates for PCI due to unfavorable anatomy, whereas only 5% 
of CABG patients will not be candidates for surgery due to coronary 
anatomy. The primary reason for being considered inoperable with 
CABG is the presence of severe comorbidities such as advanced age, 
frailty, severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), poor left 
ventricular function, or lack of suitable surgical conduits or poor distal 
targets for bypass.
Another consideration in choosing a revascularization strategy is 
the degree of revascularization. In patients with multivessel disease, 
bypass grafts can usually be placed to all vessels >2 mm with sig-
nificant stenosis, whereas PCI may be able to treat only some of the 
lesions due to the presence of unfavorable anatomy. Assessment of the 
significance of intermediate lesions using fractional flow reserve (FFR) 
(Chap. 237) can assist in determining which lesions should be revascu-
larized. The Fractional Flow Reserve versus Angiography for Multives-
sel Evaluation (FAME) trial showed a 30% reduction in adverse events 
when revascularization by PCI was restricted to those lesions that were 
hemodynamically significant (FFR ≤0.80) rather than when guided by 
angiography alone. Thus, complete revascularization of all functionally 
significant lesions should be favored and considered when choosing 
the optimal revascularization strategy. Given the multiple factors that 
need to be considered in choosing the best revascularization for an 
individual patient with multivessel disease, it is optimal to have a 
discussion among the cardiac surgeon, interventional cardiologist, and 
the physicians caring for the patient (so-called Heart Team) to weigh 
the choices properly.
Patients with acute coronary syndrome are at excess risk of short- 
and long-term mortality. Randomized clinical trials have shown that 
PCI is superior to intensive medical therapy in reducing mortality 
and myocardial infarction, with the benefit largely confined to those 
patients who are high risk. High-risk patients are defined as those 
with any one of the following: refractory ischemia, recurrent angina, 
positive cardiac-specific enzymes, new ST-segment depression, low 
ejection fraction, severe arrhythmias, or a recent PCI or CABG. PCI is 
preferred over surgical therapy in most high-risk patients with acute 
coronary syndromes unless they have severe multivessel disease or 
the culprit lesion responsible for the unstable presentation cannot be 
adequately treated. In STEMI, thrombolysis or PCI (primary PCI) are 
effective methods to restore coronary blood flow and salvage myo-
cardium within the first 12 h after onset of chest pain. Because PCI is 
more effective in restoring flow than thrombolysis, it is preferred if 
readily available within 90 min of presentation to the hospital. PCI is 
also performed following thrombolysis to facilitate adequate reperfu-
sion or as a rescue procedure in those who do not achieve reperfusion 
from thrombolysis, cannot be rapidly transferred to a hospital that can 
perform primary PCI, or in those who develop cardiogenic shock.
OTHER INTERVENTIONAL TECHNIQUES
■
■STRUCTURAL HEART DISEASE
Interventional treatment for structural heart disease (adult congenital 
heart disease and valvular heart disease) is a significant and growing 
component of the field of interventional cardiology.
The most common adult congenital lesion to be treated with percu-
taneous techniques is closure of atrial septal defects (Chap. 264). The 
procedure is done as in a diagnostic right heart catheterization with the 
passage of a catheter up the femoral vein into the right atrium. With 
echo and fluoroscopic guidance, the size and location of the defect can 
be accurately defined, and closure is accomplished using one of several 
approved devices. All devices use a left atrial and right atrial wire mesh 
or covered disk that are pulled together to capture the atrial septum 
around the defect and seal it off. The Amplatzer Septal Occluder device 
(AGA Medical, Minneapolis, Minnesota) is the most commonly used 
in the United States. The success rate in selected patients is 85–95%, 
and the device complications are rare and include device embolization, 
infection, or erosion. Closure of patent foramen ovale (PFO) is done in 
a similar way. PFO closure may be considered in patients who have had 
recurrent paradoxical stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA) despite 
adequate medical therapy including anticoagulation or antiplatelet 
therapy. The CLOSURE I trial randomized 909 patients with crypto-
genic stroke or TIA who had a PFO. Closure did not reduce the primary 
endpoint of death within 30 days or death following a neurologic 
cause during 2 years of follow-up or stroke/TIA within 2 years. Other 
trials have confirmed these findings. However, the 10-year follow up 
from the Randomized Evaluation of Recurrent Stroke Comparing PFO 
Closure to Established Current Standard of Care Treatment (RESPECT) 
trial did suggest a benefit of closure in reducing the risk for recurrent 
cryptogenic stroke. The use in the treatment of migraine is not sup-
ported by the current data.
Similar devices can also be used to close patent ductus arteriosus 
and ventricular septal defects. Other congenital diseases that can be 
treated percutaneously include coarctation of the aorta, pulmonic 
stenosis, peripheral pulmonary stenosis, and other abnormal commu-
nications between the cardiac chambers or vessels.
The treatment of valvular heart disease is the most rapidly growing 
area in interventional cardiology. Until recently, the only available tech-
niques were balloon valvuloplasty for the treatment of aortic, mitral, 
or pulmonic stenosis (Chap. 256). Mitral valvuloplasty is the preferred 
treatment for symptomatic patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis 
who have favorable anatomy. The outcome in these patients is equal to 
that of surgical commissurotomy. The success is highly related to the 
echocardiographic appearance of the valve. The most favorable setting 
is commissural fusion without calcification or subchordal fusion and 
the absence of significant mitral regurgitation. Access is obtained from 
the femoral vein using a transseptal technique in which a long metal 
catheter with a needle tip is advanced from the femoral vein through 
the right atrium and atrial septum at the level of the foramen ovale 
into the left atrium. A guidewire is advanced into the left ventricle, 
and a balloon-dilatation catheter is negotiated across the mitral valve 
and inflated to a predetermined size to enlarge the valve. The most 
commonly used dilatation catheter is the Inoue balloon. The technique 
splits the commissural fusion and commonly results in a doubling 
of the mitral valve area. The success of the procedure in favorable 
anatomy is 95% and severe complications are rare (1–2%). The most 
common complications are tamponade due to puncture into the 
pericardium during the transseptal puncture or the creation of severe 
mitral regurgitation due to damage to the valve leaflets.
Severe mitral regurgitation can be treated percutaneously using 
the MitraClip (Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois) device. The procedure 
involves the passage of a catheter into the left atrium using the trans-
septal technique. A special catheter with a metallic clip on the end is 
passed through the mitral valve and retracted to catch and clip together 
CHAPTER 270 Percutaneous Coronary Interventions and Other Interventional Procedures
1889
the mid portion of the anterior and posterior mitral valve leaflets. 
The clip creates a double opening in the mitral valve and thereby 
reduces mitral regurgitation similar to the surgical Alfieri repair. In the 
Endovascular Valve Edge-to-Edge Repair Study (EVEREST II) trial, the 
device was less effective than surgical repair or replacement but was 
shown to be safe. Subsequent trials have shown it to be reasonably 
effective for patients who are not good candidates for surgical repair, 
particularly when the regurgitation is due to functional causes.
Severe aortic stenosis can be treated with balloon valvuloplasty 
as well. In this setting, the valvuloplasty balloon catheter is placed 
retrograde across the aortic valve from the femoral artery and briefly 
inflated to stretch open the valve. The success is much less favorable, 
with only 50% achieving an aortic valve area of >1 cm2 and a restenosis 
rate of 25–50% after 6–12 months. This poor success rate has limited its 
use to patients who are not surgical candidates or as a bridge to sur-
gery or transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR). In this setting, 
the intermediate-term mortality rate of the procedure is high (10%). 
Repeat aortic valvuloplasty as a treatment for aortic valve restenosis 
has been reported.
Percutaneous TAVR has been shown to be an effective treatment for 
intermediate, high-risk, and inoperable patients with aortic stenosis. 
Currently, two valve models, the Edwards SAPIEN valve (Edwards 
Lifescience, Irvine, California) and the CoreValve ReValving system 
(Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota) are available. In more than 
50,000 cases worldwide since 2002, follow-up shows no evidence of 
restenosis or severe prosthetic valve dysfunction in the midterm, but 
long-term outcomes of 5–10 years are not yet available. The CoreValve 
is self-expanding, while the Edwards valve is balloon expanded. The 
cannulas are large (14–22 French), and retrograde access via the femoral 
artery is most commonly chosen, if possible. In patients with peripheral 
artery disease, access via the subclavian artery, aorta, or transapically 
through a surgical incision can be used. Following balloon valvu-
loplasty, the valve is positioned across the valve and deployed with 
post-deployment balloon inflation to ensure full contact with the aortic 
annulus. The success rate is >90%, and the 30-day mortality rate is 
2–15% based on preoperative risk. The Placement of Aortic Transcath-
eter Valve (PARTNER) randomized trial of the Edwards valve showed 
a 55% reduction in 1-year mortality and major adverse events in the 
extreme-risk group randomized to TAVR compared with medical ther-
apy. In separate randomized trials, moderate- and high-risk patients 
had similar outcomes to surgical valve replacement at 1 year. As a 
result, this valve is approved for both intermediate-risk, high-risk, and 
extreme-risk patients with severe aortic stenosis.
Aortic and mitral bioprosthetic valve degeneration can be treated 
with repeat surgery or, in high-risk patients, with a valve-in-valve proce-
dure where a percutaneous valve is placed inside 
of the prior surgical valve. It has been shown to 
be effective for aortic and mitral valves.
Pulmonic stenosis can also be effectively 
treated with balloon valvuloplasty and per-
cutaneously replaced with the Melody valve 
(Medtronic). Tricuspid valve interventions 
remain experimental.
■
■PERIPHERAL ARTERY 
INTERVENTIONS
The use of percutaneous interventions to treat 
symptomatic patients with arterial obstruction 
in the carotid, renal, aortic, and peripheral ves-
sels is an effective alternative to vascular sur-
gery. Randomized clinical trial data support the 
use of carotid stenting in patients at high risk 
of complications from carotid endarterectomy 
(Fig. 270-4). Recent trials suggest similar out-
comes with carotid stenting and carotid endar-
terectomy in patients at average risk, although 
depending on the patient’s risk for peripro-
cedural stroke or myocardial infarction, one 
A
B
FIGURE 270-4  A. An example of a high-risk patient who requires carotid revascularization, but who is not a 
candidate for carotid endarterectomy. B. Carotid artery stenting resulted in an excellent angiographic result. 
(From M Belkin, DL Bhatt: Circulation 119:2302, 2009; with permission.)
procedure may be preferred over the other. The success rate of periph-
eral artery interventional procedures has been improving, including 
treatment for long segments of occlusive disease historically treated by 
peripheral bypass surgery (Fig. 270-5). The use of drug-coated balloons 
and drug-eluting stents has shown to reduce restenosis when compared 
with balloon angioplasty alone. Peripheral intervention is increasingly 
part of the training of an interventional cardiologist, and most programs 
now require an additional year of training after the interventional car-
diology training year. The techniques and outcomes are described in 
detail in the chapter on peripheral vascular disease (Chap. 275).
■
■CIRCULATORY SUPPORT TECHNIQUES
The use of circulatory support techniques is indicated for the man-
agement of patients with shock or hemodynamic instability and occa-
sionally is needed in order to safely perform PCI on hemodynamically 
unstable patients. It also can be useful in helping to stabilize patients 
before surgical interventions. The most commonly used device is the 
percutaneous intraaortic balloon pump developed in the early 1960s. A 
7- to 10-French, 25- to 50-mL balloon catheter is placed retrograde from 
the femoral artery into the descending aorta between the aortic arch 
and the abdominal aortic bifurcation. It is connected to a helium gas 
inflation system that synchronizes the inflation to coincide with early 
diastole with deflation by mid-diastole. As a result, it increases early 
diastolic pressure, lowers systolic pressure, and lowers late diastolic 
pressure through displacement of blood from the descending aorta 
(counterpulsation). This results in an increase in coronary blood flow 
and a decrease in afterload. It is contraindicated in patients with aortic 
regurgitation, aortic dissection, or severe peripheral artery disease. The 
major complications are vascular and thrombotic. Intravenous heparin 
is given in order to reduce thrombotic complications.
Another useful support device is the Impella (Abiomed, Danvers, 
Massachusetts). The Impella catheter is placed percutaneously from the 
femoral artery into the left ventricle. The catheter has a small microaxial 
pump at its tip that can pump up to 2.5–5 L/min from the left ventricle 
to the aorta. The smaller devices can be placed percutaneously but the 
larger devices need surgical access. Other support devices include Tan-
demHeart (CardiacAssist, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania), which involves 
placement of a large 21-French catheter from the femoral vein through 
the right atrium into the left atrium using the transseptal technique 
and a catheter in the femoral artery. A centrifugal pump can deliver 
5 L of blood per minute. It may be useful in patients in shock or with 
STEMI or very-high-risk PCI. Patients can also be placed on peripheral 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) using large cannulas 
placed in the femoral artery and vein. This technique can be performed 
in the catheterization laboratory and is useful for support of patients 
with acute respiratory failure or cardiac failure.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1890
■
■INTERVENTIONS FOR PULMONARY EMBOLISM
The treatment of deep vein thrombosis is intravenous anticoagulation, 
with placement of an inferior vena cava filter if recurrent pulmonary 
emboli (PE) occur or anticoagulation is not possible. Postphlebitic 
syndrome is a serious condition due to chronic venous obstruction that 
can lead to chronic leg edema and venous ulcers. Preliminary studies 
suggest that mechanical treatments may have a role in treatment, and 
a large trial is ongoing.
PE should be treated with fibrinolytic agents if massive and in some 
cases if submassive. Surgical pulmonary embolectomy is an option for 
the treatment of massive PE with hemodynamic instability in patients 
who have contraindications for systemic fibrinolysis or those in whom 
it has failed. Catheter-based therapies for submassive and massive PEs 
are still evolving, but studies have shown promise. The techniques 
employed include the use of aspiration of the clot with a large catheter 
(10 French), intraclot infusion of a thrombolytic agent followed by 
aspiration, ultrasound-assisted catheter-directed thrombolysis, and 
use of rheolytic thrombectomy. Success for these techniques has been 
reported to be 80–90%, with major complications occurring in 2–4% of 
patients.
■
■INTERVENTIONS FOR REFRACTORY HYPERTENSION
The recent recognition of the importance of the renal sympathetic nerves 
in modulating blood pressure has led to a technique to selectively 
denervate renal sympathetic nerves in patients with refractory hyper-
tension. The procedure involves applying low-power radiofrequency 
treatment via a catheter along the length of both renal arteries. In the 
randomized Symplicity HTN-2 trial, renal denervation significantly 
reduced blood pressure compared with medical therapy. The Symplic-
ity device (Medtronic, Minnesota) is approved in Europe, though the 
randomized and blinded U.S. Symplicity HTN-3 trial showed no effect. 
Further optimization of the technique is needed with evidence from 
randomized trials of efficacy before approval in the United States.
CONCLUSION
Interventional cardiology continues to expand its borders. Treatment 
for coronary artery disease, including complex anatomic subsets, con-
tinues to advance. Technological advances such as drug-eluting stents, 
now already in their second generation are improving the results of 
PCI. PCI is the treatment of choice for patients with acute coronary 
syndromes. For patients with stable coronary disease, PCI is effective 
in symptom alleviation. Use of a Heart Team is the best way to make 
Hypertension is one of the leading causes of the global burden of 
disease. Elevated blood pressure affects more than one billion individ-
uals and causes an estimated 9.4 million deaths per year. Hypertension 
doubles the risk of cardiovascular diseases, including coronary heart 
disease (CHD), congestive heart failure (CHF), ischemic and hemor-
rhagic stroke, renal failure, and peripheral arterial disease (PAD). It 
often is associated with additional cardiovascular disease risk factors, 
271 Hypertensive Vascular 
Disease
Theodore A. Kotchen 
decisions concerning which revascularization—PCI or CABG—is best 
for an individual patient. Treatment of peripheral and cerebrovascular 
disease can be effective with percutaneous techniques. Structural heart 
disease is increasingly being treated with percutaneous options, with 
a high likelihood that interventional approaches will compete with 
open-heart surgery in a significant proportion of cases in years to come.
■
■FURTHER READING
Faxon DP, Williams DO: Interventional cardiology: Current status 
and future directions in coronary disease and valvular heart disease. 
Circulation 133:2697, 2016.
Levine GN et al: 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Percutaneous 
Coronary Intervention: Executive Summary: A Report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines and the Society for Cardiovascular Angi-
ography and Interventions. Circulation 124:2574, 2011.
Moscucci M (ed): Grossman & Baim’s Cardiac Catheterization, Angiog-
raphy, and Intervention 8th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2014.
Vahl TP et al: Transcatheter aortic valve replacement 2016: A modern-
day “Through the looking-glass” adventure. J Am Coll Cardiol 
67:1472, 2016.
A
D
E
B
C
FIGURE 270-5  Peripheral interventional procedures have become highly effective at treating anatomic lesions previously amenable only to bypass surgery. A. 
Complete occlusion of the left superficial femoral artery. B. Wire and catheter advanced into subintimal space. C. Intravascular ultrasound positioned in the subintimal 
space to guide retrograde wire placement through the occluded vessel. D. Balloon dilation of the occlusion. E. Stent placement with excellent angiographic result. (From 
A Al Mahameed, DL Bhatt: Cleve Clin J Med 73:S45, 2006; with permission. Copyright © 2006 Cleveland Clinic Foundation. All rights reserved.)
CHAPTER 271 Hypertensive Vascular Disease
1891
hypertension. Clinically, although replication has been a challenge, 
results of candidate gene studies and genome-wide association stud-
ies in large numbers of individuals have also identified a number of 
hypertension-related genes, several of which are involved in pathways 
that regulate arterial pressure, e.g., genes that encode components of 
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, atrial natriuretic peptide, the 
beta-2 adrenoreceptor, and alpha adducin (associated with increased 
renal tubular reabsorption of sodium). Overall, identified genetic 
determinants account for ~1% of blood pressure variance, whereas 
based on family studies, heritability of hypertension is estimated to 
be in the range of 30–40%. One hypothesis to account for the “missing 
heritability” is that epigenetic modifications of DNA contribute to the 
heritability of blood pressure. Epigenetic processes are changes in gene 
expression that occur without changes in DNA sequence. In contrast to 
DNA sequence, the epigenome is relatively susceptible to modification 
by environmental exposures. Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged 
as a hallmark of several complex diseases, including hypertension. 
Several recent studies have described epigenetic modifications of 
specific genes associated with hypertension. However, current results 
of detailed genome-wide epigenetic modifications of DNA are limited 
and conflicting.
Preliminary evidence suggests that there may also be genetic deter-
minants of target organ damage and vascular disease attributed to 
hypertension. Family studies indicate significant heritability of left 
ventricular mass, and there is considerable individual variation in the 
responses of the heart to hypertension. Family studies and variations 
in candidate genes associated with renal damage suggest that genetic 
factors also may contribute to hypertensive nephropathy. Specific 
genetic variants have been linked to CHD and stroke. In the future, it is 
possible that DNA and epigenetic analyses may predict individual risk 
for hypertension and target organ damage and will identify responders 
to specific classes of antihypertensive agents.
MECHANISMS OF HYPERTENSION
To provide a framework for understanding the pathogenesis and 
treatment options for hypertensive disorders, it is useful to understand 
factors involved in the regulation of both normal and elevated arterial 
pressure. Cardiac output and peripheral resistance are the two deter-
minants of arterial pressure (Fig. 271-1). Cardiac output is determined 
by stroke volume and heart rate; stroke volume is related to myocardial 
contractility and to the size of the vascular compartment. Peripheral 
resistance is determined by functional and anatomic changes in small 
arteries (lumen diameter 100–400 μm) and arterioles.
■
■INTRAVASCULAR VOLUME
Sodium is predominantly an extracellular ion and is a primary deter-
minant of the extracellular fluid volume. When NaCl intake exceeds 
the capacity of the kidney to excrete sodium, vascular volume may 
initially expand and cardiac output may increase. However, many vas-
cular beds have the capacity to autoregulate blood flow, and if constant 
blood flow is to be maintained in the face of increased arterial pressure, 
resistance within that bed must increase, since
=
Blood Flow
pressure across the vascular bed
vascular resistance
The initial elevation of blood pressure in response to vascular 
volume expansion may be related to an increase of cardiac output; 
Arterial pressure
Cardiac output
Peripheral resistance
Stroke volume
Heart rate
Vascular structure
Vascular function
FIGURE 271-1  Determinants of arterial pressure.
and the risk of cardiovascular disease increases with the total burden 
of risk factors. Although antihypertensive therapy reduces the risks of 
cardiovascular and renal disease, large segments of the hypertensive 
population are either untreated or inadequately treated.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Blood pressure levels, the rate of age-related increases in blood pres-
sure, and the prevalence of hypertension vary among countries and 
among subpopulations within a country. Hypertension is present in all 
populations except for small numbers of individuals living in isolated 
societies. In industrialized societies, blood pressure increases steadily 
during the first two decades of life. In children and adolescents, blood 
pressure is associated with growth and maturation. Blood pressure 
“tracks” over time in children and between adolescence and young 
adulthood. In the United States, average systolic blood pressure is 
higher for men than for women during early adulthood, although 
among older individuals the age-related rate of rise is steeper for 
women. Consequently, among individuals aged ≥60 years, systolic 
blood pressures of women are higher than those of men. Among adults, 
diastolic blood pressure also increases progressively with age until 
~55 years, after which it tends to decrease. The consequence is a wid-
ening of pulse pressure (the difference between systolic and diastolic 
blood pressure) beyond age 60.
In the United States, ~78 million adults have hypertension. Hyper-
tension prevalence is 33.5% in non-Hispanic blacks, 28.9% in non- 
Hispanic whites, and 20.7% in Mexican Americans. The likelihood 
of hypertension increases with age, and among individuals aged 
≥60 years, the prevalence is 65.4%. Recent evidence suggests that the 
prevalence of hypertension in the United States may be increasing, 
possibly as a consequence of increasing obesity. The prevalence of 
hypertension and stroke mortality rates is higher in the southeastern 
United States than in other regions. In African Americans, hyperten-
sion appears earlier, is generally more severe, and results in higher 
rates of morbidity and mortality from stroke, left ventricular hypertro-
phy, CHF, and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) than in white Americans. 
According to NHANES (National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey) data, in 2007–2010, 81.5% of those with hypertension were 
aware they had it, 74.9% were being treated, but only 52.5% were 
controlled.
Both environmental and genetic factors may contribute to regional 
and racial variations in hypertension prevalence. Studies of societies 
undergoing “acculturation” and studies of migrants from a less to a 
more urbanized setting indicate a profound environmental contribu-
tion to blood pressure. Obesity and weight gain are strong, indepen-
dent risk factors for hypertension. It has been estimated that 60% of 
hypertensives are >20% overweight. Among populations, hyperten-
sion prevalence is related to dietary NaCl intake, and the age-related 
increase in blood pressure may be augmented by a high NaCl intake. 
Low dietary intakes of calcium and potassium also may contribute 
to the risk of hypertension. The urine sodium-to-potassium ratio (an 
index of both sodium and potassium intakes) is a stronger correlate 
of blood pressure than is either sodium or potassium alone. Alcohol 
consumption, psychosocial stress, and low levels of physical activity 
also may contribute to hypertension.
■
■GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Although specific genetic variants have been identified in rare 
Mendelian forms of hypertension (Table 271–5), these variants are 
not applicable to the vast majority (>98%) of patients with hyper-
tension. For most individuals, it is likely that hypertension represents a 
polygenic disorder in which a combination of genes acts in concert with 
environmental exposures to make only a modest contribution to blood 
pressure. Furthermore, different subsets of genes may lead to different 
phenotypes associated with hypertension, e.g., obesity, dyslipidemia, 
insulin resistance.
Adoption, twin, and family studies document a significant heri-
table component to blood pressure levels and hypertension. Animal 
models (including selectively bred rats and congenic rat strains) 
have identified a number of genetic loci and genes associated with 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1892 however, over time, peripheral resistance increases and cardiac output 
reverts toward normal. Whether this hypothesized sequence of events 
occurs in the pathogenesis of hypertension is not clear. What is clear 
is that salt can activate a number of neural, endocrine/paracrine, and 
vascular mechanisms, all of which have the potential to increase arte-
rial pressure. The effect of sodium on blood pressure is related to the 
provision of sodium with chloride; non-chloride salts of sodium have 
little or no effect on blood pressure. As arterial pressure increases in 
response to a high NaCl intake, urinary sodium excretion increases 
and sodium balance is maintained at the expense of an increase in 
arterial pressure. The mechanism for this “pressure-natriuresis” phe-
nomenon may involve a subtle increase in the glomerular filtration 
rate, decreased absorbing capacity of the renal tubules, and possibly 
hormonal factors such as atrial natriuretic factor. In individuals with 
an impaired capacity to excrete sodium, greater increases in arterial 
pressure are required to achieve natriuresis and sodium balance.
NaCl-dependent hypertension may be a consequence of a decreased 
capacity of the kidney to excrete sodium, due either to intrinsic renal 
disease or to increased production of a salt-retaining hormone (min-
eralocorticoid) resulting in increased renal tubular reabsorption of 
sodium. Renal tubular sodium reabsorption also may be augmented 
by increased neural activity to the kidney. In each of these situations, 
a higher arterial pressure may be required to achieve sodium balance. 
Conversely, salt-wasting disorders are associated with low blood 
pressure levels. ESRD is an extreme example of volume-dependent 
hypertension. In ~80% of these patients, vascular volume and hyper-
tension can be controlled with adequate dialysis; in the other 20%, 
the mechanism of hypertension is related to increased activity of the 
renin-angiotensin system and is likely to be responsive to pharmaco-
logic blockade of renin-angiotensin.
■
■AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Adrenergic reflexes modulate blood pressure over the short term, and 
adrenergic function, in concert with hormonal and volume-related 
factors, contributes to the long-term regulation of arterial pressure. 
Norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine all play important roles 
in tonic and phasic cardiovascular regulation.
The activities of the adrenergic receptors are mediated by guanosine 
nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins (G proteins) and by intracellu-
lar concentrations of downstream second messengers. In addition to 
receptor affinity and density, physiologic responsiveness to catecho-
lamines may be altered by the efficiency of receptor-effector coupling 
at a site “distal” to receptor binding. The receptor sites are relatively 
specific both for the transmitter substance and for the response that 
occupancy of the receptor site elicits. Based on their physiology and 
pharmacology, adrenergic receptors have been divided into two 
principal types: α and β. These types have been differentiated further 
into α1, α2, β1, and β2 receptors. Recent molecular cloning studies have 
identified several additional subtypes. α Receptors are occupied and 
activated more avidly by norepinephrine than by epinephrine, and the 
reverse is true for β receptors. α1 Receptors are located on postsynaptic 
cells in smooth muscle and elicit vasoconstriction. α2 Receptors are 
localized on presynaptic membranes of postganglionic nerve terminals 
that synthesize norepinephrine. When activated by catecholamines, 
α2 receptors act as negative feedback controllers, inhibiting further 
norepinephrine release. In the kidney, activation of α1-adrenergic recep-
tors increases renal tubular reabsorption of sodium. Different classes of 
antihypertensive agents either inhibit α1 receptors or act as agonists of α2 
receptors and reduce systemic sympathetic outflow. Activation of myo-
cardial β1 receptors stimulates the rate and strength of cardiac contraction 
and consequently increases cardiac output. β1 Receptor activation also 
stimulates renin release from the kidney. Another class of antihyperten-
sive agents acts by inhibiting β1 receptors. Activation of β2 receptors by 
epinephrine relaxes vascular smooth muscle and results in vasodilation.
Circulating catecholamine concentrations may affect the number of 
adrenoreceptors in various tissues. Downregulation of receptors may 
be a consequence of sustained high levels of catecholamines and pro-
vides an explanation for decreasing responsiveness, or tachyphylaxis, 
to catecholamines. For example, orthostatic hypotension frequently is 
observed in patients with pheochromocytoma, possibly due to the lack 
of norepinephrine-induced vasoconstriction with assumption of the 
upright posture. Conversely, with chronic reduction of neurotransmit-
ter substances, adrenoreceptors may increase in number or be upreg-
ulated, resulting in increased responsiveness to the neurotransmitter. 
Chronic administration of agents that block adrenergic receptors may 
result in upregulation, and abrupt withdrawal of those agents may pro-
duce a condition of temporary hypersensitivity to sympathetic stimuli. 
For example, clonidine is an antihypertensive agent that is a centrally 
acting α2 agonist that inhibits sympathetic outflow. Rebound hyperten-
sion may occur with the abrupt cessation of clonidine therapy, probably 
as a consequence of upregulation of α1 receptors.
Several reflexes modulate blood pressure on a minute-to-minute 
basis. One arterial baroreflex is mediated by stretch-sensitive sensory 
nerve endings in the carotid sinuses and the aortic arch. The rate of 
firing of these baroreceptors increases with arterial pressure, and the 
net effect is a decrease in sympathetic outflow, resulting in decreases 
in arterial pressure and heart rate. This is a primary mechanism for 
rapid buffering of acute fluctuations of arterial pressure that may occur 
during postural changes, behavioral or physiologic stress, and changes 
in blood volume. However, the activity of the baroreflex declines or 
adapts to sustained increases in arterial pressure such that the barore-
ceptors are reset to higher pressures. Patients with autonomic neur-
opathy and impaired baroreflex function may have extremely labile 
blood pressures with difficult-to-control episodic blood pressure spikes 
associated with tachycardia.
In both normal-weight and obese individuals, hypertension often 
is associated with increased sympathetic outflow. Based on recordings 
of postganglionic muscle nerve activity (detected by a microelectrode 
inserted in a peroneal nerve in the leg), sympathetic outflow tends 
to be higher in hypertensive than in normotensive individuals. Sym-
pathetic outflow is increased in obesity-related hypertension and in 
hypertension associated with obstructive sleep apnea. Baroreceptor 
activation via electrical stimulation of carotid sinus afferent nerves 
lowers blood pressure in patients with “resistant” hypertension. Drugs 
that block the sympathetic nervous system are potent antihypertensive 
agents, indicating that the sympathetic nervous system plays a permis-
sive, although not necessarily a causative, role in the maintenance of 
increased arterial pressure.
Pheochromocytoma is the most blatant example of hypertension 
related to increased catecholamine production, in this instance by a 
tumor. Blood pressure can be reduced by surgical excision of the tumor 
or by pharmacologic treatment with an α1 receptor antagonist or with 
an inhibitor of tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting step in catecho-
lamine biosynthesis.
■
■RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN-ALDOSTERONE
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system contributes to the regulation 
of arterial pressure primarily via the vasoconstrictor properties of angi-
otensin II and the sodium-retaining properties of aldosterone. Renin is 
an aspartyl protease that is synthesized as an enzymatically inactive 
precursor, prorenin. Most renin in the circulation is synthesized in the 
renal afferent renal arteriole. Prorenin may be secreted directly into the 
circulation or may be activated within secretory cells and released as 
active renin. Although human plasma contains two to five times more 
prorenin than renin, there is no evidence that prorenin contributes to 
the physiologic activity of this system. There are three primary stimuli 
for renin secretion: (1) decreased NaCl transport in the distal portion of 
the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle that abuts the correspond-
ing afferent arteriole (macula densa), (2) decreased pressure or stretch 
within the renal afferent arteriole (baroreceptor mechanism), and (3) 
sympathetic nervous system stimulation of renin-secreting cells via β1 
adrenoreceptors. Conversely, renin secretion is inhibited by increased 
NaCl transport in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle, by 
increased stretch within the renal afferent arteriole, and by β1 receptor 
blockade. In addition, angiotensin II directly inhibits renin secretion due 
to angiotensin II type 1 receptors on juxtaglomerular cells, and renin 
secretion increases in response to pharmacologic blockade of either 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) or angiotensin II receptors.
CHAPTER 271 Hypertensive Vascular Disease
1893
Once released into the circulation, active renin cleaves a substrate, 
angiotensinogen, to form an inactive decapeptide, angiotensin I 
(Fig. 271-2). A converting enzyme, located primarily but not exclu-
sively in the pulmonary circulation, converts angiotensin I to the active 
octapeptide, angiotensin II, by releasing the C-terminal histidyl-leucine 
dipeptide. The same converting enzyme cleaves a number of other pep-
tides, including and thereby inactivating the vasodilator bradykinin. 
Acting primarily through angiotensin II type 1 (AT1) receptors on cell 
membranes, angiotensin II is a potent pressor substance, the primary 
tropic factor for the secretion of aldosterone by the adrenal zona glo-
merulosa. Independent of its hemodynamic effects, angiotensin II may 
play a role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis through a direct cel-
lular action on the vessel wall. The angiotensin II type 2 (AT2) receptor 
has the opposite functional effects of the AT1 receptor. The AT2 receptor 
induces vasodilation, sodium excretion, and inhibition of cell growth 
and matrix formation. Experimental evidence suggests that the AT2 
receptor improves vascular remodeling by stimulating smooth muscle 
cell apoptosis and contributes to the regulation of glomerular filtration 
rate. AT1 receptor blockade induces an increase in AT2 receptor activity.
Renin-secreting tumors are clear examples of renin-dependent 
hypertension. In the kidney, these tumors include benign hemangio-
pericytomas of the juxtaglomerular apparatus and, infrequently, renal 
carcinomas, including Wilms’ tumors. Renin-producing carcinomas 
also have been described in lung, liver, pancreas, colon, and adrenals. 
Renovascular hypertension is another renin-mediated form of hyper-
tension. Obstruction of the renal artery leads to decreased renal perfu-
sion pressure, thereby stimulating renin secretion. Over time, possibly 
as a consequence of secondary renal damage, this form of hypertension 
may become less renin-dependent.
Angiotensinogen, renin, and angiotensin II are also synthesized 
locally in many tissues, including the brain, pituitary, aorta, arteries, 
heart, adrenal glands, kidneys, adipocytes, leukocytes, ovaries, testes, 
uterus, spleen, and skin. Angiotensin II in tissues may be formed by 
the enzymatic activity of renin or by other proteases, e.g., tonin, chy-
mase, and cathepsins. In addition to regulating local blood flow, tissue 
angiotensin II is a mitogen that stimulates growth and contributes 
to modeling and repair. Excess tissue angiotensin II may contribute 
to atherosclerosis, cardiac hypertrophy, and renal failure, and conse-
quently may be a target for pharmacologic therapy to prevent target 
organ damage.
Angiotensin II is the primary tropic factor regulating the synthesis 
and secretion of aldosterone by the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal 
cortex. Aldosterone synthesis is also dependent on potassium, and 
aldosterone secretion may be decreased in potassium-depleted indi-
viduals. Although acute elevations of adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH) levels also increase aldosterone secretion, ACTH is not an 
important tropic factor for the chronic regulation of aldosterone.
Aldosterone is a potent mineralocorticoid that increases sodium 
reabsorption by amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channels (ENaC) 
on the apical surface of the principal cells of the renal cortical collect-
ing duct (Chap. 303). Electric neutrality is maintained by exchanging 
sodium for potassium and hydrogen ions. Consequently, increased 
aldosterone secretion may result in hypokalemia and alkalosis. Beyond 
its renal effects, aldosterone can exert deleterious effects on the 
cardiovascular system, including fibrosis, endothelial dysfunction, 
inflammation, and oxidative stress, as well as an overall increase in 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
Cortisol also binds to the mineralocorticoid receptor but normally 
functions as a less potent mineralocorticoid than aldosterone because 
cortisol is converted to cortisone by the enzyme 11 β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 2. Cortisone has no affinity for the mineralocor-
ticoid receptor. Primary aldosteronism is a compelling example of 
mineralocorticoid-mediated hypertension. In this disorder, adrenal 
aldosterone synthesis and release are independent of renin-angiotensin, 
and renin release is suppressed by the resulting volume expansion.
Mineralocorticoid receptors are expressed in a number of tissues 
in addition to the kidney, and mineralocorticoid receptor activation 
induces structural and functional alterations in the heart, kidney, and 
blood vessels, leading to myocardial fibrosis, nephrosclerosis, and vas-
cular inflammation and remodeling, perhaps as a consequence of oxi-
dative stress. These effects are amplified by a high salt intake. In animal 
models, high circulating aldosterone levels stimulate cardiac fibrosis 
and left ventricular hypertrophy, and spironolactone (an aldosterone 
antagonist) prevents aldosterone-induced myocardial fibrosis. Patho-
logic patterns of left ventricular geometry also have been associated 
with elevations of plasma aldosterone concentration in hypertensive 
patients. In patients with CHF, low-dose spironolactone reduces the 
risk of progressive heart failure and sudden death from cardiac causes 
by 30%. Due to a renal hemodynamic effect, in patients with primary 
aldosteronism, high circulating levels of aldosterone also may cause 
glomerular hyperfiltration and albuminuria.
Increased activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis is not 
invariably associated with hypertension. In response to a low-NaCl 
diet or to volume contraction, arterial pressure and volume homeosta-
sis may be maintained by increased activity of the renin-angiotensin- 
aldosterone axis. Secondary aldosteronism (i.e., increased aldosterone 
secondary to increased renin-angiotensin), but not hypertension, also is 
observed in edematous states such as CHF and liver disease.
■
■VASCULAR MECHANISMS
Vascular radius and compliance of resistance arteries are important 
determinants of arterial pressure. Resistance to flow varies inversely 
with the fourth power of the radius, and consequently, small decreases 
in lumen size significantly increase resistance. In hypertensive patients, 
structural, mechanical, or functional changes may reduce the lumen 
diameter of small arteries and arterioles. Remodeling refers to geomet-
ric alterations in the vessel wall without a change in vessel volume. 
Hypertrophic (increased cell size, and increased deposition of inter-
cellular matrix) or eutrophic vascular remodeling results in decreased 
lumen size and, hence, increased peripheral resistance. Apoptosis, 
low-grade inflammation, and vascular fibrosis also contribute to 
remodeling. Lumen diameter also is related to elasticity of the vessel. 
Vessels with a high degree of elasticity can accommodate an increase 
of volume with relatively little change in pressure, whereas in a semi-
rigid vascular system, a small increment in volume induces a relatively 
large increment of pressure.
An association between arterial stiffness and hypertension is 
well established. A stiffened vasculature is less able to buffer short-
term alterations in flow. Although it has been assumed that arterial 
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
AT1 receptor
AT2 receptor
Renin
Aldosterone
Bradykinin
Inactive
peptides
ACE-kininase II
FIGURE 271-2  Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis. ACE, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1894 stiffness is a manifestation of hypertension, recent evidence suggests 
that vascular stiffness may also represent a cause of hypertension. Non- 
invasive determination of pulse wave velocity between the carotid and 
femoral arteries is often interpreted as an index of arterial stiffness. Due 
to arterial stiffness, central blood pressures (aortic, carotid) may not cor-
respond to brachial artery pressures. Ejection of blood into the aorta elic-
its a pressure wave that is propagated at a given velocity. The forward 
traveling wave generates a reflected wave that travels backward toward 
the ascending aorta. Although mean arterial pressure is determined by 
cardiac output and peripheral resistance, pulse pressure is related to 
the functional properties of large arteries and the amplitude and timing 
of the incident and reflected waves. Increased arterial stiffness results 
in increased pulse wave velocity of both incident and reflected waves. 
Due to the timing of these waves, the consequence is augmentation 
of aortic systolic pressure and a reduction of aortic diastolic pressure, 
i.e., an increase in pulse pressure. The aortic augmentation index, a 
surrogate index of arterial stiffening, is calculated as the ratio of central 
arterial pressure-to-pulse pressure. However, wave reflections are also 
influenced by left ventricular structure and function. Central blood 
pressure may be measured directly by placing a sensor in the aorta 
or noninvasively by radial tonometry using commercially available 
devices. Central blood pressure and the aortic augmentation index are 
strong, independent predictors of cardiovascular disease and all-cause 
mortality. Central blood pressure also appears to be more strongly 
associated with pre-clinical organ damage than brachial blood pressure.
Ion transport by vascular smooth muscle cells may contribute to 
hypertension-associated abnormalities of vascular tone and vascu-
lar growth, both of which are modulated by intracellular pH (pHi). 
Three ion transport mechanisms participate in the regulation of pHi: 
(1) Na+-H+ exchange, (2) Na+-dependent HCO3
–-Cl– exchange, and 
(3) cation-independent HCO3
–-Cl– exchange. Based on measurements 
in cell types that are more accessible than vascular smooth muscle 
(e.g., leukocytes, erythrocytes, platelets, skeletal muscle), activity 
of the Na+-H+ exchanger is increased in hypertension, and this may 
result in increased vascular tone by two mechanisms. First, increased 
sodium entry may lead to increased vascular tone by activating 
Na+-Ca2+ exchange and thereby increasing intracellular calcium. Sec-
ond, increased pHi enhances calcium sensitivity of the contractile 
apparatus, leading to an increase in contractility for a given intracel-
lular calcium concentration. Additionally, increased Na+-H+ exchange 
may stimulate growth of vascular smooth muscle cells by enhancing 
sensitivity to mitogens.
Vascular endothelial function also modulates vascular tone. The vas-
cular endothelium synthesizes and releases several vasoactive substances, 
including nitric oxide, a potent vasodilator. Endothelium-dependent vaso-
dilation is impaired in hypertensive patients. This impairment often is 
assessed with high-resolution ultrasonography before and after the 
hyperemic phase of reperfusion that follows 5 min of forearm ischemia. 
Alternatively, endothelium-dependent vasodilation may be assessed 
in response to an intra-arterially infused endothelium-dependent 
vasodilator, e.g., acetylcholine. Endothelin is a vasoconstrictor peptide 
produced by the endothelium, and orally active endothelin antagonists 
may lower blood pressure in patients with resistant hypertension.
Currently, it is not known if the hypertension-related vascular abnor-
malities of ion transport and endothelial function are primary alterations 
or secondary consequences of elevated arterial pressure. Limited evi-
dence suggests that vascular compliance and endothelium-dependent 
vasodilation may be improved by aerobic exercise, weight loss, and 
antihypertensive agents. It remains to be determined whether these 
interventions affect arterial structure and stiffness via a blood pressure–
independent mechanism and whether different classes of antihyperten-
sive agents preferentially affect vascular structure and function.
■
■IMMUNE MECHANISMS, INFLAMMATION, AND 
OXIDATIVE STRESS
Inflammation and alterations of the immune response have been 
implicated in the pathogenesis of vascular injury and hypertension 
for at least four decades. Patients with primary hypertension have 
increased circulating levels of autoantibodies. Both hypertension and 
aortic stiffness are associated with activation of innate and adaptive 
immunity. Many forms of hypertension in experimental animals are 
associated with an inflammatory component requiring T lymphocytes. 
Inflammation and exudative injury are closely coupled. Inflammation, 
vascular stretch, angiotensin II, and salt have all been shown to result 
in the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which modify T cell 
function and further enhance inflammation. ROS also attenuate the 
effects of endogenous small-molecule vasodilators. ROS within the 
renal medulla is a key determinant of the set point of the renal pressure- 
natriuresis curve. Increasing evidence suggests that infiltration of T cells 
into the renal interstitium contributes to inflammation and oxidative 
stress. Renal medullary oxidative stress disrupts pressure-natriuresis 
and contributes to the development of hypertension in experimental 
models. Clinically, markers of oxidative stress have been described in 
both hypertensive and pre-hypertensive patients.
PATHOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES OF 
HYPERTENSION
■
■HEART
Heart disease is the most common cause of death in hypertensive 
patients. Hypertensive heart disease is the result of structural and func-
tional adaptations leading to left ventricular hypertrophy, CHF, athero-
sclerotic coronary artery disease and microvascular disease, and cardiac 
arrhythmias, including atrial fibrillation. Individuals with left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy are at increased risk for CHD, stroke, CHF, and sudden 
death. Aggressive control of hypertension can regress or reverse left 
ventricular hypertrophy and reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease.
CHF may be related to systolic dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction, or 
a combination of the two. Abnormalities of diastolic function that range 
from asymptomatic heart disease to overt heart failure are common 
in hypertensive patients. Approximately one-third of patients with 
CHF have normal systolic function but abnormal diastolic function. 
Diastolic dysfunction is an early consequence of hypertension-related 
heart disease and is exacerbated by left ventricular hypertrophy and 
ischemia. Cardiac catheterization provides the most accurate assess-
ment of diastolic function. Alternatively, diastolic function can be eval-
uated by several noninvasive methods, including echocardiography 
and radionuclide angiography.
■
■BRAIN
Stroke is the second most frequent cause of death in the world; it 
accounts for 5 million deaths each year, with an additional 15 million 
persons having nonfatal strokes. Elevated blood pressure is the stron-
gest risk factor for stroke. Approximately 85% of strokes are due to 
infarction, and the remainder are due to either intracerebral or sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage. The incidence of stroke rises progressively with 
increasing blood pressure levels, particularly systolic blood pressure in 
individuals aged >65 years. Treatment of hypertension decreases the 
incidence of both ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes.
Hypertension also is associated with impaired cognition in an aging 
population, and longitudinal studies support an association between 
midlife hypertension and late-life cognitive decline. Hypertension is 
associated with beta amyloid deposition, a major pathologic factor in 
dementia. In addition to actual blood pressure level, arterial stiffness and 
visit-to-visit blood pressure variability may be independently related 
to subclinical small vessel disease and subsequent cognitive decline. 
Hypertension-related cognitive impairment and dementia may also be 
a consequence of a single infarct due to occlusion of a “strategic” larger 
vessel or multiple lacunar infarcts due to occlusive small vessel disease 
resulting in subcortical white matter ischemia. Several clinical trials 
suggest that antihypertensive therapy has a beneficial effect on cog-
nitive function, although this remains an active area of investigation.
Cerebral blood flow remains unchanged over a wide range of 
arterial pressures (mean arterial pressure of 50–150 mmHg) through a 
process termed autoregulation of blood flow. In patients with the clinical 
syndrome of malignant hypertension, encephalopathy is related to fail-
ure of autoregulation of cerebral blood flow at the upper pressure limit, 
resulting in vasodilation and hyperperfusion. Signs and symptoms of 
CHAPTER 271 Hypertensive Vascular Disease
1895
hypertensive encephalopathy may include severe headache, nausea 
and vomiting (often of a projectile nature), focal neurologic signs, and 
alterations in mental status. Untreated, hypertensive encephalopathy 
may progress to stupor, coma, seizures, and death within hours. It 
is important to distinguish hypertensive encephalopathy from other 
neurologic syndromes that may be associated with hypertension, e.g., 
cerebral ischemia, hemorrhagic or thrombotic stroke, seizure disorder, 
mass lesions, pseudotumor cerebri, delirium tremens, meningitis, acute 
intermittent porphyria, traumatic or chemical injury to the brain, and 
uremic encephalopathy.
■
■KIDNEY
The kidney is both a target and a cause of hypertension. Primary renal 
disease is the most common etiology of secondary hypertension. Mech-
anisms of kidney-related hypertension include a diminished capacity 
to excrete sodium, excessive renin secretion in relation to volume sta-
tus, and sympathetic nervous system overactivity. Conversely, hyper-
tension is a risk factor for renal injury and ESRD. The increased risk 
associated with high blood pressure is graded, continuous, and present 
throughout the distribution of blood pressure above optimal pressure. 
Renal risk appears to be more closely related to systolic than to diastolic 
blood pressure, and black men are at greater risk than white men for 
developing ESRD at every level of blood pressure.
Atherosclerotic, hypertension-related vascular lesions in the kidney 
primarily affect preglomerular arterioles, resulting in ischemic changes 
in the glomeruli and postglomerular structures. Glomerular injury also 
may be a consequence of direct damage to the glomerular capillaries 
due to glomerular hyperperfusion. Studies of hypertension-related 
renal damage, primarily in experimental animals, suggest that loss of 
autoregulation of renal blood flow at the afferent arteriole results in 
transmission of elevated pressures to an unprotected glomerulus with 
ensuing hyperfiltration, hypertrophy, and eventual focal segmental 
glomerular sclerosis. With progressive renal injury there is a loss of 
autoregulation of renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate, result-
ing in a lower blood pressure threshold for renal damage and a steeper 
slope between blood pressure and renal damage. The result may be a 
vicious cycle of renal damage and nephron loss leading to more severe 
hypertension, glomerular hyperfiltration, and further renal damage. 
Glomerular pathology progresses to glomerulosclerosis, and eventually 
the renal tubules may also become ischemic and gradually atrophic. 
The renal lesion associated with malignant hypertension consists of 
fibrinoid necrosis of the afferent arterioles, sometimes extending into 
the glomerulus, and may result in focal necrosis of the glomerular tuft.
Clinically, macroalbuminuria (a random urine albumin/creatinine 
ratio >300 mg/g) or microalbuminuria (a random urine albumin/
creatinine ratio 30–300 mg/g) are early markers of renal injury. These 
are also risk factors for renal disease progression and cardiovascular 
disease.
■
■PERIPHERAL ARTERIES
In addition to contributing to the pathogenesis of hypertension, blood 
vessels are a target organ for atherosclerotic disease secondary to long-
standing elevated blood pressure. In hypertensive patients, vascular 
disease is a major contributor to stroke, heart disease, and renal fail-
ure. Further, hypertensive patients with arterial disease of the lower 
extremities are at increased risk for future cardiovascular disease. 
Although patients with stenotic lesions of the lower extremities may be 
asymptomatic, intermittent claudication is the classic symptom of PAD. 
The ankle-brachial index is a useful approach for evaluating PAD and 
is defined as the ratio of noninvasively assessed ankle to brachial (arm) 
systolic blood pressure. An ankle-brachial index <0.90 is considered 
diagnostic of PAD and is associated with >50% stenosis in at least one 
major lower limb vessel. An ankle-brachial index <0.80 is associated 
with elevated blood pressure, particularly systolic blood pressure.
DEFINING HYPERTENSION
From an epidemiologic perspective, there is no obvious level of blood 
pressure that defines hypertension. In adults, there is a continuous, 
incremental risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke, and renal disease 
across levels of both systolic and diastolic blood pressure. The Multiple 
Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT), which included >350,000 male 
participants, demonstrated a continuous and graded influence of both 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure on CHD mortality, extending 
down to systolic blood pressures of 120 mmHg. Similarly, results of 
a meta-analysis involving almost 1 million participants indicate that 
ischemic heart disease mortality, stroke mortality, and mortality from 
other vascular causes are directly related to the height of the blood 
pressure, beginning at 115/75 mmHg, without evidence of a threshold. 
Cardiovascular disease risk doubles for every 20-mmHg increase in 
systolic and 10-mmHg increase in diastolic pressure. Among older 
individuals, systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure are more 
powerful predictors of cardiovascular disease than is diastolic blood 
pressure.
Clinically, hypertension may be defined as that level of blood pres-
sure at which the institution of therapy reduces blood pressure–related 
morbidity and mortality. Clinical criteria for defining hypertension 
generally have been based on the average of two or more seated blood 
pressure readings during each of two or more outpatient visits. One 
classification recommends blood pressure criteria for defining normal 
blood pressure, prehypertension, hypertension (stages I and II), and 
isolated systolic hypertension, which is frequent among the elderly 
(Table 271-1). In children and adolescents, hypertension generally 
is defined as systolic and/or diastolic blood pressure consistently 
>95th percentile for age, sex, and height. Blood pressures between the 
90th and 95th percentiles are considered prehypertensive and are an 
indication for lifestyle interventions.
Home blood pressure and average 24-h ambulatory blood pressure 
measurements are generally lower than clinic blood pressures. Because 
ambulatory blood pressure recordings yield multiple readings through-
out the day and night, they provide a more comprehensive assessment 
of the vascular burden of hypertension than do a limited number of 
office readings. Increasing evidence suggests that home blood pressures, 
including 24-h blood pressure recordings, more reliably predict target 
organ damage than do office blood pressures. Blood pressure tends to 
be higher in the early morning hours, soon after waking, than at other 
times of day. Myocardial infarction and stroke are more common in the 
early morning hours. Nighttime blood pressures are generally 10–20% 
lower than daytime blood pressures, and an attenuated nighttime blood 
pressure “dip” may be associated with increased cardiovascular disease 
risk. Recommended criteria for a diagnosis of hypertension, based on 
24-h blood pressure monitoring, are average awake blood pressure 
≥135/85 mmHg and asleep blood pressure ≥120/75 mmHg. These levels 
approximate a clinic blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg.
Approximately 15–20% of patients with stage 1 hypertension 
based on office blood pressures have average ambulatory readings 
<135/85 mmHg, termed “white coat hypertension.” Long-term out-
comes of individuals with white coat hypertension are more similar to 
normotensive individuals than to individuals with sustained hyper-
tension (elevation of both office and out-of-office blood pressures). 
To confirm hypertension, some authorities recommend ambulatory 
blood pressure monitoring in all individuals with elevated clinic 
blood pressure, and postponing therapy with careful follow-up in 
those individuals with normal out-of-office blood pressures who 
are at low cardiovascular risk. In contrast, the prognosis of “masked 
hypertension” (normal office blood pressure and elevated out-of-office 
blood pressure) is nearly equivalent to that of sustained hypertension.
TABLE 271-1  Blood Pressure Classification
BLOOD PRESSURE 
CLASSIFICATION
SYSTOLIC, mmHg
DIASTOLIC, mmHg
Normal
<120
and <80
Prehypertension
120–139
or 80–89
Stage 1 hypertension
140–159
or 90–99
Stage 2 hypertension
≥160
or ≥100
Isolated systolic 
hypertension
≥140
and <90
Source: Adapted from AV Chobanian et al: JAMA 289:2560, 2003.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1896 CLINICAL DISORDERS OF HYPERTENSION
Depending on methods of patient ascertainment, ~80–95% of hyperten-
sive patients are diagnosed as having primary, or “essential,” hyper-
tension. In the remaining 5–20% of hypertensive patients, a specific 
underlying disorder causing the elevation of blood pressure can be 
identified (Tables 271-2 and 271-3). In individuals with “secondary” 
hypertension, a specific mechanism for the blood pressure elevation is 
often more apparent.
■
■PRIMARY HYPERTENSION
Primary hypertension tends to be familial and is likely to be the con-
sequence of an interaction between environmental and genetic factors. 
The prevalence of primary hypertension increases with age, and 
individuals with relatively high blood pressures at younger ages are 
at increased risk for the subsequent development of hypertension. It 
is likely that primary hypertension represents a spectrum of disorders 
with different underlying pathophysiologies. In the majority of patients 
with established hypertension, peripheral resistance is increased and 
cardiac output is normal or decreased; however, in younger patients 
with mild or labile hypertension, cardiac output may be increased and 
peripheral resistance may be normal.
When plasma renin activity (PRA) is plotted against 24-h sodium 
excretion, ~10–15% of hypertensive patients have high PRA and 25% 
have low PRA. High-renin patients may have a vasoconstrictor form of 
hypertension, whereas low-renin patients may have volume-dependent 
hypertension. Inconsistent associations between plasma aldosterone 
and blood pressure have been described in patients with primary 
hypertension. The association between aldosterone and blood pressure 
is more striking in African Americans, and PRA tends to be low in 
hypertensive African Americans. This raises the possibility that subtle 
increases in aldosterone may contribute to hypertension in at least 
some groups of patients who do not have overt primary aldostero-
nism. Furthermore, spironolactone, an aldosterone antagonist, may be 
a particularly effective antihypertensive agent for some patients with 
primary hypertension, including some patients with “drug-resistant” 
hypertension.
■
■OBESITY AND THE METABOLIC SYNDROME
(See also Chap. 401) There is a well-documented association between 
obesity (body mass index >30 kg/m2) and hypertension. Further, 
cross-sectional studies indicate a direct linear correlation between body 
weight (or body mass index) and blood pressure. Centrally located 
body fat is a more important determinant of blood pressure elevation 
than is peripheral body fat. In longitudinal studies, a direct correlation 
exists between change in weight and change in blood pressure over 
time. Sixty percent of hypertensive adults are >20% overweight. It has 
been established that 60–70% of hypertension in adults may be directly 
attributable to adiposity.
Hypertension and dyslipidemia frequently occur together and in 
association with resistance to insulin-stimulated glucose uptake. This 
clustering of risk factors is often, but not invariably, associated with 
obesity, particularly abdominal obesity. Insulin resistance also is asso-
ciated with an unfavorable imbalance in the endothelial production of 
mediators that regulate platelet aggregation, coagulation, fibrinolysis, 
and vessel tone. When these risk factors cluster, the risks for CHD, 
stroke, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease mortality are increased 
further.
Depending on the populations studied and the methodologies 
for defining insulin resistance, ~25–50% of nonobese, nondiabetic 
hypertensive persons are insulin resistant. The constellation of insulin 
resistance, abdominal obesity, hypertension, and dyslipidemia has 
been designated as the metabolic syndrome. As a group, first-degree rel-
atives of patients with primary hypertension are also insulin resistant, 
and hyperinsulinemia (a surrogate marker of insulin resistance) may 
predict the eventual development of hypertension and cardiovascular 
disease. Although the metabolic syndrome may in part be heritable 
as a polygenic condition, the expression of the syndrome is modified 
by environmental factors, such as degree of physical activity and diet. 
Insulin sensitivity increases and blood pressure decreases in response 
to weight loss. The recognition that cardiovascular disease risk factors 
tend to cluster within individuals has important implications for the 
evaluation and treatment of hypertension. Evaluation of both hyper-
tensive patients and individuals at risk for developing hypertension 
should include assessment of overall cardiovascular disease risk. 
Similarly, introduction of lifestyle modification strategies and drug 
therapies should address overall risk and not focus exclusively on 
hypertension.
■
■RENAL PARENCHYMAL DISEASES
Virtually all disorders of the kidney may cause hypertension 
(Table 271-3), and renal disease is the most common cause of secondary 
hypertension. Hypertension is present in >80% of patients with chronic 
renal failure. In general, hypertension is more severe in glomerular 
diseases than in interstitial diseases such as chronic pyelonephritis. 
Conversely, hypertension may cause nephrosclerosis, and in some 
instances it may be difficult to determine whether hypertension or 
renal disease was the initial disorder. Proteinuria >1000 mg/d and an 
active urine sediment are indicative of primary renal disease. In either 
instance, the goals are to control blood pressure and retard the rate of 
progression of renal dysfunction.
■
■RENOVASCULAR HYPERTENSION
Hypertension due to an occlusive lesion of a renal artery, renovascu-
lar hypertension, is a potentially curable form of hypertension. Two 
groups of patients are at risk for this disorder: older arteriosclerotic 
patients who have a plaque obstructing the renal artery, frequently 
at its origin, and patients with fibromuscular dysplasia. Atheroscle-
rosis accounts for the large majority of patients with renovascular 
hypertension. Although fibromuscular dysplasia may occur at any 
age, it has a strong predilection for young white women. The lesions 
TABLE 271-2  Systolic Hypertension with Wide Pulse Pressure
1.  Decreased vascular compliance (arteriosclerosis)
2.  Increased cardiac output
a.  Aortic regurgitation
b.  Thyrotoxicosis
c.  Hyperkinetic heart syndrome
d.  Fever
e.  Arteriovenous fistula
f.  Patent ductus arteriosus
TABLE 271-3  Secondary Causes of Systolic and Diastolic 
Hypertension
Renal
Parenchymal diseases, renal cysts (including 
polycystic kidney disease), renal tumors (including 
renin-secreting tumors), obstructive uropathy
Renovascular
Arteriosclerotic, fibromuscular dysplasia
Adrenal
Primary aldosteronism, Cushing’s syndrome, 
17α-hydroxylase deficiency, 11β-hydroxylase 
deficiency, 11-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
deficiency (licorice), pheochromocytoma
Aortic coarctation
 
Obstructive sleep apnea
 
Preeclampsia/eclampsia
 
Neurogenic
Psychogenic, diencephalic syndrome, familial 
dysautonomia, polyneuritis (acute porphyria, lead 
poisoning), acute increased intracranial pressure, 
acute spinal cord section
Miscellaneous endocrine
Hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, hypercalcemia, 
acromegaly
Medications
High-dose estrogens, adrenal steroids, 
decongestants, appetite suppressants, 
cyclosporine, tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors, erythropoietin, nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory agents, cocaine
Mendelian forms of 
hypertension
See Table 271-4
CHAPTER 271 Hypertensive Vascular Disease
1897
of fibromuscular dysplasia are frequently bilateral and, in contrast to 
atherosclerotic renovascular disease, tend to affect more distal portions 
of the renal artery.
Renovascular hypertension should be considered in patients with 
other evidence of atherosclerotic vascular disease. Severe or refractory 
hypertension, recent loss of hypertension control or recent onset of 
moderately severe hypertension, and unexplained deterioration of 
renal function or deterioration of renal function associated with an 
ACE inhibitor should raise the possibility of renovascular hyperten-
sion. Approximately 50% of patients with renovascular hypertension 
have an abdominal or flank bruit, and the bruit is more likely to be 
hemodynamically significant if it lateralizes or extends throughout 
systole into diastole.
If renal artery stenosis is suspected and if the clinical condition 
warrants an intervention such as percutaneous transluminal renal 
angioplasty (PTRA), placement of a vascular endoprosthesis (stent), or 
surgical renal revascularization, imaging studies should be the next step 
in the evaluation. As a screening test, renal blood flow may be evaluated 
with a radionuclide [131I]-orthoiodohippurate (OIH) scan, or glomeru-
lar filtration rate may be evaluated with a [99mTc]-diethylenetriamine 
pentaacetic acid (DTPA) scan before and after a single dose of captopril 
(or another ACE inhibitor). In patients with normal, or nearly normal, 
renal function, a normal captopril renogram essentially excludes 
functionally significant renal artery stenosis; however, its usefulness 
is limited in patients with renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance 
<20 mL/min) or bilateral renal artery stenosis. Additional imaging 
studies are indicated if the scan is positive. Doppler ultrasound of the 
renal arteries produces reliable estimates of renal blood flow velocity 
and offers the opportunity to track a lesion over time. Positive studies 
usually are confirmed at angiography, whereas false-negative results 
occur frequently, particularly in obese patients. Gadolinium-contrast 
magnetic resonance angiography offers clear images of the proximal 
renal artery but may miss distal lesions. An advantage is the opportu-
nity to image the renal arteries with an agent that is not nephrotoxic. 
Contrast arteriography remains the “gold standard” for evaluation and 
identification of renal artery lesions.
Some degree of renal artery obstruction may be observed in almost 
50% of patients with atherosclerotic disease, and there are several 
approaches for evaluating the functional significance of such a lesion to 
predict the effect of vascular repair on blood pressure control and renal 
function. Each approach has varying degrees of sensitivity and specific-
ity, and no single test is sufficiently reliable to determine a causal rela-
tionship between a renal artery lesion and hypertension. Functionally 
significant lesions generally occlude >70% of the lumen of the affected 
renal artery. On angiography, the presence of collateral vessels to the 
ischemic kidney suggests a functionally significant lesion. A lateraliz-
ing renal vein renin ratio (ratio >1.5 of affected side/contralateral side) 
has a 90% predictive value for a lesion that would respond to vascular 
repair; however, the false-negative rate for blood pressure control is 
50–60%. Measurement of the pressure gradient across a renal artery 
lesion does not reliably predict the response to vascular repair.
In the final analysis, a decision concerning vascular repair vs medical 
therapy and the type of repair procedure should be individualized. If 
blood pressure is adequately controlled with medical therapy and renal 
function remains stable, there may be little impetus to pursue an evalu-
ation for renal artery stenosis. Several recent randomized clinical trials 
have found that PTRA with stent placement in patients with arterioscle-
rotic renal artery stenosis offers no advantages to medical therapy in 
reducing cardiovascular events and mortality or in preserving kidney 
function. In addition, 5 of 7 trials found similar blood pressure control 
in the two groups of patients. These results suggest that laboratory 
evaluation for renal artery stenosis and stent placement should be con-
sidered only in those arteriosclerotic patients in whom medical therapy 
fails to control blood pressure or preserve renal function. Patients with 
long-standing hypertension, advanced renal insufficiency, or diabetes 
mellitus are less likely to benefit from renal vascular repair. The most 
effective medical therapies include an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin 
II receptor blocker; however, these agents decrease glomerular filtra-
tion rate in a stenotic kidney owing to efferent renal arteriolar dilation. 
In the presence of bilateral renal artery stenosis or renal artery stenosis 
to a solitary kidney, progressive renal insufficiency may result from 
the use of these agents. Importantly, the renal insufficiency is generally 
reversible after discontinuation of the offending drug. Patients with 
fibromuscular disease have more favorable outcomes with vascular 
repair than do patients with atherosclerotic lesions, presumably owing 
to their younger age, shorter duration of hypertension, and less sys-
temic disease.
■
■PRIMARY ALDOSTERONISM
Excess aldosterone production due to primary aldosteronism is a 
potentially curable form of hypertension. In patients with primary 
aldosteronism, increased aldosterone production is independent of the 
renin-angiotensin system, and the consequences are sodium retention, 
hypertension, hypokalemia, and low PRA. The reported prevalence 
of this disorder varies from <2 to ~15% of hypertensive individuals. 
In part, this variation is related to the intensity of screening and the 
criteria for establishing the diagnosis.
History and physical examination provide little information about 
the diagnosis. The age at the time of diagnosis is generally the third 
through fifth decade. Hypertension is usually mild to moderate but 
occasionally may be severe; primary aldosteronism should be con-
sidered in all patients with refractory hypertension. Hypertension 
in these patients may be associated with glucose intolerance. Most 
patients are asymptomatic; however, infrequently, polyuria, polydip-
sia, paresthesias, or muscle weakness may be present as a consequence 
of hypokalemic alkalosis. Although aldosterone is a salt-retaining hor-
mone, patients with primary aldosteronism rarely have edema. Renal 
dysfunction and cardiovascular disease are strikingly increased in 
patients with primary aldosteronism compared to those with primary 
hypertension.
In a hypertensive patient with unprovoked hypokalemia (i.e., unre-
lated to diuretics, vomiting, or diarrhea), the prevalence of primary 
aldosteronism approaches 40–50%. In patients on diuretics, serum 
potassium <3.1 mmol/L (<3.1 meq/L) also raises the possibility of 
primary aldosteronism; however, serum potassium is an insensitive 
and nonspecific screening test. Serum potassium is normal in ~25% 
of patients subsequently found to have an aldosterone-producing 
adenoma, and higher percentages of patients with other etiologies of 
primary aldosteronism are not hypokalemic.
The ratio of plasma aldosterone to PRA (PA/PRA) is a useful screen-
ing test. These measurements preferably are obtained in ambulatory 
patients in the morning. A ratio >30:1 in conjunction with a plasma 
aldosterone concentration >555 pmol/L (>20 ng/dL) reportedly has a 
sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 91% for an aldosterone-producing 
adenoma. In a Mayo Clinic series, an aldosterone-producing adenoma 
subsequently was confirmed surgically in >90% of hypertensive 
patients with a PA/PRA ratio ≥20 and a plasma aldosterone concen-
tration ≥415 pmol/L (≥15 ng/dL). There are, however, several caveats 
to interpreting the ratio. The cutoff for a “high” ratio is laboratory- 
and assay-dependent. Some anti-hypertensive agents may affect the 
ratio (e.g., aldosterone antagonists, angiotensin receptor antagonists, 
and ACE inhibitors may increase renin; aldosterone antagonists 
may increase aldosterone). Current recommendations are to with-
draw aldosterone antagonists for at least 4–6 weeks before obtaining 
these measurements. Because aldosterone biosynthesis is potassium- 
dependent, hypokalemia should be corrected with oral potassium 
supplements prior to screening. With these caveats, the ratio has been 
reported to be useful as a screening test in measurements obtained 
with patients taking their usual antihypertensive medications except 
for aldosterone antagonists, which should be discontinued six weeks 
before testing. A high ratio in the absence of an elevated plasma 
aldosterone level is considerably less specific for primary aldostero-
nism since many patients with primary hypertension have low renin 
levels in this setting, particularly African Americans and elderly 
patients. In patients with renal insufficiency, the ratio may also be ele-
vated because of decreased aldosterone clearance. In patients with an 
elevated PA/PRA ratio, the diagnosis of primary aldosteronism can be 
confirmed by demonstrating failure to suppress plasma aldosterone to 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1898 <277 pmol/L (<10 ng/dL) after IV infusion of 2 L of isotonic saline over 
4 h; post-saline infusion plasma aldosterone values between 138 and 
277 pmol/L (5–10 ng/dL) are not determinant. Alternative confirma-
tory tests include failure to suppress aldosterone (based on test-specific 
criteria) in response to an oral NaCl load, fludrocortisone, or captopril.
Several sporadic and familial adrenal abnormalities may culminate 
in the syndrome of primary aldosteronism, and appropriate therapy 
depends on the specific etiology. The two most common causes of spo-
radic primary aldosteronism are an aldosterone-producing adenoma 
and bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Together, they account for >90% of 
all patients with primary aldosteronism. The tumor is almost always 
unilateral, and most often measures <3 cm in diameter. Most of the 
remainder of these patients have bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia 
(idiopathic hyperaldosteronism). Rarely, primary aldosteronism may be 
caused by an adrenal carcinoma or an ectopic malignancy, e.g., ovarian 
arrhenoblastoma. Most aldosterone-producing carcinomas, in contrast 
to adrenal adenomas and hyperplasia, produce excessive amounts of 
other adrenal steroids in addition to aldosterone. Functional differences 
in hormone secretion may assist in the diagnosis of adenoma vs hyper-
plasia. Aldosterone biosynthesis is more responsive to ACTH in patients 
with adenoma and more responsive to angiotensin in patients with 
hyperplasia. Consequently, patients with adenoma tend to have higher 
plasma aldosterone in the early morning that decreases during the day, 
reflecting the diurnal rhythm of ACTH, whereas plasma aldosterone 
tends to increase with upright posture in patients with hyperplasia, 
reflecting the normal postural response of the renin-angiotensin- 
aldosterone axis. However, there is overlap in the ability of these measure-
ments to discriminate between adenoma and hyperplasia. Rare familial 
forms of primary aldosteronism include glucocorticoid-remediable pri-
mary aldosteronism and familial aldosteronism types II and III. Genetic 
testing may assist in the diagnosis of these familial disorders.
Adrenal computed tomography (CT) should be carried out in all 
patients diagnosed with primary aldosteronism. High-resolution CT 
may identify tumors as small as 0.3 cm and is positive for an adrenal 
tumor 90% of the time. If the CT is not diagnostic, an adenoma may 
be detected by adrenal scintigraphy with 6 β-[I131] iodomethyl-19- 
norcholesterol after dexamethasone suppression (0.5 mg every 6 h for 
7 days); however, this technique has decreased sensitivity for ade-
nomas <1.5 cm.
When carried out by an experienced radiologist, bilateral adrenal 
venous sampling for measurement of plasma aldosterone is the most 
accurate means of differentiating unilateral from bilateral forms of pri-
mary aldosteronism. The sensitivity and specificity of adrenal venous 
sampling (95 and 100%, respectively) for detecting unilateral aldoster-
one hypersecretion are superior to those of adrenal CT; success rates are 
90–96%, and complication rates are <2.5%. One frequently used proto-
col involves sampling for aldosterone and cortisol levels in response 
to ACTH stimulation. An ipsilateral/contralateral aldosterone ratio 
>4, with symmetric ACTH-stimulated cortisol levels, is indicative of 
unilateral aldosterone production.
Hypertension generally is responsive to surgery in patients with ade-
noma but not in patients with bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Unilateral 
adrenalectomy, often done via a laparoscopic approach, is curative in 
40–70% of patients with an adenoma. Transient hypoaldosteronism may 
occur up to 3 months postoperatively, resulting in hyperkalemia, which 
should be treated with potassium-wasting diuretics and with fludrocor-
tisone, if needed. Patients with bilateral hyperplasia should be treated 
medically. The drug regimen for these patients, as well as for patients 
with an adenoma who are poor surgical candidates, should include 
an aldosterone antagonist and, if necessary, other potassium-sparing 
diuretics.
Glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldosteronism is a rare, monogenic 
autosomal dominant disorder characterized by moderate to severe 
hypertension, often occurring at an early age. These patients may have 
a family history of hemorrhagic stroke at a young age. Hypokalemia is 
usually mild or absent. Normally, angiotensin II stimulates aldosterone 
production by the adrenal zona glomerulosa, whereas ACTH stimu-
lates cortisol production in the zona fasciculata. Owing to a chimeric 
gene on chromosome 8, ACTH also regulates aldosterone secretion 
by the zona fasciculata in patients with glucocorticoid-remediable 
hyperaldosteronism. The consequence is overproduction in the zona 
fasciculata of both aldosterone and hybrid steroids (18-hydroxycortisol 
and 18-oxocortisol) due to oxidation of cortisol. The diagnosis may be 
established by urine excretion rates of these hybrid steroids that are 
20–30 times normal or by direct genetic testing. Therapeutically, sup-
pression of ACTH with low-dose glucocorticoids corrects the hyperal-
dosteronism, hypertension, and hypokalemia. Aldosterone antagonists 
are also therapeutic options. Patients with familial aldosteronism types II 
and III are treated with aldosterone antagonists or adrenalectomy.
■
■CUSHING’S SYNDROME
(See also Chap. 379) Cushing’s syndrome is related to excess cortisol 
production due either to excess ACTH secretion (from a pituitary 
tumor or an ectopic tumor) or to ACTH-independent adrenal pro-
duction of cortisol. Hypertension occurs in 75–80% of patients with 
Cushing’s syndrome. The mechanism of hypertension may be related 
to stimulation of mineralocorticoid receptors by cortisol and increased 
secretion of other adrenal steroids. If clinically suspected based on 
phenotypic characteristics, in patients not taking exogenous glucocor-
ticoids, laboratory screening may be carried out with measurement of 
24-h excretion rates of urine-free cortisol or an overnight dexametha-
sone-suppression test. Late night salivary cortisol is also a sensitive and 
convenient screening test. Further evaluation is required to confirm the 
diagnosis and identify the specific etiology of Cushing’s syndrome. 
Appropriate therapy depends on the etiology.
■
■PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
(See also Chap. 380) Catecholamine-secreting tumors are located in 
the adrenal medulla (pheochromocytoma) or in extra-adrenal paragan-
glion tissue (paraganglioma) and account for hypertension in ~0.05% 
of patients. If unrecognized, pheochromocytoma may result in lethal 
cardiovascular consequences. Clinical manifestations, including hyper-
tension, are primarily related to increased circulating catecholamines, 
although some of these tumors may secrete a number of other vasoactive 
substances. In a small percentage of patients, epinephrine is the pre-
dominant catecholamine secreted by the tumor, and these patients may 
present with hypotension rather than hypertension. The initial suspicion 
of the diagnosis is based on symptoms and/or the association of pheo-
chromocytoma with other disorders (Table 271-4). Approximately 20% 
of pheochromocytomas are familial with autosomal dominant inheri-
tance. Inherited pheochromocytomas may be associated with multiple 
endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2A and type 2B, von Hippel-Lindau 
disease, and neurofibromatosis (Table 271-4). Each of these syndromes 
is related to specific, identifiable germ-line mutations. Additionally, 
mutations of succinate dehydrogenase genes are associated with 
paraganglioma syndromes, generally characterized by head and neck 
paragangliomas. Laboratory testing consists of measuring catechola-
mines in either urine or plasma, e.g., 24-h urine metanephrine excretion 
or fractionated plasma-free metanephrines. The urine measurement 
is less sensitive but more specific. Genetic screening is available for 
evaluating patients and relatives suspected of harboring a pheochro-
mocytoma associated with a familial syndrome. Surgical excision is 
the definitive treatment of pheochromocytoma and results in cure in 
~90% of patients.
■
■MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES OF HYPERTENSION
Independent of obesity, hypertension occurs in >50% of individuals with 
obstructive sleep apnea. The severity of hypertension correlates with the 
severity of sleep apnea. Approximately 70% of patients with obstructive 
sleep apnea are obese. Hypertension related to obstructive sleep apnea 
also should be considered in patients with drug-resistant hypertension 
and patients with a history of snoring. The diagnosis can be confirmed 
by polysomnography. In obese patients, weight loss may alleviate or 
cure sleep apnea and related hypertension. Continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP) or bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) adminis-
tered during sleep is an effective therapy for obstructive sleep apnea. 
With CPAP or BiPAP, patients with apparently drug-resistant hyperten-
sion may be more responsive to antihypertensive agents.
CHAPTER 271 Hypertensive Vascular Disease
1899
TABLE 271-4  Rare Mendelian Forms of Hypertension
DISEASE
PHENOTYPE
GENETIC CAUSE
Glucocorticoid-remediable 
hyperaldosteronism 
Autosomal dominant
Absent or mild hypokalemia
Chimeric 11β-hydroxylase/aldosterone gene on 
chromosome 8 
17α-hydroxylase deficiency
 
 
Autosomal recessive
Males: pseudohermaphroditism
Females: primary amenorrhea, absent secondary sexual characteristics
Random mutations of the CYP17 gene on 
chromosome 10
  
11β-hydroxylase deficiency 
Autosomal recessive
Masculinization
Mutations of the CYP11B1 gene on chromosome 
8q21-q22 
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
deficiency (apparent 
mineralocorticoid excess 
syndrome)
Autosomal recessive
Hypokalemia, low renin, low aldosterone
Mutations in the 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase gene
Liddle’s syndrome
 
Autosomal dominant
Hypokalemia, low renin, low aldosterone
Mutation subunits of the epithelial sodium 
channel SCNN1B and SCNN1C genes 
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II 
(Gordon’s syndrome) 
Autosomal dominant
Hyperkalemia, normal glomerular filtration rate
Linkage to chromosomes 1q31-q42 and 
17p11-q21 
Hypertension exacerbated in 
pregnancy 
Autosomal dominant
Severe hypertension in early pregnancy
Missense mutation with substitution of leucine for 
serine at codon 810 (MRL810) 
Polycystic kidney disease
 
Autosomal dominant
Large cystic kidneys, renal failure, liver cysts, cerebral aneurysms, 
valvular heart disease
Mutations in the PKD1 gene on chromosome 16 
and PKD2 gene on chromosome 4
 
Pheochromocytoma
Autosomal dominant
 
 
(a)  Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2A
(a)  Mutations in the RET protooncogene
 
Medullary thyroid carcinoma, hyperparathyroidism
 
 
(b)  Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2B
(b)  Mutations in the RET protooncogene
 
Medullary thyroid carcinoma, mucosal neuromas, thickened corneal 
nerves, alimentary ganglioneuromatoses, marfanoid habitus
 
 
(c)  von Hippel-Lindau disease
(c)  Mutations in the VHL tumor-suppressor gene
 
Retinal angiomas, hemangioblastomas of the cerebellum and spinal 
cord, renal cell carcinoma
 
 
(d)  Neurofibromatosis type 1
(d)  Mutations in the NF1 tumor-suppressor gene
 
Multiple neurofibromas, café-au-lait spots
 
Coarctation of the aorta is the most common congenital cardiovascular 
cause of hypertension (Chap. 264). The incidence is 1–8 per 1000 live 
births. It is usually sporadic but occurs in 35% of children with Turner’s 
syndrome. Even when the anatomic lesion is surgically corrected in 
infancy, up to 30% of patients develop subsequent hypertension and 
are at risk of accelerated coronary artery disease and cerebrovascular 
events. Patients with less severe lesions may not be diagnosed until 
young adulthood. Physical findings include diminished and delayed 
femoral pulses and a systolic pressure gradient between the right arm 
and the legs and, depending on the location of the coarctation, between 
the right and left arms. A blowing systolic murmur may be heard in 
the posterior left interscapular areas. The diagnosis may be confirmed 
by chest x-ray and transesophageal echocardiography. Therapeutic 
options include surgical repair and balloon angioplasty, with or with-
out placement of an intravascular stent. Subsequently, many patients 
do not have a normal life expectancy but may have persistent hyper-
tension, with death due to ischemic heart disease, cerebral hemorrhage, 
or aortic aneurysm.
Several additional endocrine disorders, including thyroid diseases 
and acromegaly, cause hypertension. Mild diastolic hypertension may 
be a consequence of hypothyroidism, whereas hyperthyroidism may 
result in systolic hypertension. Hypercalcemia of any etiology, the most 
common being primary hyperparathyroidism, may result in hyperten-
sion. Hypertension also may be related to a number of prescribed or 
over-the-counter medications.
MONOGENIC HYPERTENSION
In addition to glucocorticoid-remediable primary aldosteronism, a 
number of rare forms of monogenic hypertension have been identified 
(Table 271–4). These disorders may be recognized by their characteristic 
phenotypes, and in many instances the diagnosis may be confirmed 
by genetic analysis. Several inherited defects in adrenal steroid 
biosynthesis and metabolism result in mineralocorticoid-induced 
hypertension and hypokalemia. In patients with a 17α-hydroxylase 
deficiency, synthesis of sex hormones and cortisol is decreased 
(Fig. 271-3). Consequently, these individuals do not mature sexually; 
males may present with pseudohermaphroditism and females with pri-
mary amenorrhea and absent secondary sexual characteristics. Because 
cortisol-induced negative feedback on pituitary ACTH production is 
diminished, ACTH-stimulated adrenal steroid synthesis proximal to 
the enzymatic block is increased. Hypertension and hypokalemia are 
consequences of increased synthesis of mineralocorticoids proximal 
to the enzymatic block, particularly desoxycorticosterone. Increased 
steroid production and, hence, hypertension may be treated with low-
dose glucocorticoids. An 11β-hydroxylase deficiency results in a salt- 
retaining adrenogenital syndrome that occurs in 1 in 100,000 live births. 
This enzymatic defect results in decreased cortisol synthesis, increased 
synthesis of mineralocorticoids (e.g., desoxycorticosterone), and shunt-
ing of steroid biosynthesis into the androgen pathway. In the severe 
form, the syndrome may present early in life, including the newborn 
period, with virilization and ambiguous genitalia in females and penile 
enlargement in males, or in older children as precocious puberty and 
short stature. Acne, hirsutism, and menstrual irregularities may be the 
presenting features when the disorder is first recognized in adolescence 
or early adulthood. Hypertension is less common in the late-onset 
forms. Patients with an 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency 
have an impaired capacity to metabolize cortisol to its inactive metabo-
lite, cortisone, and hypertension is related to activation of mineralocor-
ticoid receptors by cortisol. This defect may be inherited or acquired, 
due to licorice-containing glycyrrhizin acid. The same substance is 
present in the paste of several brands of chewing tobacco. The defect 
in Liddle’s syndrome (Chaps. 49 and 379) results from constitutive 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1900
Mineralocorticoid
Glucocorticoid
Androgen
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
17 OH Pregnenolone
Deoxycortisol
(17α hydroxylase)
DHEA
Progesterone
Corticosterone
Aldosterone
Deoxycorticosterone
17 OH Progesterone
Cortisone
Cortisol
Androstenedione
Testosterone
(21 hydroxylase)
(11β hydroxylase)
(11β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase)
FIGURE 271-3  Adrenal enzymatic defects. DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone.
TABLE 271-5  Relevant History and Physical
History
Duration of hypertension
Previous therapies: responses and side effects
Family history of hypertension and cardiovascular disease
Dietary and psychosocial history
Other risk factors: weight change, dyslipidemia, smoking, diabetes, physical 
inactivity
Evidence of secondary hypertension: history of renal disease; change in 
appearance; muscle weakness; spells of sweating, palpitations, tremor; 
erratic sleep, snoring, daytime somnolence; symptoms of hypo- or 
hyperthyroidism; use of agents that may increase blood pressure
Evidence of target organ damage: history of TIA, stroke, transient blindness; 
angina, myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure; sexual function
Other comorbidities
Physical
Body habitus
Blood pressure in both arms
Supine and standing blood pressures
Funduscopic examination of retina
Quality of femoral and pedal pulses
Vascular and abdominal bruits
Cardiac rate and rhythm
Signs of congestive heart failure
Signs of secondary hypertension
Abbreviation: TIA, transient ischemic attack.
activation of amiloride-sensitive ENaC on the distal renal tubule, 
resulting in excess sodium reabsorption; the syndrome is ameliorated 
by amiloride. Hypertension exacerbated in pregnancy (Chap. 466) may 
be due to activation of the mineralocorticoid receptor by progesterone.
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Hypertension
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL
The initial assessment of a hypertensive patient should include a 
complete history and physical examination to confirm a diagnosis 
of hypertension, screen for other cardiovascular disease risk factors, 
screen for secondary causes of hypertension, identify cardiovascular 
consequences of hypertension and other comorbidities, assess blood 
pressure–related lifestyles, and determine the potential for interven-
tion. Most patients with hypertension have no specific symptoms 
referable to their blood pressure elevation. Table 271-5 lists salient 
features of the history and physical examination of the hypertensive 
patient.
Reliable measurements of blood pressure depend on attention 
to the details of the technique and conditions of the measurement. 
Proper training of observers, positioning of the patient, and selection 
of cuff size are essential. Owing to recent regulations preventing the 
use of mercury because of concerns about its potential toxicity, most 
office measurements are made with aneroid sphygmomanometers 
or with oscillometric devices. These instruments should be cali-
brated periodically, and their accuracy confirmed.
LABORATORY TESTING
Table 271-6 lists recommended laboratory tests in the initial evalu-
ation of hypertensive patients. Repeat measurements of renal func-
tion, serum electrolytes, fasting glucose, and lipids may be obtained 
after the introduction of a new antihypertensive agent and then 
annually or more frequently if clinically indicated. More extensive 
laboratory testing is appropriate for patients with apparent drug- 
resistant hypertension or when the clinical evaluation suggests a 
secondary form of hypertension.
TREATMENT
Hypertension
LIFESTYLE INTERVENTIONS
Implementation of lifestyles that favorably affect blood pressure has 
implications for both the prevention and the treatment of hyperten-
sion. Health-promoting lifestyle modifications are recommended for 
individuals with prehypertension and as an adjunct to drug therapy 
CHAPTER 271 Hypertensive Vascular Disease
1901
TABLE 271-6  Basic Laboratory Tests for Initial Evaluation
SYSTEM
TEST
Renal
Microscopic urinalysis, albumin excretion, serum 
BUN and/or creatinine
Endocrine
Serum sodium, potassium, calcium, TSH
Metabolic
Fasting blood glucose, total cholesterol, HDL and 
LDL (often computed) cholesterol, triglycerides
Other
Hematocrit, electrocardiogram
Abbreviations: BUN, blood urea nitrogen; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-
density lipoprotein; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
in hypertensive individuals. These interventions should address 
overall cardiovascular disease risk. Although the impact of lifestyle 
interventions on blood pressure is more pronounced in persons 
with hypertension, in short-term trials, weight loss and reduction 
of dietary NaCl have been shown to prevent the development of 
hypertension. In hypertensive individuals, even if these interven-
tions do not produce a sufficient reduction in blood pressure to 
avoid drug therapy, the number of medications or doses required 
for blood pressure control may be reduced. Dietary modifications 
that effectively lower blood pressure are weight loss, reduced NaCl 
intake, increased potassium intake, moderation of alcohol consump-
tion, and an overall healthy dietary pattern (Table 271-7).
Prevention and treatment of obesity are important for reducing 
blood pressure and cardiovascular disease risk. In short-term trials, 
even modest weight loss can lead to a reduction of blood pres-
sure and an increase in insulin sensitivity. Average blood pressure 
reductions of 6.3/3.1 mmHg have been observed with a reduction 
in mean body weight of 9.2 kg. Regular physical activity facilitates 
weight loss, decreases blood pressure, and reduces the overall risk of 
cardiovascular disease. Blood pressure may be lowered by 30 min of 
moderately intense physical activity, such as brisk walking, 6–7 days 
a week, or by more intense, less frequent workouts.
There is individual variability in the sensitivity of blood pressure 
to NaCl, and this variability may have a genetic basis. Several genetic 
loci have been associated with NaCl sensitivity. Based on results of 
meta-analyses, lowering of blood pressure by limiting daily NaCl 
intake to 4.4–7.4 g (75–125 meq) results in blood pressure reductions 
of 3.7–4.9/0.9–2.9 mmHg in hypertensive individuals and lesser 
reductions in normotensive individuals. Results of randomized 
clinical trials on the impact of sodium reduction on the incidence of 
cardiovascular events are conflicting; however, for obvious practical 
reasons, such studies are challenging and often are not sufficiently 
powered to detect differences in cardiovascular endpoints. Although 
reduced salt intakes are generally recommended for both the pre-
vention and treatment of hypertension, overly rigorous salt restric-
tion may have adverse cardiovascular outcomes in diabetic patients 
and in patients with CHF aggressively treated with diuretics. Potas-
sium and calcium supplementation have inconsistent, modest anti-
hypertensive effects, and, independent of blood pressure, potassium 
supplementation may be associated with reduced stroke mortality. 
Consuming three or more alcoholic drinks per day (a standard 
drink contains ~14 g ethanol) is associated with higher blood pres-
sures, and a reduction of alcohol consumption is associated with a 
TABLE 271-7  Lifestyle Modifications to Manage Hypertension
Weight reduction
Attain and maintain BMI <25 kg/m2
Dietary salt reduction
<6 g NaCl/d
Adapt DASH-type dietary 
plan
Diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy 
products with reduced content of saturated and 
total fat
Moderation of alcohol 
consumption
For those who drink alcohol, consume ≤2 
drinks/d in men and ≤1 drink/d in women
Physical activity
Regular aerobic activity, e.g., brisk walking for 
30 min/d
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; DASH, Dietary Approaches to Stop 
Hypertension (trial).
reduction of blood pressure. In patients with advanced renal disease, 
dietary protein restriction may have a modest effect in mitigating 
renal damage by reducing the intrarenal transmission of systemic 
arterial pressure.
The DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) trial con-
vincingly demonstrated that over an 8-week period a diet high in 
fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy products lowers blood pressure 
in individuals with high-normal blood pressures or mild hyperten-
sion. Reduction of daily NaCl intake to <6 g (100 meq) augmented 
the effect of this diet on blood pressure. Fruits and vegetables are 
enriched sources of potassium, magnesium, and fiber, and dairy 
products are an important source of calcium.
PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY
Lowering systolic blood pressure by 10–12 mmHg and diastolic 
blood pressure by 5–6 mmHg confers relative risk reductions of 
35–40% for stroke and 12–16% for CHD within 5 years of the ini-
tiation of treatment. The risk of heart failure is reduced by >50%; 
although the benefit of blood pressure lowering on progression 
of renal failure is less apparent, hypertension control is the single 
most effective intervention for slowing the rate of progression of  
hypertension-related kidney disease.
There is considerable variation in individual responses to dif-
ferent classes of antihypertensive agents, and the magnitude of 
response to any single agent may be limited by activation of 
counter-regulatory mechanisms. Most available agents reduce sys-
tolic blood pressure by 7–13 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure 
by 4–8 mmHg when corrected for placebo effect. More often than 
not, combinations of agents, with complementary antihypertensive 
mechanisms, are required to achieve goal blood pressure reduc-
tions. Selection of antihypertensive agents and combinations of 
agents should be individualized, taking into account age, severity 
of hypertension, other cardiovascular disease risk factors, comorbid 
conditions, and practical considerations related to cost, side effects, 
and frequency of dosing (Table 271-8).
Diuretics  Low-dose thiazide diuretics may be used alone or in 
combination with other antihypertensive drugs. Thiazides inhibit 
the Na+/Cl– pump in the distal convoluted tubule and hence 
increase sodium excretion. In the long term, they also may act as 
vasodilators. Thiazides are safe, efficacious, inexpensive, and reduce 
clinical events. They provide additive blood pressure–lowering 
effects when combined with beta blockers, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs). 
In contrast, addition of a diuretic to a calcium channel blocker is  
less effective. Usual doses of hydrochlorothiazide range from 6.25 to 
50 mg/d. Owing to an increased incidence of metabolic side effects 
(hypokalemia, insulin resistance, increased cholesterol), higher 
doses generally are not recommended. Chlorthalidone is a diuretic 
structurally similar to hydrochlorothiazide, and like hydrochloro-
thiazide, it blocks sodium-chloride cotransport in the early distal 
tubule. However, chlorthalidone has a longer half-life (40–60 h  
vs 9–15 h) and an antihypertensive potency ~1.5–2.0 times that of 
hydrochlorothiazide. Potassium loss is also greater with chlorthali-
done. Two potassium-sparing diuretics, amiloride and triamterene, 
act by inhibiting ENaC in the distal nephron. These agents are weak 
antihypertensive agents but may be used in combination with a 
thiazide to protect against hypokalemia. The main pharmacologic 
target for loop diuretics is the Na+-K+-2Cl– cotransporter in the thick 
ascending limb of the loop of Henle. Loop diuretics generally are 
reserved for hypertensive patients with reduced glomerular filtra-
tion rates (reflected in serum creatinine >220 μmol/L [>2.5 mg/dL]), 
CHF, or sodium retention and edema for some other reason, such as 
treatment with a potent vasodilator, e.g., minoxidil.
Blockers of the Renin–Angiotensin System  ACEIs decrease the 
production of angiotensin II, increase bradykinin levels, and reduce 
sympathetic nervous system activity. ARBs provide selective block-
ade of AT1 receptors, and the effect of angiotensin II on unblocked 
AT2 receptors may augment their hypotensive effect. Both classes 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1902
TABLE 271-8  Examples of Oral Drugs Used in Treatment of Hypertension
DRUG CLASS
EXAMPLES
USUAL TOTAL DAILY 
DOSEa (DOSING 
FREQUENCY/DAY)
OTHER INDICATIONS
CONTRAINDICATIONS/CAUTIONS
Diuretics
 
 
 
 
  Thiazides
Hydrochlorothiazide
6.25–50 mg (1–2)
 
Diabetes, dyslipidemia, 
hyperuricemia, gout, hypokalemia 
 
Chlorthalidone
25–50 mg (1)
 
  Loop diuretics
Furosemide
40–80 mg (2–3)
CHF due to systolic dysfunction, renal 
failure 
Diabetes, dyslipidemia, 
hyperuricemia, gout, hypokalemia 
 
Ethacrynic acid
50–100 mg (2–3)
  Aldosterone antagonists
Spironolactone
25–100 mg (1–2)
CHF due to systolic dysfunction, primary 
aldosteronism 
Renal failure, hyperkalemia 
 
Eplerenone
50–100 mg (1–2)
  K+ retaining
Amiloride
5–10 mg (1–2)
 
Renal failure, hyperkalemia
 
Triamterene
50–100 mg (1–2)
 
 
Beta blockers
 
 
 
Asthma, COPD, 2nd- or 3rd-degree 
heart block, sick-sinus syndrome
  Cardioselective
Atenolol
25–100 mg (1)
Angina, CHF due to systolic dysfunction, 
post-MI, sinus tachycardia, ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias
 
Metoprolol
25–100 mg (1–2)
 
 
  Nonselective
Propranolol
40–160 mg (2)
 
 
 
Propranolol LA
60–180 (1)
 
 
  Combined alpha/beta
Labetalol
200–800 mg (2)
 
 
Carvedilol
12.5–50 mg (2)
 
 
Alpha antagonists
 
 
 
 
  Selective
Prazosin
2–20 mg (2–3)
Prostatism
 
 
Doxazosin
1–16 mg (1)
 
 
 
Terazosin
1–10 mg (1–2)
 
 
  Nonselective
Phenoxybenzamine
20–120 mg (2–3)
Pheochromocytoma
 
Sympatholytics
 
 
 
 
  Central
Clonidine
0.1–0.6 mg (2)
 
 
 
Clonidine patch
0.1–0.3 mg (1/week)
 
 
 
Methyldopa
250–1000 mg (2)
 
 
 
Reserpine
0.05–0.25 mg (1)
 
 
 
Guanfacine
0.5–2 mg (1)
 
 
ACE inhibitors
Captopril
25–200 mg (2)
Post-MI, coronary syndromes, CHF with 
low ejection fraction, nephropathy 
Acute renal failure, bilateral 
renal artery stenosis, pregnancy, 
hyperkalemia 
 
Lisinopril
10–40 mg (1)
 
Ramipril
2.5–20 mg (1–2)
 
Angiotensin II antagonists
Losartan
25–100 mg (1–2)
CHF with low ejection fraction, 
nephropathy, ACE inhibitor cough 
Renal failure, bilateral renal artery 
stenosis, pregnancy, hyperkalemia 
 
Valsartan
80–320 mg (1)
 
Candesartan
2–32 mg (1–2)
 
 
Renin inhibitors
Aliskiren
150–300 mg (1)
Diabetic nephropathy
Pregnancy
Calcium antagonists
 
 
 
 
  Dihydropyridines
Nifedipine (long-acting)
30–60 mg (1)
 
 
  Nondihydropyridines
Verapamil (long-acting)
120–360 mg (1–2)
Post-MI, supraventricular tachycardias, 
angina 
2nd- or 3rd-degree heart block
 
Diltiazem (long-acting)
180–420 mg (1)
 
Direct vasodilators
Hydralazine
25–100 mg (2)
 
Severe coronary artery disease
 
Minoxidil
2.5–80 mg (1–2)
 
 
aAt the initiation of therapy, lower doses may be preferable for elderly patients and for select combinations of antihypertensive agents.
Abbreviations: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; MI, myocardial infarction.
of agents are effective antihypertensive agents that may be used 
as monotherapy or in combination with diuretics, calcium antago-
nists, and alpha blocking agents. ACEIs and ARBs improve insulin 
action and ameliorate the adverse effects of diuretics on glucose 
metabolism. Although the overall impact on the incidence of dia-
betes is modest, compared with amlodipine (a calcium antagonist), 
valsartan (an ARB) has been shown to reduce the risk of developing 
diabetes in high-risk hypertensive patients. ACEI/ARB combina-
tions are less effective in lowering blood pressure than is the case 
when either class of these agents is used in combination with other 
classes of agents. In patients with vascular disease or a high risk 
of diabetes, combination ACEI/ARB therapy has been associated 
with more adverse events (e.g., cardiovascular death, myocardial 
infarction, stroke, and hospitalization for heart failure) without 
increases in benefit.
Side effects of ACEIs and ARBs include functional renal insuf-
ficiency due to efferent renal arteriolar dilation in a kidney with a 
stenotic lesion of the renal artery. Additional predisposing conditions 
to renal insufficiency induced by these agents include dehydration, 
CHF, and use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Dry cough 
occurs in ~15% of patients, and angioedema occurs in <1% of patients 
taking ACEIs. Angioedema occurs most commonly in individuals 
of Asian origin and more commonly in African Americans than in 
whites. Hyperkalemia due to hypoaldosteronism is an occasional 
side effect of both ACEIs and ARBs.
An alternative approach to blocking the renin-angiotensin system 
has recently been introduced into clinical practice for the treatment 
of hypertension: direct renin inhibitors. Blockade of the renin- 
angiotensin system is more complete with renin inhibitors than with 
ACEIs or ARBs. Aliskiren is the first of a class of oral, nonpeptide 
CHAPTER 271 Hypertensive Vascular Disease
1903
competitive inhibitors of the enzymatic activity of renin. Mono-
therapy with aliskiren seems to be as effective as an ACEI or ARB 
for lowering blood pressure, but not more effective. Further blood 
reductions may be achieved when aliskiren is used in combination 
with a thiazide diuretic or a calcium antagonist. Currently, aliskiren 
is not considered a first-line antihypertensive agent.
Aldosterone Antagonists  Spironolactone is a nonselective aldoster-
one antagonist that may be used alone or in combination with 
a thiazide diuretic. It may be a particularly effective agent in 
patients with low-renin primary hypertension, resistant hyperten-
sion, and primary aldosteronism. In patients with CHF, low-dose 
spironolactone reduces mortality and hospitalizations for heart 
failure when given in addition to conventional therapy with ACEIs, 
digoxin, and loop diuretics. Because spironolactone binds to pro-
gesterone and androgen receptors, side effects may include gyneco-
mastia, impotence, and menstrual abnormalities. These side effects 
are circumvented by a newer agent, eplerenone, which is a selective 
aldosterone antagonist.
Beta Blockers  β-Adrenergic receptor blockers lower blood pres-
sure by decreasing cardiac output owing to a reduction of heart rate 
and contractility. Other proposed mechanisms by which beta block-
ers lower blood pressure include a central nervous system effect and 
inhibition of renin release. Beta blockers are particularly effective 
in hypertensive patients with tachycardia, and their hypotensive 
potency is enhanced by co-administration with a diuretic. In lower 
doses, some beta blockers selectively inhibit cardiac β1 receptors 
and have less influence on β2 receptors on bronchial and vascular 
smooth muscle cells; however, there seems to be no difference in 
the antihypertensive potencies of cardioselective and nonselective 
beta blockers. Some beta blockers have intrinsic sympathomimetic 
activity, although it is uncertain whether this constitutes an overall 
advantage or disadvantage in cardiac therapy. Beta blockers with-
out intrinsic sympathomimetic activity decrease the rate of sud-
den death, overall mortality, and recurrent myocardial infarction. 
In patients with CHF, beta blockers have been shown to reduce 
the risks of hospitalization and mortality. Overall, beta blockers 
may be less protective against cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 
endpoints, and some beta blockers may have less effect on central 
aortic pressure than other classes of antihypertensive agents. How-
ever, beta blockers remain appropriate therapy for hypertensive 
patients with concomitant heart disease and related comorbidities. 
Carvedilol and labetalol block both β receptors and peripheral 
α-adrenergic receptors. The potential advantages of combined β- 
and α-adrenergic blockade in treating hypertension remain to be 
determined. Nebivolol represents another class of cardioselective 
beta blockers that has additional vasodilator actions related to 
enhancement of nitric oxide activity. Whether this confers greater 
clinical effectiveness remains to be determined.
`-Adrenergic Blockers  Postsynaptic, selective α-adrenoreceptor 
antagonists lower blood pressure by decreasing peripheral vascular 
resistance. They are effective antihypertensive agents used either 
as monotherapy or in combination with other agents. However, 
in clinical trials of hypertensive patients, alpha blockade has not 
been shown to reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality or to 
provide as much protection against CHF as other classes of antihy-
pertensive agents. These agents are also effective in treating lower 
urinary tract symptoms in men with prostatic hypertrophy. Non-
selective α-adrenoreceptor antagonists bind to postsynaptic and 
presynaptic receptors and are used primarily for the management 
of patients with pheochromocytoma.
Sympatholytic Agents  Centrally acting α2 sympathetic agonists 
decrease peripheral resistance by inhibiting sympathetic outflow. 
They may be particularly useful in patients with autonomic neurop-
athy who have wide variations in blood pressure due to barorecep-
tor denervation. Drawbacks include somnolence, dry mouth, and 
rebound hypertension on withdrawal. Peripheral sympatholytics 
decrease peripheral resistance and venous constriction by depleting 
nerve terminal norepinephrine. Although they are potentially effec-
tive antihypertensive agents, their usefulness is limited by ortho-
static hypotension, sexual dysfunction, and numerous drug-drug 
interactions. Rebound hypertension is another concern with abrupt 
cessation of drugs with a short half-life.
Calcium Channel Blockers  Calcium antagonists reduce vascular 
resistance through L-channel blockade, which reduces intracellu-
lar calcium and blunts vasoconstriction. This is a heterogeneous 
group of agents that includes drugs in the following three classes: 
phenylalkylamines (verapamil), benzothiazepines (diltiazem), and 
1,4-dihydropyridines (nifedipine-like). Used alone and in combina-
tion with other agents (ACEIs, beta blockers, α1-adrenergic block-
ers), calcium antagonists effectively lower blood pressure; however, 
it is unclear if adding a diuretic to a calcium blocker results in a fur-
ther lowering of blood pressure. Side effects of flushing, headache, 
and edema with dihydropyridine use are related to their potencies 
as arteriolar dilators; edema is due to an increase in transcapillary 
pressure gradients, not to net salt and water retention.
Direct Vasodilators  Direct vasodilators decrease peripheral 
resistance and concomitantly activate mechanisms that defend 
arterial pressure, notably the sympathetic nervous system, the renin- 
angiotensin-aldosterone system, and sodium retention. Usually, 
they are not considered first-line agents but are most effective when 
added to a combination that includes a diuretic and a beta blocker. 
Hydralazine is a potent direct vasodilator that has antioxidant 
and nitric oxide–enhancing actions, and minoxidil is a particularly 
potent agent and is used most frequently in patients with renal 
insufficiency who are refractory to all other drugs. Hydralazine may 
induce a lupus-like syndrome, and side effects of minoxidil include 
hypertrichosis and pericardial effusion. Intravenous nitroprusside 
can be used to treat malignant hypertension and life-threatening left 
ventricular heart failure associated with elevated arterial pressure.
COMPARISONS OF ANTIHYPERTENSIVES
Based on pooling results from clinical trials, meta-analyses of the 
efficacy of different classes of antihypertensive agents suggest essen-
tially equivalent blood pressure–lowering effects of the following 
six major classes of antihypertensive agents when used as mono-
therapy: thiazide diuretics, beta blockers, ACEIs, ARBs, calcium 
antagonists, and α1 blockers. On average, standard doses of most 
antihypertensive agents reduce blood pressure by 8–10/4–7 mmHg; 
however, there may be subgroup differences in responsiveness. 
Younger patients may be more responsive to beta blockers and 
ACEIs, whereas patients aged >50 years may be more responsive 
to diuretics and calcium antagonists. There is a limited relationship 
between plasma renin and blood pressure response. Patients with 
high-renin hypertension may be more responsive to ACEIs and 
ARBs than to other classes of agents, whereas patients with low-
renin hypertension are more responsive to diuretics and calcium 
antagonists. Hypertensive African Americans tend to have low renin 
and may require higher doses of ACEIs and ARBs than whites for 
optimal blood pressure control, although this difference is abolished 
when these agents are combined with a diuretic. Beta blockers 
also appear to be less effective than thiazide diuretics in African 
Americans than in non-African Americans. Early pharmacogenetic 
studies, utilizing a candidate gene approach, genome-wide scans, or 
integrated metabolomic and genetic profiles, have shown associa-
tions of gene polymorphisms with blood pressure responsiveness to 
specific antihypertensive drugs. However, the reported effects have 
generally been too small to affect clinical decisions, and associated 
polymorphisms remain to be confirmed. Currently, in practical 
terms, the presence of comorbidities often influences the selection of 
antihypertensive agents.
A meta-analysis of >30 randomized trials of blood pressure– 
lowering therapy indicates that for a given reduction in blood pres-
sure, the major drug classes seem to produce similar overall net 
effects on total cardiovascular events. In both nondiabetic and dia-
betic hypertensive patients, most trials have failed to show significant 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1904
differences in cardiovascular outcomes with different drug regimens 
as long as equivalent decreases in blood pressure were achieved. For 
example, the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Pre-
vent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT) demonstrated that the occurrence 
of CHD and nonfatal myocardial infarction, as well as overall mortal-
ity, was virtually identical in hypertensive patients treated with either 
an ACEI (lisinopril), a diuretic (chlorthalidone), or a calcium antago-
nist (amlodipine). However, there is some evidence that beta blockers 
are inferior to other classes of agents for prevention of cardiovascular 
events, stroke, renal failure, and all-cause mortality, whereas calcium 
channel blockers may be inferior and diuretics but superior to other 
classes of agents for the prevention of heart failure.
However, in specific patient groups, ACEIs may have particular 
advantages, beyond that of blood pressure control, in reducing 
cardiovascular and renal outcomes. ACEIs and ARBs decrease intra-
glomerular pressure and proteinuria and may retard the rate of 
progression of renal insufficiency, not totally accounted for by their 
hypotensive effects, in both diabetic and nondiabetic renal diseases. 
In patients with type 2 diabetes, treatment with an ACEI, an ARB, 
or aliskiren decreases proteinuria and delays the progression of 
renal disease. In experimental models of hypertension and diabetes, 
renal protection with aliskiren is comparable to that with ACEIs and 
ARBs. However, in patients with type 2 diabetes, addition of ali-
skiren to an ACEI provides no additional protection against cardio-
vascular or renal disease and may be associated with more adverse 
outcomes. Among African Americans with hypertension-related 
renal disease, ACEIs appear to be more effective than beta blockers 
or dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers in slowing, although 
not preventing, the decline of glomerular filtration rate. The reno-
protective effect of these renin-angiotensin blockers, compared with 
other antihypertensive drugs, is less obvious at lower blood pres-
sures. In most patients with hypertension and heart failure due to 
systolic and/or diastolic dysfunction, the use of diuretics, ACEIs or 
ARBs, and beta blockers is recommended to improve survival. Inde-
pendent of blood pressure, in both hypertensive and normotensive 
individuals, ACEIs attenuate the development of left ventricular 
hypertrophy, improve symptomatology and risk of death from 
CHF, and reduce morbidity and mortality rates in post-myocardial 
infarction patients. Similar benefits in cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality rates in patients with CHF have been observed with 
the use of ARBs. ACEIs provide better coronary protection than do 
calcium channel blockers, whereas calcium channel blockers pro-
vide more stroke protection than do either ACEIs or beta blockers. 
Results of a large, double-blind, prospective clinical trial (Avoiding 
Cardiovascular Events through Combination Therapy in Patients 
Living with Systolic Hypertension [ACCOMPLISH Trial]) indi-
cated that combination treatment with an ACEI (benazepril) plus 
a calcium antagonist (amlodipine) was superior to treatment with 
the ACEI plus a diuretic (hydrochlorothiazide) in reducing the risk 
of cardiovascular events and death among high-risk patients with 
hypertension. However, the combination of an ACEI and a diuretic 
has recently been shown to produce major reductions in morbidity 
and mortality in the very elderly.
After a stroke, combination therapy with an ACEI and a diuretic, 
but not with an ARB, has been reported to reduce the rate of recur-
rent stroke. Some of these apparent differences may reflect differ-
ences in trial design and/or patient groups.
There has been a recent resurgence of interest in two non- 
pharmacologic, antihypertensive therapies that interrupt sympa-
thetic outflow: (1) device-based carotid baroreflex activation by 
electrical stimulation of the carotid sinus; and (2) endovascular 
radiofrequency ablation of the renal sympathetic nerves. Both have 
been suggested as potential options for resistant hypertension. 
Whereas renal denervation is a minimally invasive procedure, 
carotid baroreceptor stimulation is a surgical procedure, usually per-
formed under general anesthesia that currently involves implanting 
electrodes on both the right and left carotid arteries. Both inter-
ventions inhibit sympathetic drive and decrease blood pressure 
by increasing the capacity of the kidney to excrete sodium and by 
decreasing renin release. Sustained activation of the baroreflex most 
likely lowers blood pressure by other mechanisms as well; however, 
clinical experience with this intervention is limited. Enthusiasm for 
renal denervation has been questioned by the results of Simplicity 
3, a randomized, prospective clinical trial, comparing bilateral renal 
denervation with a sham procedure in 535 patients with resistant 
hypertension. At the end of six months there was no benefit of 
renal artery denervation on both office and ambulatory systolic 
blood pressures, the trial’s primary endpoints. It remains to be seen 
whether these interventions will be adopted into clinical practice.
BLOOD PRESSURE GOALS OF ANTIHYPERTENSIVE THERAPY
Based on clinical trial data, the maximum protection against  
combined cardiovascular endpoints is achieved with pressures 
<135–140 mmHg for systolic blood pressure and <80–85 mmHg 
for diastolic blood pressure; however, treatment has not reduced 
cardiovascular disease risk to the level in non-hypertensive individ-
uals. According to a recent meta-analysis, the magnitude of the pro-
portional reduction of cardiovascular events is broadly consistent 
regardless of baseline co-morbidity, although the absolute benefit 
of blood pressure reduction is greater among individuals with the 
highest risk for cardiovascular events.
The degree of benefit derived from antihypertensive agents is 
related to the magnitude of the blood pressure reduction. Guide-
lines establishing blood pressure targets for hypertension control 
continue to evolve. An intensive blood pressure lowering strategy 
is superior to a less intensive strategy for prevention of stroke 
and myocardial infarction. For example, the SPRINT trial studied 
9361 subjects aged >50 years at increased risk for cardiovascular 
evens. Intensive blood pressure control (systolic blood pressure  
<120 mmHg) reduced the risk of cardiovascular events and mortality 
by 25% compared with less intensive control (systolic blood pressure 
135–139 mmHg). More intense control may also be associated with a 
higher incidence of adverse events (e.g., syncope, electrolyte abnor-
malities, deterioration of renal function), and recent studies suggest 
that the benefits of intensive blood-pressure lowering outweigh the 
risks. Nevertheless, the absolute impact of more intensive control is 
relatively small. In the final analysis, patients need to be carefully 
monitored, and clinical decision making should be individualized.
In diabetic patients, effective blood pressure control reduces 
the risk of cardiovascular events and death as well as the risk for 
microvascular disease (nephropathy, retinopathy). Various guide-
lines have been recommended for hypertension control in patients 
with type 2 diabetes (<140/90, <140/85, <130/80). One widely 
cited Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes clinical 
trial (ACCORD) failed to find superiority of intensive blood pres-
sure lowering (<120 mmHg) over standard blood pressure control  
(<140 mmHg) in reducing the risk of the study’s primary outcome (a 
composite endpoint of myocardial infarction, stroke, and cardiovas-
cular death) in diabetic patients. However, that trial did demonstrate 
a significant reduction of stroke and left ventricular hypertrophy 
with more intensive therapy.
In patients with chronic renal insufficiency, a small, non-progressive 
increase in the serum creatinine concentration may occur with inten-
sive blood pressure lowering. This generally reflects a hemodynamic 
response, not structural renal injury, indicating that intraglomerular 
pressure has been reduced. Blood pressure control should not be 
allowed to deteriorate in order to prevent the modest creatinine 
rise. Among older patients with isolated systolic hypertension, 
further lowering of diastolic blood pressure does not result in harm. 
However, relatively little information is available concerning the 
risk-versus-benefit ratio of intensive antihypertensive therapy in 
individuals >80 years of age, and in this population, gradual blood 
pressure reduction to a less aggressive target level of control may be 
appropriate (e.g., 130–150 mmHg).
To achieve recommended blood pressure goals, the majority of 
individuals with hypertension will require treatment with more 
than one drug. Three or more drugs frequently are needed in 
patients with diabetes and renal insufficiency. For most agents, 
CHAPTER 271 Hypertensive Vascular Disease
1905
reduction of blood pressure at half-standard doses is only ~20% less 
than at standard doses. Appropriate combinations of agents at these 
lower doses may have additive or almost additive effects on blood 
pressure with a lower incidence of side effects.
The term resistant hypertension refers to patients with blood pres-
sures persistently >140/90 mmHg despite taking three or more 
antihypertensive agents, including a diuretic. Resistant or difficult-to-
control hypertension is more common in patients aged >60 years 
than in younger patients. Resistant hypertension may be related to 
“pseudoresistance” (high office blood pressures and lower home 
blood pressures), nonadherence to therapy, identifiable causes of 
hypertension (including obesity and excessive alcohol intake), and 
the use of any of a number of nonprescription and prescription 
drugs (Table 271-3). Rarely, in older patients, pseudohypertension 
may be related to the inability to measure blood pressure accurately 
in severely sclerotic arteries. This condition is suggested if the radial 
pulse remains palpable despite occlusion of the brachial artery by the 
cuff (Osler maneuver). The actual blood pressure can be determined 
by direct intra-arterial measurement. Evaluation of patients with 
resistant hypertension might include home blood pressure monitor-
ing to determine if office blood pressures are representative of the 
usual blood pressure. A more extensive evaluation for a secondary 
form of hypertension should be undertaken if no other explanation 
for hypertension resistance becomes apparent.
HYPERTENSIVE EMERGENCIES
Probably due to the widespread availability of antihypertensive 
therapy, in the United States there has been a decline in the num-
bers of patients presenting with “crisis levels” of blood pressure. 
Most patients who present with severe hypertension are chronically 
hypertensive, and in the absence of acute end organ damage, precip-
itous lowering of blood pressure may result in significant morbidity 
and should be avoided. The key to successful management of severe 
hypertension is to differentiate hypertensive crises from hyperten-
sive urgencies. The degree of target organ damage, rather than the 
level of blood pressure alone, determines the rapidity with which 
blood pressure should be lowered. Tables 271-9 and 271-10 list a 
number of hypertension-related emergencies and recommended 
therapies.
Malignant hypertension is a syndrome associated with an abrupt 
increase of blood pressure in a patient with underlying hyperten-
sion or related to the sudden onset of hypertension in a previously 
normotensive individual. The absolute level of blood pressure is 
not as important as its rate of rise. Pathologically, the syndrome is 
associated with diffuse necrotizing vasculitis, arteriolar thrombi, 
and fibrin deposition in arteriolar walls. Fibrinoid necrosis has been 
observed in arterioles of kidney, brain, retina, and other organs. 
Clinically, the syndrome is recognized by progressive retinopathy 
(arteriolar spasm, hemorrhages, exudates, and papilledema), deteri-
orating renal function with proteinuria, microangiopathic hemolytic 
TABLE 271-9  Preferred Parenteral Drugs for Selected Hypertensive 
Emergencies
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Nitroprusside, nicardipine, labetalol
Malignant hypertension (when IV 
therapy is indicated)
Labetalol, nicardipine, nitroprusside, 
enalaprilat
Stroke
Nicardipine, labetalol, nitroprusside
Myocardial infarction/unstable  
angina
Nitroglycerin, nicardipine, labetalol, 
esmolol
Acute left ventricular failure
Nitroglycerin, enalaprilat, loop 
diuretics
Aortic dissection
Nitroprusside, esmolol, labetalol
Adrenergic crisis
Phentolamine, nitroprusside
Postoperative hypertension
Nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, labetalol, 
nicardipine
Preeclampsia/eclampsia of pregnancy
Hydralazine, labetalol, nicardipine
Source: Adapted from DG Vidt, in S Oparil, MA Weber (eds): Hypertension, 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
TABLE 271-10  Usual Intravenous Doses of Antihypertensive Agents 
Used in Hypertensive Emergenciesa
ANTIHYPERTENSIVE 
AGENT
INTRAVENOUS DOSE
Nitroprusside
Initial 0.3 (μg/kg)/min; usual 2–4 (μg/kg)/min; 
maximum 10 (μg/kg)/min for 10 min
Nicardipine
Initial 5 mg/h; titrate by 2.5 mg/h at 5–15 min 
intervals; max 15 mg/h
Labetalol
2 mg/min up to 300 mg or 20 mg over 2 min, then 
40–80 mg at 10-min intervals up to 300 mg total
Enalaprilat
Usual 0.625–1.25 mg over 5 min every 6–8 h; 
maximum 5 mg/dose
Esmolol
Initial 80–500 μg/kg over 1 min, then 50– 
300 (μg/kg)/min
Phentolamine
5–15 mg bolus
Nitroglycerin
Initial 5 μg/min, then titrate by 5 μg/min at 3–5-min 
intervals; if no response is seen at 20 μg/min, 
incremental increases of 10–20 μg/min may be used
Hydralazine
10–50 mg at 30-min intervals
aConstant blood pressure monitoring is required. Start with the lowest dose. 
Subsequent doses and intervals of administration should be adjusted according 
to the blood pressure response and duration of action of the specific agent.
anemia, and encephalopathy. Historic inquiry should include ques-
tions about the use of monoamine oxidase inhibitors and recre-
ational drugs (e.g., cocaine, amphetamines).
Although blood pressure should be lowered rapidly in patients 
with hypertensive encephalopathy, there are inherent risks of overly 
aggressive therapy. In hypertensive individuals, the upper and 
lower limits of autoregulation of cerebral blood flow are shifted 
to higher levels of arterial pressure, and rapid lowering of blood 
pressure to below the lower limit of autoregulation may precipi-
tate cerebral ischemia or infarction as a consequence of decreased 
cerebral blood flow. Renal and coronary blood flows also may 
decrease with overly aggressive acute therapy. The initial goal of 
therapy is to reduce mean arterial blood pressure by no more than 
25% within minutes to 2 h or to a blood pressure in the range of 
160/100–110 mmHg. This may be accomplished with IV nitroprus-
side, a short-acting vasodilator with a rapid onset of action that 
allows for minute-to-minute control of blood pressure. Parenteral 
labetalol and nicardipine are also effective agents for the treatment 
of hypertensive encephalopathy.
In patients with malignant hypertension without encephalopa-
thy or another catastrophic event, it is preferable to reduce blood 
pressure over hours or longer rather than minutes. This goal may 
effectively be achieved initially with frequent dosing of short-acting 
oral agents such as captopril, clonidine, and labetalol.
Acute, transient blood pressure elevations that last days to weeks 
frequently occur after thrombotic and hemorrhagic strokes. Autoreg-
ulation of cerebral blood flow is impaired in ischemic cerebral tissue, 
and higher arterial pressures may be required to maintain cerebral 
blood flow. Although specific blood pressure targets have not been 
defined for patients with acute cerebrovascular events, aggressive 
reductions of blood pressure are to be avoided. With the increasing 
availability of improved methods for measuring cerebral blood 
flow (using CT technology), studies are in progress to evaluate the 
effects of different classes of antihypertensive agents on both blood 
pressure and cerebral blood flow after an acute stroke. Currently, in 
the absence of other indications for acute therapy, for patients with 
cerebral infarction who are not candidates for thrombolytic therapy, 
one recommended guideline is to institute antihypertensive therapy 
only for patients with a systolic blood pressure >220 mmHg or a dia-
stolic blood pressure >130 mmHg. If thrombolytic therapy is to be 
used, the recommended goal blood pressure is <185 mmHg systolic 
pressure and <110 mmHg diastolic pressure. In patients with hem-
orrhagic stroke, there is no consistent evidence that acute reduc-
tions of systolic blood pressure to a more aggressive target than 
140–179 mmHg improves functional outcome. The management 
of hypertension after subarachnoid hemorrhage is controversial. 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1906
Cautious reduction of blood pressure is indicated if mean arterial 
pressure is >130 mmHg.
In addition to pheochromocytoma, an adrenergic crisis due to 
catecholamine excess may be related to cocaine or amphetamine 
overdose, clonidine withdrawal, acute spinal cord injuries, and an 
interaction of tyramine-containing compounds with monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors. These patients may be treated with phentolamine 
or nitroprusside.
Treatment of hypertension in patients with acute aortic dissec-
tion is discussed in Chap. 274, and treatment of hypertension in 
pregnancy is discussed in Chap. 466.
■
■FURTHER READING
Ettehad D et al: Blood pressure lowering for prevention of cardio-
vascular disease and death: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Lancet 387:957, 2016.
Feinberg AP, Fallin MD: Epigenetics at the crossroads of genes and 
the environment. JAMA 314:1129, 2015.
Go AS et al: An effective approach to high blood pressure control: A 
science advisory from the American Heart Association, the American 
College of Cardiology, and the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention. Hypertension 63:878, 2014.
Guo F et al: Trend in prevalence, awareness, management, and control 
of hypertension among United States adults, 1999 to 2010. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 60:599, 2012.
Harrison DG et al: Inflammation, immunity and hypertension. 
Hypertension 57:132, 2011.
Hughes TM, Sink TM: Hypertension and its role in cognitive function: 
Current evidence and challenges for the future. Am J Hypertension 
29:149, 2016.
Oh YS et al: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Working Group 
Report on Salt in Human Health and Sickness: Building on the 
current scientific evidence. Hypertension 68:281, 2016.
Raman G et al: Comparative effectiveness of management strategies 
for renal artery stenosis: An updated systematic review. Ann Intern 
Med 165:635, 2016.  
Sprint Research Group: A randomized trial of intensive versus 
standard blood pressure control. N Engl J Med 373:2103, 2015.
272 Renovascular Disease
Stephen C. Textor 
The renal vasculature is unusually complex with rich arteriolar flow 
to the cortex in excess of metabolic requirements, consistent with its 
primary function as a filtering organ. After delivering blood to cortical 
glomeruli, the postglomerular circulation supplies deeper medullary 
segments that support energy-dependent solute transport at multiple 
levels of the renal tubule. These postglomerular vessels carry less 
blood, and high oxygen consumption leaves the deeper medullary 
regions at the margin of hypoxemia. Vascular disorders that commonly 
threaten the blood supply of the kidney include large-vessel atheroscle-
rosis, fibromuscular diseases, and embolic disorders. Microvascular 
injury, including inflammatory and primary hematologic disorders, 
is described in Chap. 311.
The glomerular capillary endothelium shares susceptibility to oxi-
dative stress, pressure injury, and inflammation with other vascular 
territories. Rates of urinary albumin excretion (UAE) are predictive of 
systemic atherosclerotic disease events. Increased UAE may develop 
years before cardiovascular events. UAE and the risk of cardiovascular 
events are both reduced with pharmacologic therapy such as statins. 
Experimental studies demonstrate functional changes and rarefaction 
of renal microvessels under conditions of accelerated atherosclerosis 
and/or compromise of proximal perfusion pressures with large-vessel 
disease (Fig. 272-1).
MACROVASCULAR DISEASE
Large-vessel renal artery occlusive disease can result from extrinsic 
compression of the vessel, intimal dissection, fibromuscular dysplasia 
(FMD), or, most commonly, atherosclerotic disease. Any disorder that 
reduces perfusion pressure to the kidney can activate mechanisms that 
tend to restore renal pressures at the expense of developing systemic 
hypertension. Because restoration of perfusion pressures can reverse 
these pathways, renal artery stenosis is considered a specifically treat-
able “secondary” cause of hypertension.
Renal artery stenosis is common and often has only minor hemody-
namic effects. FMD is reported in 3–5% of normal subjects presenting 
as potential kidney donors without hypertension. It may present clin-
ically with hypertension in younger individuals (between age 15 and 
50), most often women. FMD does not often threaten kidney function, 
but sometimes produces total occlusion and can be associated with 
renal artery aneurysms. Atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis (ARAS) 
is common in the general population (6.8% of a community-based 
sample above age 65). The prevalence increases with age and for 
patients with other vascular conditions such as coronary artery disease 
(18–23%) and/or peripheral aortic or lower extremity disease (>30%). 
If untreated, ARAS progresses in nearly 50% of cases over a 5-year 
period, sometimes to total occlusion. Intensive treatment of arterial 
blood pressure and statin therapy appear to slow these rates and 
improve clinical outcomes.
Critical levels of stenosis lead to a reduction in perfusion pressure 
that activates the renin-angiotensin system, reduces sodium excretion, 
and activates sympathetic adrenergic pathways. These events lead to 
systemic hypertension characterized by angiotensin dependence in the 
early stages, widely varying pressures, loss of circadian blood pres-
sure (BP) rhythms, and accelerated target organ injury, including left 
ventricular hypertrophy and renal fibrosis. Renovascular hypertension 
can be treated with agents that block the renin-angiotensin system and 
other drugs that modify these pressor pathways. It can also be treated 
with restoration of renal blood flow by either endovascular or surgical 
revascularization. Most patients require continued antihypertensive 
drug therapy because revascularization alone rarely lowers BP to 
normal.
ARAS and systemic hypertension tend to affect both the post-stenotic 
and contralateral kidneys, reducing overall glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR) in ARAS. When kidney function is threatened by large-vessel 
disease primarily, it has been labeled ischemic nephropathy. Moder-
ately reduced blood flow that develops gradually is associated with 
reduced GFR and limited oxygen consumption with preserved tissue 
oxygenation. Hence, kidney function often remains stable during med-
ical therapy, sometimes for years. With more advanced disease, reduc-
tions in cortical perfusion and frank tissue hypoxia develop. Unlike 
FMD, ARAS develops in patients with other risk factors for atheroscle-
rosis and is commonly superimposed upon preexisting small-vessel 
disease in the kidney resulting from hypertension, aging, and diabetes. 
Nearly 85% of patients considered for renal revascularization have 
stage 3–5 chronic kidney disease (CKD) with GFR <60 mL/min per 
1.73 m2. The presence of ARAS is a strong predictor of morbidity- and 
mortality-related cardiovascular events, independent of whether renal 
revascularization is undertaken.
Diagnostic approaches to renal artery stenosis depend partly on the 
specific clinical questions to be addressed. Noninvasive characterization 
of the renal vasculature may be achieved by several techniques, sum-
marized in Table 272-1. Although activation of the renin-angiotensin 
system is a key step in developing renovascular hypertension, it 
is transient. Levels of renin activity are therefore subject to timing, 
the effects of drugs, and sodium intake, and do not reliably predict 
the response to vascular therapy. Renal artery velocities by Doppler 
ultrasound >200 cm/s generally predict hemodynamically important 
lesions (>60% vessel lumen occlusion), although some treatment trials 
require velocity >300 cm/s to avoid false positives. The renal resistive 
index has predictive value regarding the viability of the kidney. 
CHAPTER 272 Renovascular Disease
1907
Normal
MV proliferation
(early atherosclerosis)
MV rarefaction
(chronic renal ischemia)
Cortex
Medulla
FIGURE 272-1  Examples of micro-CT images from vessels defined by radiopaque casts injected into the renal vasculature. These illustrate the complex, dense 
cortical capillary network supplying the kidney cortex that can either proliferate or succumb to rarefaction under the influence of atherosclerosis and/or occlusive 
disease. Changes in blood supply are followed by tubulointerstitial fibrosis and loss of kidney function. MV, microvascular. (From LO Lerman, AR Chade: Curr Opin 
Nephrol Hyper 18:160, 2009, with permission.)
It remains operator- and institution-dependent, however. Captopril- 
enhanced renography has a strong negative predictive value when 
entirely normal. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is now less 
often used, as gadolinium contrast has been associated with neph-
rogenic systemic fibrosis. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography 
(CT) with vascular reconstruction provides excellent vascular images 
and functional assessment, but carries a small risk of contrast toxicity.
TREATMENT
Renal Artery Stenosis
While restoring renal blood flow and perfusion seems intuitively 
beneficial for high-grade occlusive lesions, revascularization proce-
dures also pose hazards and expense. Patients with FMD are com-
monly younger females with otherwise normal vessels and a long life 
expectancy. These patients often respond well to percutaneous renal 
artery angioplasty. If BP can be controlled to goal levels and kidney 
function remains stable in patients with ARAS, it may be argued that 
medical therapy with follow-up for disease progression is equally 
effective. Multiple prospective randomized controlled trials have 
failed to identify compelling benefits for interventional procedures 
regarding short-term results of BP and renal function. Studies of 
cardiovascular outcomes including stroke, congestive heart failure, 
myocardial infarction, and end-stage renal failure, suggest a small 
mortality benefit for revascularized subjects without proteinuria. 
Medical therapy should include blockade of the renin-angiotensin 
system, attainment of goal BPs, cessation of tobacco, statins, and 
aspirin. Follow-up requires surveillance for progressive occlusion 
manifest by worsening renal function and/or loss of BP control. 
Renal revascularization is now often reserved for patients failing 
medical therapy or developing additional complications.
Techniques of renal revascularization are improving. With expe-
rienced operators, major complications occur in 5–9% of cases, 
including renal artery dissection, capsular perforation, hemorrhage, 
and occasional atheroembolic disease. Although not common, athe-
roembolic disease can be catastrophic and accelerate both hyperten-
sion and kidney failure, precisely the events that revascularization 
TABLE 272-1  Summary of Imaging Modalities for Evaluating the Kidney Vasculature
Perfusion Studies to Assess Differential Renal Blood Flow
Captopril renography with 
technetium 99mTc mertiatide  
(99mTc MAG3)
Captopril-mediated fall in filtration 
pressure amplifies differences in  
renal perfusion
Normal study excludes renovascular 
hypertension
Multiple limitations in patients with 
advanced atherosclerosis or creatinine  
>2.0 mg/dL (177 μmol/L)
Vascular Studies to Evaluate the Renal Arteries
Duplex ultrasonography
Shows the renal arteries and 
measures flow velocity as a  
means of assessing the severity of 
stenosis
Inexpensive; widely available,  
suitable for follow-up studies
Heavily dependent on operator’s experience; 
less useful than invasive angiography for the 
diagnosis of fibromuscular dysplasia and 
abnormalities in accessory renal arteries
Computed tomographic 
angiography
Shows the renal arteries and  
perirenal aorta
Provides excellent images; stents  
do not cause artifacts
Expensive, moderate volume of contrast 
required
Magnetic resonance  
angiography
Shows the renal arteries and  
perirenal aorta
Not nephrotoxic, but concerns for 
gadolinium toxicity exclude use in 
GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2; provides 
excellent images
Expensive; gadolinium excluded in renal 
failure, unable to visualize stented vessels
Intraarterial angiography
Shows location and severity of 
vascular lesion
Considered “gold standard” for 
diagnosis of large-vessel disease, 
usually performed simultaneous  
with planned intervention
Expensive, associated hazard of 
atheroemboli, contrast toxicity, procedure-
related complications, e.g., dissection
Abbreviation: GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1908
is intended to prevent. Although renal blood flow usually can be 
restored by endovascular stenting, recovery of renal function is 
limited to about 25% of cases, with no change in 50% and some 
deterioration evident in others. Patients with rapid loss of kidney 
function, sometimes associated with antihypertensive drug therapy, 
or with vascular disease affecting the entire functioning kidney 
mass are more likely to recover function after restoring blood flow. 
When hypertension is refractory to effective therapy, revasculariza-
tion offers real benefits. Table 272-2 summarizes currently accepted 
guidelines for considering renal revascularization.
ATHEROEMBOLIC RENAL DISEASE
Emboli to the kidneys arise most frequently as a result of cholesterol 
crystals breaking free of atherosclerotic vascular plaque and lodg-
ing in downstream microvessels. Most clinical atheroembolic events 
follow angiographic procedures, often of the coronary vessels. It has 
been argued that nearly all vascular interventional procedures lead to 
plaque fracture and release of microemboli, but clinical manifestations 
develop only in a fraction of these. The incidence of clinical atheroem-
boli has been increasing with more vascular procedures and longer life 
spans. Atheroembolic renal disease is suspected in >3% of elderly sub-
jects with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and is likely underdiagnosed. 
It is more frequent in males with a history of diabetes, hypertension, 
and ischemic cardiac disease. Atheroemboli in the kidney are strongly 
associated with aortic aneurysmal disease and renal artery stenosis. 
Most clinical cases can be linked to precipitating events, such as angi-
ography, vascular surgery, anticoagulation with heparin, thrombolytic 
therapy, or trauma. Clinical manifestations of this syndrome commonly 
develop between 1 and 14 days after an inciting event and may con-
tinue to develop for weeks thereafter. Systemic embolic disease mani-
festations, such as fever, abdominal pain, and weight loss, are present 
in less than half of patients, although cutaneous manifestations includ-
ing livedo reticularis and localized toe gangrene may be more common. 
Worsening hypertension and deteriorating kidney function are com-
mon, sometimes reaching a malignant phase. Progressive renal failure 
can occur and require dialytic support. These cases often develop after 
a stuttering onset over many weeks and have an ominous prognosis. 
Mortality rate after 1 year reaches 38%, and although some may even-
tually recover sufficiently to no longer require dialysis, many do not.
Beyond the clinical manifestations above, laboratory findings 
include rising creatinine, transient eosinophilia (60–80%), elevated 
sedimentation rate, and hypocomplementemia (15%). Establishing this 
diagnosis can be difficult and is often by exclusion. Definitive diagnosis 
depends on kidney biopsy demonstrating microvessel occlusion with 
cholesterol crystals that leave a “cleft” in the vessel. Biopsies obtained 
from patients undergoing surgical revascularization of the kidney 
indicate that silent cholesterol emboli are frequently present before any 
further manipulation is performed.
No effective therapy is available for atheroembolic disease once it 
has developed. Withdrawal of anticoagulation is recommended. Late 
recovery of kidney function after supportive measures sometimes 
occurs, and statin therapy may improve outcome. The role of embolic 
protection devices in the renal circulation is unclear, but a few prospec-
tive trials have failed to demonstrate major benefits. These devices are 
limited to distal protection during the endovascular procedure and 
offer no protection from embolic debris developing after removal.
THROMBOEMBOLIC RENAL DISEASE
Thrombotic occlusion of renal vessels or branch arteries can lead to 
declining renal function and hypertension. It is difficult to diagnose 
and is often overlooked, especially in elderly patients. Thrombosis 
can develop as a result of local vessel abnormalities, such as local 
dissection, trauma, or inflammatory vasculitis. Local microdissections 
sometimes lead to patchy, transient areas of infarctions labeled “seg-
mental arteriolar mediolysis.” Although hypercoagulability conditions 
sometimes present as renal artery thrombosis, this is rare. It can also 
derive from distant embolic events, e.g., the left atrium in patients 
with atrial fibrillation or from fat emboli originating from traumatized 
tissue, most commonly large bone fractures. Cardiac sources include 
vegetations from subacute bacterial endocarditis. Systemic emboli to 
the kidneys may also arise from the venous circulation if right-to-left 
shunting occurs, e.g., through a patent foramen ovale.
Clinical manifestations vary depending on the rapidity of onset and 
extent of occlusion. Acute arterial thrombosis may produce flank pain, 
fever, leukocytosis, nausea, and vomiting. If kidney infarction results, 
enzymes such as lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) rise to extreme levels. If 
both kidneys are affected, renal function will decline precipitously with 
a drop in urine output. If a single kidney is involved, renal functional 
changes may be minor. Hypertension related to sudden release of renin 
from ischemic tissue can develop rapidly, as long as some viable tissue 
in the “peri-infarct” border zone remains. If the infarct zone demarcates 
precisely, the rise in BP and renin activity may resolve. Diagnosis of 
renal infarction may be established by vascular imaging with MRI, CT 
angiography, or arteriography (Fig. 272-2).
■
■MANAGEMENT OF ARTERIAL THROMBOSIS OF THE 
KIDNEY
Options for interventions of newly detected arterial occlusion include 
surgical reconstruction, anticoagulation, thrombolytic therapy, 
endovascular procedures, and supportive care, particularly antihyper-
tensive drug therapy. Application of these methods depends on the 
patient’s overall condition, the precipitating factors (e.g., local trauma 
or systemic illness), the magnitude of renal tissue and function at risk, 
and the likelihood of recurrent events in the future. For unilateral dis-
ease, for example, arterial dissection with thrombosis, supportive care 
with anticoagulation may suffice. Acute, bilateral occlusion is poten-
tially catastrophic, producing anuric renal failure. Depending on the 
precipitating event, surgical or thrombolytic therapies can sometimes 
restore kidney viability.
MICROVASCULAR INJURY ASSOCIATED WITH 
HYPERTENSION
■
■ARTERIOLONEPHROSCLEROSIS
“Malignant” Hypertension  Although BP rises with age, it has 
long been recognized that some individuals develop rapidly progressive 
BP elevations with target organ injury including retinal hemorrhages, 
encephalopathy, and declining kidney function. Placebo arms during 
the controlled trials of hypertension therapy identified progression 
to severe levels in 20% of subjects over 5 years. If untreated, patients 
TABLE 272-2  Clinical Factors That Determine the Role of  
Revascularization in Addition to Medical Therapy for Renal Artery 
Stenosis
Factors Favoring Medical Therapy and Revascularization for Renal 
Artery Stenosis
•  Progressive decline in GFR during treatment of systemic hypertension
•  Failure to achieve adequate blood pressure control with optimal medical 
therapy (medical failure)
•  Rapid or recurrent decline in the GFR in association with a reduction in 
systemic pressure
•  Decline in the GFR during therapy with ACE inhibitors or ARBs
•  Recurrent congestive heart failure in a patient in whom the adequacy of left 
ventricular function does not explain a cause
Factors Favoring Medical Therapy and Surveillance of Renal Artery 
Disease
•  Controlled blood pressure with stable renal function (e.g., stable renal 
insufficiency)
•  Stable renal artery stenosis without progression on surveillance studies 
(e.g., serial duplex ultrasound)
•  Very advanced age and/or limited life expectancy
•  Extensive comorbidity that make revascularization too risky
•  High risk for or previous experience with atheroembolic disease
•  Other concomitant renal parenchymal diseases that cause progressive 
renal dysfunction (e.g., interstitial nephritis, diabetic nephropathy)
Abbreviations: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARBs, angiotensin receptor 
blockers; GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
CHAPTER 272 Renovascular Disease
1909
FIGURE 272-2  A. CT angiogram illustrating loss of circulation to the upper pole of the right kidney in a patient with fibromuscular disease and a renal artery aneurysm. 
Activation of the renin-angiotensin system produced rapidly developing hypertension. B. Angiogram illustrating high-grade renal artery stenosis affecting the left kidney. 
This lesion is often part of widespread atherosclerosis and sometimes is an extension of aortic plaque. This lesion develops in older individuals with preexisting 
atherosclerotic risk factors.
A
B
with target organ injury including papilledema and declining kidney 
function suffered mortality rates in excess of 50% over 6–12 months, 
hence the designation “malignant.” Postmortem studies of such 
patients identified vascular lesions, designated “fibrinoid necrosis,” 
with breakdown of the vessel wall, deposition of eosinophilic material 
including fibrin, and a perivascular cellular infiltrate. A separate lesion 
was identified in the larger interlobular arteries in many patients 
with hyperplastic proliferation of the vascular wall cellular elements, 
deposition of collagen, and separation of layers, designated the 
“onionskin” lesion. For many of these patients, fibrinoid necrosis led 
to obliteration of glomeruli and loss of tubular structures. Progressive 
kidney failure ensued and, without dialysis support, led to early 
mortality in untreated malignant-phase hypertension. These vascular 
changes could develop with pressure-related injury from a variety 
of hypertensive pathways, including but not limited to activation of 
the renin-angiotensin system and severe vasospasm associated with 
catecholamine release. Occasionally, endothelial injury is sufficient to 
induce microangiopathic hemolysis, as discussed below.
Antihypertensive therapy is the mainstay of therapy for malignant 
hypertension. With effective BP reduction, manifestations of vascular 
injury, including microangiopathic hemolysis and renal dysfunction, 
can improve over time. Whereas prior reports before the era of drug 
therapy suggested that 1-year mortality rates exceeded 90%, current 
survival over 5 years exceeds 50%.
Malignant hypertension is less common in Western countries, 
although it persists in parts of the world where medical care and 
antihypertensive drug therapy are less available. It most commonly 
develops in patients with treated hypertension who neglect to take 
medications or who may use vasospastic drugs, such as cocaine. Renal 
abnormalities typically include rising serum creatinine and occasion-
ally hematuria and proteinuria. Biochemical findings may include 
evidence of hemolysis (anemia, schistocytes, and reticulocytosis) and 
changes associated with kidney failure. African-American males are 
more likely to develop rapidly progressive hypertension and kidney 
failure than are whites in the United States. Genetic polymorphisms 
for APOL1 that are common in the African-American population 
predispose to subtle focal sclerosing glomerular disease, with severe 
hypertension developing at younger ages secondary to renal disease 
in this instance.
“Hypertensive Nephrosclerosis”  Based on experience with 
malignant hypertension and epidemiologic evidence linking BP 
with long-term risks of kidney failure, it has long been assumed 
that lesser degrees of hypertension induce less severe, but prevalent, 
changes in kidney vessels and loss of kidney function. As a result, a 
large portion of patients reaching ESRD without a specific etiologic 
diagnosis are assigned the designation “hypertensive nephrosclero-
sis.” Pathologic examination commonly identifies afferent arteriolar 
thickening with deposition of homogeneous eosinophilic material 
(hyaline arteriolosclerosis) associated with narrowing of vascular 
lumina. Clinical manifestations include retinal vessel changes associ-
ated with hypertension (arteriolar narrowing, arteriovenous crossing 
changes), left ventricular hypertrophy, and elevated BP. The role of 
these vascular changes in kidney function is unclear. Postmortem 
and biopsy samples from normotensive kidney donors demonstrate 
similar vessel changes associated with aging, dyslipidemia, and glu-
cose intolerance. Although BP reduction does slow progression of 
proteinuric kidney diseases and is warranted to reduce the excessive 
cardiovascular risks associated with CKD, antihypertensive therapy 
does not alter the course of kidney dysfunction identified specifically 
as hypertensive nephrosclerosis.
■
■FURTHER READING
de Mast Q, Beutler JJ: The prevalence of atherosclerotic renal artery 
stenosis in risk groups: A systemic literature review. J Hypertens 
27:1333, 2009.
Freedman BI, Cohen AH: Hypertension-attributed nephropathy: 
What’s in a name? Nat Rev Nephrol 12:27, 2016.
Herrmann SM et al: Management of atherosclerotic renovascular dis-
ease after Cardiovascular Outcomes in Renal Atherosclerotic Lesions 
(CORAL). Nephrol Dial Transplant 30:366, 2015.
Modi KS, Rao VK: Atheroembolic renal disease. J Am Soc Nephrol 
12:1781 2001.
Parikh SA et al: SCAI expert consensus statement for renal artery 
stenting appropriate use. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 84:1163, 2014.
Persu A et al: European consensus on the diagnosis and management 
of fibromuscular dysplasia. J Hypertens 32:1367, 2014.
Textor SC et al: Percutaneous revascularization for ischemic nephrop-
athy: The past, present and future. Kidney Int 83:28, 2013.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1910
These prothrombotic networks contain histones that stimulate platelet 
aggregation and promote platelet-dependent thrombin generation. 
Venous thrombi form and flourish in an environment of stasis, low 
oxygen tension, and upregulation of proinflammatory genes.
Prothrombotic States  The two most common autosomal domi-
nant genetic mutations are factor V Leiden, which causes resistance to 
the endogenous anticoagulant, activated protein C (which inactivates 
clotting factors V and VIII), and the prothrombin gene mutation, which 
increases the plasma prothrombin concentration (Chaps. 61 and 113). 
Antithrombin, protein C, and protein S are naturally occurring coagula-
tion inhibitors. Deficiencies of these inhibitors are associated with VTE 
but are rare. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is the most common 
acquired cause of thrombophilia and is associated with venous or 
arterial thrombosis. Other common predisposing factors include can-
cer, obesity, cigarette smoking, systemic arterial hypertension, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic kidney disease, blood transfu-
sion, long-haul air travel, air pollution, estrogen-containing contracep-
tives, pregnancy, postmenopausal hormone replacement, surgery, and 
trauma. Inflammation predisposes to thrombosis, and conditions such 
as psoriasis and inflammatory bowel disease have become recognized 
risk factors of VTE. Sedentary lifestyle is an increasingly prevalent 
etiology of fatal PE. A Japanese study found that each 2 h per day 
increment of television watching is associated with a 40% increased 
likelihood of fatal PE.
Embolization  When deep venous thrombi (Fig. 273-2) detach from 
their site of formation, they embolize to the vena cava, right atrium, 
and right ventricle, and lodge in the pulmonary arterial circulation, 
thereby causing acute PE. Paradoxically, these thrombi occasionally 
embolize to the arterial circulation through a patent foramen ovale or 
atrial septal defect. Many patients with PE have no evidence of DVT 
because the clot has already embolized to the lungs.
Physiology  The most common gas exchange abnormalities are 
arterial hypoxemia and an increased alveolar-arterial O2 tension gra-
dient, which represents the inefficiency of O2 transfer across the lungs. 
Anatomic dead space increases because breathed gas does not enter gas 
exchange units of the lung. Physiologic dead space increases because 
ventilation to gas exchange units exceeds venous blood flow through 
the pulmonary capillaries.
Other pathophysiologic abnormalities include:
1.	 Increased pulmonary vascular resistance due to vascular obstruc-
tion or platelet secretion of vasoconstricting neurohumoral agents 
such as serotonin. Release of vasoactive mediators can produce 
ventilation-perfusion mismatching at sites remote from the embolus, 
thereby accounting for discordance between a small PE and a large 
alveolar-arterial O2 gradient.
■
■EPIDEMIOLOGY
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) encompasses deep venous thrombo-
sis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) and causes cardiovascular 
death and disability as well as psychological illness and emotional 
distress. In the United States, the Surgeon General estimates that there 
are 100,000 to 180,000 deaths annually from PE and has declared that 
PE is the most common preventable cause of death among hospitalized 
patients. In a Canadian study, almost half of PE patients at 1 year had 
exercise limitation, decreased walking distance, or dyspnea, which 
lowered their quality of life. Survivors may suffer the complications of 
chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension or postthrombotic 
syndrome. Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension causes 
breathlessness, especially with exertion. Postthrombotic syndrome 
(also known as chronic venous insufficiency) damages the venous valves 
of the leg and worsens the quality of life by causing ankle or calf 
swelling and leg aching, especially after prolonged standing. In its 
most severe form, postthrombotic syndrome causes skin ulceration 
(Fig. 273-1).
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Inflammation and Platelet Activation  Virchow’s triad of 
venous stasis, hypercoagulability, and endothelial injury leads to 
recruitment of activated platelets, which release microparticles. These 
microparticles contain proinflammatory mediators that bind neu-
trophils, stimulating them to release their nuclear material and form 
web-like extracellular networks called neutrophil extracellular traps. 
Deep Venous Thrombosis 
and Pulmonary 
Thromboembolism
Samuel Z. Goldhaber 
273
FIGURE 273-1  Skin ulceration in the lateral malleolus from postthrombotic 
syndrome of the leg.
FIGURE 273-2  Deep venous thrombosis at autopsy.
CHAPTER 273 Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
1911
2.	 Impaired gas exchange due to increased alveolar dead space from 
vascular obstruction, hypoxemia from alveolar hypoventilation rel-
ative to perfusion in the nonobstructed lung, right-to-left shunting, 
or impaired carbon monoxide transfer due to loss of gas exchange 
surface.
3.	 Alveolar hyperventilation due to reflex stimulation of irritant receptors.
4.	 Increased airway resistance due to constriction of airways distal to the 
bronchi.
5.	 Decreased pulmonary compliance due to lung edema, lung hemor-
rhage, or loss of surfactant.
Pulmonary 
Hypertension, 
Right Ventricular 
(RV) 
Dysfunction, and RV Microinfarction 
Pulmonary artery 
obstruction and neurohumoral mediators cause a rise in pulmonary 
artery pressure and in pulmonary vascular resistance. When RV 
wall tension rises, RV dilation and dysfunction ensue, with release 
of the cardiac biomarker, brain natriuretic peptide, due to abnormal 
RV stretch. The interventricular septum bulges into and compresses 
an intrinsically normal left ventricle (LV). Diastolic LV dysfunction 
reduces LV distensibility and impairs LV filling. Increased RV wall 
tension also compresses the right coronary artery, limits myocardial 
oxygen supply, and precipitates right coronary artery ischemia and RV 
microinfarction, with release of cardiac biomarkers such as troponin. 
Underfilling of the LV may lead to a fall in LV cardiac output and sys-
temic arterial pressure, with consequent circulatory collapse and death.
■
■CLASSIFICATION OF PULMONARY EMBOLISM AND 
DEEP VENOUS THROMBOSIS
Pulmonary Embolism  Massive PE accounts for 5–10% of cases, 
and is characterized by extensive thrombosis affecting at least half 
of the pulmonary vasculature. Dyspnea, syncope, hypotension, and 
cyanosis are hallmarks of massive PE. Patients with massive PE may 
present in cardiogenic shock and can die from multisystem organ fail-
ure. Submassive PE accounts for 20–25% of patients, and is character-
ized by RV dysfunction despite normal systemic arterial pressure. The 
combination of right heart failure and release of cardiac biomarkers 
indicates a high risk of clinical deterioration. Low-risk PE constitutes 
about 65–75% of cases. These patients have an excellent prognosis.
Deep Venous Thrombosis  Lower extremity DVT usually begins 
in the calf and propagates proximally to the popliteal vein, femoral 
vein, and iliac veins. Leg DVT is about 10 times more common than 
upper extremity DVT, which is often precipitated by placement 
of pacemakers, internal cardiac defibrillators, or indwelling central 
venous catheters. The likelihood of upper extremity DVT increases 
as the catheter diameter and number of lumens increase. Superficial 
venous thrombosis usually presents with erythema, tenderness, and a 
“palpable cord.” Patients are at risk for extension of the thrombosis to 
the deep-venous system.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
Clinical Evaluation  PE is known as “the Great Masquerader.” 
Diagnosis is difficult because symptoms and signs are nonspecific. 
The most common symptom is unexplained breathlessness. When 
occult PE occurs concomitantly with overt congestive heart failure or 
pneumonia, clinical improvement often fails to ensue despite standard 
medical treatment of the concomitant illness. This scenario presents a 
clinical clue to the possible coexistence of PE.
Hospitalization for syncope was associated with a 17% rate of newly 
diagnosed PE in an Italian multicenter study of 560 patients. Among 
those patients who had no alternative explanation for syncope, 25% 
had PE. Even when there was an alternative explanation for syncope, 
13% had PE. When clinical suspicion was high according to the Wells 
Score or when the plasma d-dimer level was elevated, 42% had PE. PE 
in these patients was anatomically extensive, and 42% had thrombus in 
the main pulmonary artery.
With DVT, the most common symptom is a cramp or “charley 
horse” in the lower calf that persists and intensifies over several days. 
Wells Point Score criteria help estimate the clinical likelihood of DVT 
and PE (Table 273-1). Patients with a low-to-moderate likelihood of 
DVT or PE should undergo initial diagnostic evaluation with d-dimer 
testing alone (see “Blood Tests”) without obligatory imaging tests 
(Fig. 273-3). However, patients with a high clinical likelihood of VTE 
should skip d-dimer testing and undergo imaging as the next step in 
the diagnostic algorithm.
Clinical Pearls  Not all leg pain is due to DVT, and not all dyspnea 
is due to PE (Table 273-2). Sudden, severe calf discomfort suggests a 
ruptured Baker’s cyst. Fever and chills usually herald cellulitis rather 
than DVT. Physical findings, if present, may consist only of mild palpa-
tion discomfort in the lower calf. However, massive DVT often presents 
with marked thigh swelling, tenderness, and erythema. Recurrent 
left thigh edema especially in young women raises the possibility of 
May-Thurner Syndrome, with right proximal iliac artery compression 
TABLE 273-1  Clinical Decision Rules
Low Clinical Likelihood of Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) If Point 
Score Is Zero or Less; Moderate Likelihood If Score Is 1 to 2; High 
Likelihood If Score Is 3 or Greater
CLINICAL VARIABLE
DVT SCORE
Active cancer
1
Paralysis, paresis, or recent cast
1
Bedridden for >3 days; major surgery <12 weeks
1
Tenderness along distribution of deep veins
1
Entire leg swelling
1
Unilateral calf swelling >3 cm
1
Pitting edema
1
Collateral superficial nonvaricose veins
1
Alternative diagnosis at least as likely as DVT
–2
High Clinical Likelihood of Pulmonary Embolism (PE) if Point Score 
Exceeds 4
CLINICAL VARIABLE
PE SCORE
Signs and symptoms of DVT
3.0
Alternative diagnosis less likely than PE
3.0
Heart rate >100/min
1.5
Immobilization >3 days; surgery within 4 weeks
1.5
Prior PE or DVT
1.5
Hemoptysis
1.0
Cancer
1.0
ALGORITHM FOR DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Suspect DVT or PE
Assess clinical likelihood
Low
D-dimer
D-dimer
Normal
No DVT
Imaging test needed
No PE
Imaging test needed
High
Normal
High
Not low
Not high
High
DVT
PE
FIGURE 273-3  How to decide whether diagnostic imaging is needed. For 
assessment of clinical likelihood, see Table 273-1.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1912
of the left proximal iliac vein. However, if a leg is diffusely edema-
tous, DVT is unlikely. More probable is an acute exacerbation of 
venous insufficiency due to postthrombotic syndrome. Upper extrem-
ity venous thrombosis may present with asymmetry in the supraclavi-
cular fossa or in the circumference of the upper arms.
Pulmonary infarction usually indicates a small PE. This condition is 
exquisitely painful because the thrombus lodges peripherally, near the 
innervation of pleural nerves. Nonthrombotic PE etiologies include fat 
embolism after pelvic or long bone fracture, tumor embolism, bone 
marrow, and air embolism. Cement embolism and bony fragment 
embolism can occur after total hip or knee replacement. Intravenous 
drug users may inject themselves with a wide array of substances that 
can embolize, such as hair, talc, and cotton. Amniotic fluid embolism 
occurs when fetal membranes leak or tear at the placental margin.
Nonimaging Diagnostic Modalities  • 
BLOOD TESTS  The 
quantitative plasma d-dimer enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
rises in the presence of DVT or PE because of the breakdown of fibrin 
by plasmin. Elevation of d-dimer indicates endogenous although often 
clinically ineffective thrombolysis. The sensitivity of the d-dimer is 
>80% for DVT (including isolated calf DVT) and >95% for PE. The 
d-dimer is less sensitive for DVT than for PE because the DVT thrombus 
size is smaller. A normal d-dimer is a useful “rule out” test. However, 
the d-dimer assay is not specific. Levels increase in patients with myo-
cardial infarction, pneumonia, sepsis, cancer, and the postoperative 
state and those in the second or third trimester of pregnancy. Therefore, 
d-dimer rarely has a useful role among hospitalized patients, because 
levels are frequently elevated due to systemic illness.
ELEVATED CARDIAC BIOMARKERS  Serum troponin and 
plasma heart-type fatty acid–binding protein levels 
increase because of RV microinfarction. Myocardial stretch 
causes release of brain natriuretic peptide or NT-pro-brain 
natriuretic peptide.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM  The most frequently cited abnor-
mality, in addition to sinus tachycardia, is the S1Q3T3 sign: 
an S wave in lead I, a Q wave in lead III, and an inverted 
T wave in lead III (Chap. 235). This finding is relatively 
specific but insensitive. RV strain and ischemia cause the 
most common abnormality, T-wave inversion in leads V1 
to V4.
Noninvasive Imaging Modalities 
• 
VENOUS 
ULTRASONOGRAPHY  Ultrasonography of the deep-venous 
system relies on loss of vein compressibility as the pri-
mary diagnostic criterion for DVT. When a normal vein 
is imaged in cross-section, it readily collapses with gentle 
manual pressure on the ultrasound transducer. This cre-
ates the illusion of a “wink.” With acute DVT, the vein 
loses its compressibility because of passive distention by 
acute thrombus. The diagnosis of acute DVT is even more 
secure when thrombus is directly visualized. It appears homogeneous 
and has low echogenicity (Fig. 273-4). The vein itself often appears 
mildly dilated, and collateral channels may be absent.
Venous flow dynamics can be examined with Doppler imaging. 
Normally, manual calf compression causes augmentation of the Doppler 
flow pattern. Loss of normal respiratory variation is caused by an 
obstructing DVT or by any obstructive process within the pelvis. For 
patients with a technically poor or nondiagnostic venous ultrasound, 
one should consider alternative imaging modalities for DVT, such as 
computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging.
CHEST ROENTGENOGRAPHY  A normal or nearly normal chest x-ray 
often occurs in PE. Well-established abnormalities include focal 
oligemia (Westermark’s sign), a peripheral wedged-shaped density 
usually located at the pleural base (Hampton’s hump), and an enlarged 
right descending pulmonary artery (Palla’s sign).
CHEST CT  CT of the chest with intravenous contrast is the principal 
imaging test for the diagnosis of PE (Fig. 273-5). “Thin-cut chest CT 
images” can provide exquisite detail, with ≤1 mm of resolution during 
a short breath hold. Sixth-order branches can be visualized with res-
olution superior to that of conventional invasive contrast pulmonary 
angiography. The CT scan also provides an excellent four-chamber 
view of the heart. RV enlargement on chest CT indicates an increased 
likelihood of death within the next 30 days compared with PE patients 
who have normal RV size. When imaging is extended distally below 
the chest to the knee, pelvic and proximal leg DVT also can be diag-
nosed by CT scanning. In patients without PE, the lung parenchymal 
images may establish alternative diagnoses not apparent on chest x-ray 
that explain the presenting symptoms and signs, such as pneumonia, 
emphysema, pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary mass, and aortic pathol-
ogy. Sometimes, asymptomatic early-stage lung cancer is diagnosed 
incidentally. Major efforts are underway to reduce radiation and con-
trast material requirements for chest CT. “Triple rule-out CT” utilizes 
ECG-synchronized acquisition, adjusts contrast material timing, and 
opacifies both the thoracic aorta and pulmonary artery circulation to 
exclude the three major causes of acute chest pain: PE, acute aortic 
syndrome, and acute coronary syndrome.
LUNG SCANNING  Lung scanning has become a second-line diagnostic 
test for PE, used mostly for patients who cannot tolerate intravenous 
contrast. Small particulate aggregates of albumin labeled with a 
gamma-emitting radionuclide are injected intravenously and are 
trapped in the pulmonary capillary bed. The perfusion scan defect 
indicates absent or decreased blood flow, possibly due to PE. Ventila-
tion scans, obtained with a radiolabeled inhaled gas such as xenon or 
krypton, improve the specificity of the perfusion scan. Abnormal ven-
tilation scans indicate abnormal nonventilated lung, thereby providing 
possible explanations for perfusion defects other than acute PE, such as 
TABLE 273-2  Differential Diagnosis
Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT)
Ruptured Baker’s cyst
Muscle strain/injury
Cellulitis
Acute postthrombotic syndrome/venous insufficiency
Pulmonary Embolism (PE)
Pneumonia, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Congestive heart failure
Pericarditis
Pleurisy: “viral syndrome,” costochondritis, musculoskeletal discomfort
Rib fracture, pneumothorax
Acute coronary syndrome
Anxiety
Compression
CFV
CFA
CFV
CFA
No Compression
FIGURE 273-4  Venous ultrasound, with and without compression of the leg veins. CFA, common 
femoral artery; CFV, common femoral vein; GSV, great saphenous vein; LT, left.
CHAPTER 273 Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
1913
FIGURE 273-5  Large bilateral proximal PE on a coronal chest CT image in 
a 54-year-old man with lung cancer and brain metastases. He had developed 
sudden onset of chest heaviness and shortness of breath while at home. There 
are filling defects in the main and segmental pulmonary arteries bilaterally (white 
arrows). Only the left upper lobe segmental artery is free of thrombus.
ALGORITHM FOR DVT AND PE DIAGNOSIS
DVT imaging test
Venous ultrasound
Diagnostic
Nondiagnostic
Stop
MR
CT
Phlebography
PE Imaging Test
Chest CT
Diagnostic
Nondiagnostic, unavailable, or unsafe
Stop
Stop
Lung scan
Diagnostic
Nondiagnostic
Venous ultrasound
Positive
Negative
Treat for PE
Transesophageal ECHO or MR or
invasive pulmonary angiography
FIGURE 273-6  Imaging tests to diagnose DVT and PE. ECHO, echocardiography.
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. A high-probability 
scan for PE is defined as two or more segmental perfusion defects in 
the presence of normal ventilation.
The diagnosis of PE is very unlikely in patients with normal and 
nearly normal scans and, in contrast, is about 90% certain in patients 
with high-probability scans. Unfortunately, most patients have nondi-
agnostic scans, and fewer than one-half of patients with angiographi-
cally confirmed PE have a high probability scan. As many as 40% of 
patients with high clinical suspicion for PE but “low-probability” scans 
do, in fact, have PE at angiography.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE (MR) (CONTRAST-ENHANCED) IMAGING  When 
ultrasound is equivocal, MR venography with gadolinium contrast is 
an excellent imaging modality to diagnose DVT. MR pulmonary angi-
ography may detect large proximal PE, but is not reliable for smaller 
segmental and subsegmental PE.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY  Echocardiography is not a reliable diagnostic 
imaging tool for acute PE because most patients with PE have normal 
echocardiograms. However, echocardiography is a very useful diagnostic 
tool for detecting conditions that may mimic PE, such as acute myocardial 
infarction, pericardial tamponade, and aortic dissection. Transthoracic 
echocardiography rarely images thrombus directly. The best-known 
indirect sign of PE on transthoracic echocardiography is McConnell’s 
sign: hypokinesis of the RV free wall with normal or hyperkinetic motion 
of the RV apex. One should consider transesophageal echocardiography 
when CT scanning facilities are not available or when a patient has renal 
failure or severe contrast allergy that precludes administration of contrast 
despite premedication with high-dose steroids. This imaging modality 
can identify saddle, right main, or left main PE.
Invasive Diagnostic Modalities  • 
PULMONARY ANGIOGRAPHY   
Chest CT with contrast (see above) has virtually replaced invasive pul-
monary angiography as a diagnostic test. Invasive catheter-based diag-
nostic testing is reserved for patients with technically unsatisfactory 
chest CTs and for those in whom an interventional procedure such as 
catheter-directed thrombolysis is planned. A definitive diagnosis of PE 
requires visualization of an intraluminal filling defect in more than one 
projection. Secondary signs of PE include abrupt occlusion (“cut-off”) 
of vessels, segmental oligemia or avascularity, and a prolonged arterial 
phase with slow filling, and tortuous, tapering peripheral vessels.
CONTRAST PHLEBOGRAPHY  Venous ultrasonography has virtually 
replaced contrast phlebography as the principal diagnostic test for 
suspected DVT.
Integrated Diagnostic Approach 
An integrated diagnostic 
approach (Fig. 273-3) streamlines the workup of suspected DVT and 
PE (Fig. 273-6).
TREATMENT
Deep Venous Thrombosis
PRIMARY THERAPY
Primary therapy consists of clot dissolution with pharmacomechanical 
therapy that usually includes low-dose catheter-directed thromboly-
sis. This approach is reserved for patients with extensive femoral, 
iliofemoral, or upper extremity DVT. The open vein hypothesis pos-
tulates that patients who receive primary therapy will sustain less 
long-term damage to venous valves, with consequent lower rates 
of postthrombotic syndrome. A National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute–sponsored randomized controlled trial called ATTRACT 
(NCT00790335) is testing this hypothesis by randomizing femo-
ral and iliofemoral DVT patients to conventional anticoagulation 
versus pharmacomechanical catheter-directed thrombolysis, and 
assessing the frequency of postthrombotic syndrome 2 years after 
randomization.
SECONDARY PREVENTION
Anticoagulation or placement of an inferior vena caval (IVC) filter 
constitutes secondary prevention of VTE. In 2016, the FDA approved 
a new retrievable IVC filter that is inserted at the bedside with 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1914
ultrasound visualization of the femoral or internal jugular vein 
(Angel® Filter) but without the need for any fluoroscopic or other 
radiological imaging.
For patients with swelling of the legs when acute DVT is diag-
nosed, below-knee graduated compression stockings may be pre-
scribed, usually 30–40 mmHg, to lessen patient discomfort. They 
should be replaced every 3 months because they lose their elasticity. 
However, prescription of vascular compression stockings in asymp-
tomatic newly diagnosed acute DVT patients does not prevent the 
development of postthrombotic syndrome.
TREATMENT
Pulmonary Embolism
RISK STRATIFICATION
Hemodynamic instability, RV dysfunction on echocardiography, RV 
enlargement on chest CT, or elevation of the troponin level due to 
RV microinfarction portend a high risk of an adverse clinical out-
come despite anticoagulation. When RV function remains normal in 
a hemodynamically stable patient, a good clinical outcome is highly 
likely with anticoagulation alone (Fig. 273-7).
ANTICOAGULATION
Effective anticoagulation is the foundation for successful treatment of 
DVT and PE. There are three major strategies: (1) the classical but wan-
ing strategy of parenteral anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin 
(UFH), low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), or fondaparinux 
“bridged” to warfarin, (2) parenteral therapy switched after 5 days 
to a novel oral anticoagulant such as dabigatran (a direct thrombin 
inhibitor) or edoxaban (an anti-Xa agent), or (3) oral anticoagulation 
monotherapy with rivaroxaban or apixaban (both are anti-Xa agents) 
with a 3-week or 1-week loading dose, respectively, followed by a 
maintenance dose without parenteral anticoagulation. For patients 
with VTE in the setting of suspected or proven heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia, one can choose between two parenteral direct 
thrombin inhibitors: argatroban and bivalirudin (Table 273-3).
Unfractionated Heparin  UFH anticoagulates by binding to and 
accelerating the activity of antithrombin, thus preventing additional 
thrombus formation. UFH is dosed to achieve a target activated 
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of 60–80 s. The most popular 
nomogram uses an initial bolus of 80 U/kg, followed by an initial 
infusion rate of 18 U/kg per h in patients with normal liver func-
tion. The major advantage of UFH is its short half-life, which is 
especially useful in patients in whom hour-to-hour control of the 
intensity of anticoagulation is desired. Heparin also has pleiotropic 
effects that may decrease systemic and local inflammation.
Risk stratify
Normotension
plus normal RV
Normotension
plus RV hypokinesis
Hypotension
Anticoagulation
plus
thrombolysis
IVC filter
Embolectomy:
catheter/surgical
Anticoagulation
alone
Secondary
prevention
Individualize
therapy
Primary
therapy
ALGORITHM FOR PE MANAGEMENT
FIGURE 273-7  Acute management of pulmonary thromboembolism. RV, right 
ventricular; IVC, inferior vena cava.
Low-Molecular-Weight Heparins  These fragments of UFH exhibit 
less binding to plasma proteins and endothelial cells and con-
sequently have greater bioavailability, a more predictable dose 
response, and a longer half-life than does UFH. No monitoring or 
dose adjustment is needed unless the patient is markedly obese or 
has chronic kidney disease.
Fondaparinux  Fondaparinux, an anti-Xa pentasaccharide, is 
administered as a weight-based once-daily subcutaneous injec-
tion in a prefilled syringe. No laboratory monitoring is required. 
Fondaparinux is synthesized in a laboratory and, unlike LMWH 
or UFH, is not derived from animal products. It does not cause 
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. The dose must be adjusted 
downward for patients with renal dysfunction.
Warfarin  This vitamin K antagonist prevents carboxylation acti-
vation of coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X. The full effect of 
warfarin requires at least 5 days, even if the prothrombin time, 
used for monitoring, becomes elevated more rapidly. If warfarin is 
initiated as monotherapy during an acute thrombotic illness, a par-
adoxical exacerbation of hypercoagulability increases the likelihood 
of thrombosis. Overlapping UFH, LMWH, fondaparinux, or parent-
eral direct thrombin inhibitors with warfarin for at least 5 days will 
nullify the early procoagulant effect of warfarin.
Warfarin dosing  In an average-size adult, warfarin is often initiated 
in a dose of 5 mg. The prothrombin time is standardized by calcu-
lating the international normalized ratio (INR), which assesses the 
anticoagulant effect of warfarin (Chap. 61). The target INR is usually 
2.5, with a range of 2.0–3.0.
The warfarin dose is usually titrated empirically to achieve the 
target INR. Proper dosing is difficult because hundreds of drug-drug 
and drug-food interactions affect warfarin metabolism. Increasing age 
and systemic illness reduce the required warfarin dose. Pharmacoge-
nomics may provide more precise initial dosing of warfarin. CYP2C9 
variant alleles impair the hydroxylation of S-warfarin, thereby lower-
ing the dose requirement. Variants in the gene encoding the vitamin K 
TABLE 273-3  Anticoagulation of Venous Thromboembolism (VTE)
Non-Warfarin Anticoagulation
Unfractionated heparin, bolus and continuous infusion, to achieve activated 
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) 2–3 times the upper limit of the laboratory 
normal, or
Enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily with normal renal function, or
Dalteparin 200 U/kg once daily or 100 U/kg twice daily, with normal renal 
function, or
Tinzaparin 175 U/kg once daily with normal renal function, or
Fondaparinux weight-based once daily; adjust for impaired renal function
Direct thrombin inhibitors: argatroban or bivalirudin (with suspected or proven 
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia)
Rivaroxaban 15 mg twice daily for 3 weeks, followed by 20 mg once daily with 
the dinner meal thereafter
Apixaban 10 mg twice daily for 1 week, followed by 5 mg twice daily thereafter
Dabigatran 5 days of unfractionated heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin 
(LMWH), or fondaparinux followed by dabigatran 150 mg twice daily
Edoxaban 5 days of unfractionated heparin, LMWH, or fondaparinux followed 
by edoxaban 60 mg once daily with normal renal function, weight >60 kg, in 
the absence of potent P-glycoprotein inhibitors
Warfarin Anticoagulation
Requires 5–10 days of administration to achieve effectiveness as 
monotherapy
(Unfractionated heparin, LMWH, and fondaparinux are the usual immediately 
effective “bridging agents” used when initiating warfarin)
Usual start dose is 5 mg
Titrate to international normalized ratio (INR), target 2.0–3.0
Continue parenteral anticoagulation for a minimum of 5 days and until two 
sequential INR values, at least 1 day apart, achieve the target INR range
CHAPTER 273 Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
1915
epoxide reductase complex 1 (VKORC1) can predict whether patients 
require low, moderate, or high warfarin doses. However, genetic test-
ing is not used clinically to dose patients with warfarin.
Centralized anticoagulation clinics have improved the efficacy 
and safety of warfarin dosing. Patients can self-monitor their INR 
with a home point-of-care fingerstick machine and can occasionally 
be taught to self-dose their warfarin.
Warfarin can cause major hemorrhage, including intracranial 
hemorrhage, even when the INR remains within the desired ther-
apeutic range. Warfarin can cause “off target” side effects such as 
alopecia or arterial vascular calcification. Some patients complain 
that warfarin makes them feel cold or fatigued.
Novel Oral Anticoagulants  Novel oral anticoagulants (NOACs) 
are administered in a fixed dose, establish effective anticoagulation 
within hours of ingestion, require no laboratory coagulation mon-
itoring, and have few of the drug-drug or drug-food interactions. 
Betrixaban, a direct factor Xa inhibitor, was approved by the FDA 
in 2017 for VTE prophylaxis in acutely ill medical patients during 
hospitalization and continuing for a total duration of 5 to 6 weeks. 
Rivaroxaban and apixaban, direct factor Xa inhibitors, are approved 
as monotherapy for acute and extended treatment of DVT and 
PE, without a parenteral “bridging” anticoagulant. Dabigatran, a 
direct thrombin inhibitor, and edoxaban, a factor Xa inhibitor, are 
approved for treatment of VTE after an initial 5-day course of par-
enteral anticoagulation.
Complications of Anticoagulants  The most serious adverse effect 
of anticoagulation is hemorrhage. For life-threatening or intracra-
nial hemorrhage due to heparin or LMWH, protamine sulfate can 
be administered. There is no specific reversal agent for bleeding 
caused by fondaparinux or factor Xa inhibitors. However, the 
dabigatran antibody, idarucizumab, is an effective and rapidly act-
ing antidote for dabigatran that is now licensed for use. Andexanet 
is a universal anti-Xa antidote for betrixaban, rivaroxaban, apix-
aban, and edoxaban that is undergoing review by the FDA.
Major bleeding from warfarin is best managed with prothrombin 
complex concentrate. With less serious bleeding, fresh-frozen plasma 
or intravenous vitamin K can be used. Oral vitamin K is effective for 
managing minor bleeding or an excessively high INR in the absence 
of bleeding.
Duration of Anticoagulation  For DVT isolated to an upper extrem-
ity or calf that has been provoked by surgery, trauma, estrogen, or 
an indwelling central venous catheter or pacemaker, 3 months of 
anticoagulation usually suffice. For an initial episode of provoked 
proximal leg DVT or PE, 3–6 months of anticoagulation used to be 
the classic teaching.  However, the EINSTEIN CHOICE study found 
that patients with provoked VTE derived as great a risk reduction in 
recurrent VTE with extended duration anticoagulation as patients 
with unprovoked VTE. For patients with cancer and VTE, prescribe 
LMWH as monotherapy without warfarin and continue anticoagu-
lation indefinitely unless the patient is rendered cancer-free.
Among patients with idiopathic, unprovoked VTE, the recur-
rence rate is high after cessation of anticoagulation. VTE that occurs 
during long-haul air travel is considered unprovoked. Unprovoked 
VTE may be caused by an exacerbation of an underlying inflamma-
tory state and can be conceptualized as a chronic illness, with latent 
periods between flares of recurrent episodes. American College of 
Chest Physicians (ACCP) guidelines recommend considering anti-
coagulation for an indefinite duration with a target INR between 2 
and 3 for patients with idiopathic VTE and a low bleeding risk. An 
alternative approach after the first 6 months of anticoagulation is to 
reduce the intensity of anticoagulation and to lower the target INR 
range to between 1.5 and 2. Another approach for patients at lower 
risk of recurrence, especially if there is an important reason to avoid 
long-term anticoagulation, is to consider low-dose aspirin after com-
pleting the initial period of standard anticoagulation.
Counterintuitively, the presence of genetic mutations such as 
heterozygous factor V Leiden and prothrombin gene mutation does 
not appear to increase the risk of recurrent VTE. However, patients 
with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome may warrant indefinite-
duration anticoagulation, even if the initial VTE was provoked by 
trauma or surgery.
INFERIOR VENA CAVA FILTERS
The two principal indications for insertion of an IVC filter are  
(1) active bleeding that precludes anticoagulation and (2) recurrent 
venous thrombosis despite intensive anticoagulation. Prevention of 
recurrent PE in patients with right heart failure who are not candidates 
for fibrinolysis and prophylaxis of extremely high-risk patients are 
“softer” indications for filter placement. The filter itself may fail by per-
mitting the passage of small- to medium-size clots. Large thrombi may 
embolize to the pulmonary arteries via collateral veins that develop.
Paradoxically, by providing a nidus for clot formation, filters 
increase the DVT rate, even though they usually prevent PE. There-
fore, a common complication is recurrent DVT or caval thrombosis 
with marked leg swelling. Retrievable filters can now be placed for 
patients with an anticipated temporary bleeding disorder or for 
patients at temporary high risk of PE, such as individuals under-
going bariatric surgery who have a prior history of perioperative 
PE. The filters can be retrieved for months after insertion, unless 
thrombus forms and is trapped within the filter. The retrievable filter 
becomes permanent if it remains in place or if, for technical reasons 
such as rapid endothelialization, it cannot be removed.
MANAGEMENT OF MASSIVE PE
For patients with massive PE and hypotension, replete volume with 
500 mL of normal saline. Additional fluid should be infused with 
extreme caution because excessive fluid administration exacerbates 
RV wall stress, causes more profound RV ischemia, and worsens 
LV compliance and filling by causing further interventricular sep-
tal shift toward the LV. Dopamine and dobutamine are first-line 
inotropic agents for treatment of PE-related shock. Maintain a low 
threshold for initiating these pressors. Often, a “trial-and-error” 
approach works best; other agents that may be effective include 
norepinephrine, vasopressin, or phenylephrine.
FIBRINOLYSIS
Successful fibrinolytic therapy rapidly reverses right heart fail-
ure and may result in a lower rate of death and recurrent PE by  
(1) dissolving much of the anatomically obstructing pulmonary arte-
rial thrombus, (2) preventing the continued release of serotonin and 
other neurohumoral factors that exacerbate pulmonary hyperten-
sion, and (3) lysing much of the source of the thrombus in the pelvic 
or deep leg veins, thereby decreasing the likelihood of recurrent PE.
The preferred systemically administered fibrinolytic regimen is 
100 mg of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) pre-
scribed as a continuous peripheral intravenous infusion over 2 h. 
The sooner thrombolysis is administered, the more effective it is. 
However, this approach can be used for at least 14 days after the PE 
has occurred. A popular off-label dosing regimen is 50 mg of TPA 
administered over 2 h.  This lower dose is widely perceived to be 
associated with fewer bleeding complications.
Contraindications to fibrinolysis include intracranial disease, 
recent surgery, and trauma. The overall major bleeding rate is about 
10%, including a 2–3% risk of intracranial hemorrhage. Careful 
screening of patients for contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy 
(Chap. 269) is the best way to minimize bleeding risk.
The only Food and Drug Administration–approved indication 
for PE fibrinolysis is massive PE. For patients with submassive PE, 
who have preserved systolic blood pressure but moderate or severe 
RV dysfunction, use of fibrinolysis remains controversial. Results of 
a 1006-patient European multicentered randomized trial of submas-
sive PE, using the thrombolytic agent tenecteplase versus heparin 
alone, showed that death or hemodynamic collapse within 7 days of 
randomization was reduced by 56% in the tenecteplase group. How-
ever, hemorrhagic stroke occurred in 2% of tenecteplase patients 
versus 0.2% in patients who only received heparin.
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1916
PHARMACOMECHANICAL CATHETER-DIRECTED THERAPY
Many patients have relative contraindications to full-dose throm-
bolysis. Pharmacomechanical catheter-directed therapy usually 
combines physical fragmentation or pulverization of thrombus 
with catheter-directed low-dose thrombolysis. Mechanical tech-
niques include catheter maceration and intentional embolization 
of clot more distally, suction thrombectomy, rheolytic hydrolysis, 
and low-energy ultrasound-facilitated thrombolysis. The dose of 
alteplase can be markedly reduced, usually to a range of 20–25 mg, 
instead of the peripheral intravenous systemic dose of 100 mg. In 
2014, the FDA approved ultrasound-facilitated catheter-directed 
thrombolysis for acute massive and submassive PE. Using a total 
tPA dose of 24 mg, this approach decreased RV dilation, reduced 
pulmonary hypertension, decreased anatomic thrombus burden, 
and minimized intracranial hemorrhage. Lower doses and durations 
of TPA are currently being studied.
PULMONARY EMBOLECTOMY
The risk of major hemorrhage with systemically administered 
fibrinolysis has prompted a renaissance of interest in surgical embolec-
tomy, an operation that had almost become extinct. More rapid refer-
ral before the onset of irreversible multisystem organ failure and 
improved surgical technique have resulted in a high survival rate.
PULMONARY THROMBOENDARTERECTOMY
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension develops in 
2–4% of acute PE patients. Therefore, PE patients who have initial 
pulmonary hypertension (usually diagnosed with Doppler echoc-
ardiography) should be followed up at about 6 weeks with a repeat 
echocardiogram to determine whether pulmonary arterial pressure 
has normalized. Patients impaired by dyspnea due to chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension should be considered 
for pulmonary thromboendarterectomy, which, when successful, 
can markedly reduce, and sometimes even cure, pulmonary hyper-
tension (Chap. 277). The operation requires median sternotomy, 
cardiopulmonary bypass, deep hypothermia, and periods of hypo-
thermic circulatory arrest. The mortality rate at experienced centers 
is ~5%. Inoperable patients should be managed with pulmonary 
vasodilator therapy and balloon angioplasty of pulmonary arterial 
webs.
EMOTIONAL SUPPORT
Patients with VTE may feel overwhelmed when they learn that 
they are suffering from PE or DVT. Some have never previously 
encountered serious cardiovascular illness. They fear they will not 
be able to adapt to the new limitations imposed by anticoagula-
tion. They worry about the health of their families and the genetic 
implications of their illness. Those who are advised to discontinue 
anticoagulation may feel especially vulnerable about the potential 
for suffering recurrent VTE. At Brigham and Women’s Hospi-
tal, a physician-nurse–facilitated PE support group was initiated 
to address these concerns and has met monthly for >25 years. 
The nonprofit organization, North American Thrombosis Forum  
(www.NATFonline.org), has initiated other online support groups 
which garner worldwide participation.
■
■PREVENTION OF VTE
Prevention of DVT and PE (Table 273-4) is of paramount importance 
because VTE is difficult to detect and poses a profound medical and 
economic burden. Low-dose UFH or LMWH is the most common 
form of in-hospital prophylaxis. Computerized reminder systems can 
increase the use of preventive measures and, at Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, have reduced the symptomatic VTE rate by >40%. Audits of 
hospitals to ensure that prophylaxis protocols are being used will also 
increase utilization of preventive measures. Duration of prophylaxis is 
an important consideration. Extended-duration prophylaxis with the 
novel anti-Xa agent, betrixaban, appears to be both effective and safe in 
medically ill patients during hospitalization, after hospital discharge, 
and is undergoing FDA review.
■
■FURTHER READING
Becattini C, Giancarlo A: Treatment of venous thromboembolism 
with new anticoagulant agents. J Am Coll Cardiol 67:1941, 2016.
Braekkan SK et al: Venous thromboembolism and subsequent work- 
related disability. J Thromb Haemost 14:1977, 2016.
Cohen AT et al: Extended thromboprophylaxis with betrixaban in 
acutely ill medical patients. N Engl J Med 375:534, 2016.
Gibson CM et al: Extended-duration betrixaban reduces the risk of 
stroke versus standard-dose enoxaparin among hospitalized medi-
cally ill patients: An APEX trial substudy (acute medically ill venous 
thromboembolism prevention with extended duration betrixaban). 
Circulation 135:648, 2017.
Kahn SR et al: Functional and exercise limitations after a first episode 
of pulmonary embolism: Results of the ELOPE prospective cohort 
study. Chest 151:1058, 2017.
Kearon C et al: Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: CHEST 
guideline and expert panel report. CHEST 149:315, 2016.
Konstantinides SV et al: Management of pulmonary embolism. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 67:975, 2015.
Piazza G et al: A prospective, single-arm, multicenter trial of 
ultrasound-facilitated, catheter-directed, low-dose fibrinolysis for 
acute massive and submassive pulmonary embolism. The SEATTLE 
II study. J Am Coll Cardiol Cardiovasc Interv 8:1382, 2015.
Poterucha TJ et al: More than an anticoagulant: Do heparins have 
direct anti-inflammatory effects? Thromb Haemost 117:437, 2017. 
Prandoni P et al: Prevalence of pulmonary embolism among patients 
hospitalized for syncope. N Engl J Med 375:1524, 2016.
Raskob GE et al: The MARINER trial of rivaroxaban after hospital 
discharge for medical patients at high risk of VTE. Thromb Haemost 
115:1240, 2016.
Shirakawa T et al: Watching television and risk of mortality from 
pulmonary embolism among Japanese men and women. Circulation 
134:355, 2016.
Weitz JI et al: Rivaroxaban or aspirin for extended treatment of venous 
thromboembolism.  N Engl J Med 376:1211, 2017.   
TABLE 273-4  Prevention of Venous Thromboembolism Among 
Hospitalized Patients
CONDITION
PROPHYLAXIS STRATEGY
High-risk 
nonorthopedic 
surgery
Unfractionated heparin 5000 units SC bid or tid
Enoxaparin 40 mg daily
Dalteparin 2500 or 5000 units daily
Cancer surgery, 
including gynecologic 
cancer surgery
Enoxaparin 40 mg daily, consider 1 month of 
prophylaxis
Major orthopedic 
surgery
Warfarin (target INR 2.0–3.0)
Enoxaparin 40 mg daily
Enoxaparin 30 mg bid
Dalteparin 2500 or 5000 units daily
Fondaparinux 2.5 mg daily
Rivaroxaban 10 mg daily, beginning 6-10 hours 
postoperatively
Aspirin 81–325 mg daily
Dabigatran 110 mg first day, then 220 mg daily
Apixaban 2.5 mg bid, beginning 12–24 h 
postoperatively
Intermittent pneumatic compression (with or without 
pharmacologic prophylaxis)
Medically ill 
patients, during 
hospitalization
Unfractionated heparin 5000 units bid or tid
Enoxaparin 40 mg daily
Dalteparin 2500 or 5000 units daily
Fondaparinux 2.5 mg daily
Medically ill patients, 
during and after 
hospitalization
Betrixaban 80 mg daily for 35–42 days
Anticoagulation 
contraindicated
Intermittent pneumatic compression devices (but 
whether graduated compression stockings are effective 
in medical patients remains uncertain)
CHAPTER 274 Diseases of the Aorta
1917
elastin and collagen. The causes of aortic aneurysms may be broadly 
categorized as degenerative disorders, genetic or developmental dis-
eases, vasculitis, infections, and trauma (Table 274-1). Inflammation, 
oxidative stress, proteolysis, and biomechanical wall stress contribute 
to the degenerative processes that characterize most aneurysms of the 
abdominal and descending thoracic aorta. These are mediated by B cell 
and T cell lymphocytes, macrophages, inflammatory cytokines, and 
matrix metalloproteinases that degrade elastin and collagen and alter 
the tensile strength and ability of the aorta to accommodate pulsatile 
stretch. The associated histopathology demonstrates destruction of 
elastin and collagen, decreased vascular smooth muscle, in-growth of 
new blood vessels, and inflammation. Factors associated with degener-
ative aortic aneurysms include aging, cigarette smoking, hypercholes-
terolemia, hypertension, and male sex.
The most common pathologic condition associated with degen-
erative aortic aneurysms is atherosclerosis. Many patients with aortic 
aneurysms have coexisting risk factors for atherosclerosis, as well as 
atherosclerosis in other blood vessels.
The aorta is the conduit through which blood ejected from the left 
ventricle is delivered to the systemic arterial bed. In adults, its diam-
eter is ~3 cm at the origin and in the ascending portion, 2.5 cm in the 
descending portion in the thorax, and 1.8–2 cm in the abdomen. The 
aortic wall consists of a thin intima composed of endothelium, suben-
dothelial connective tissue, and an internal elastic lamina; a thick tunica 
media composed of smooth muscle cells and extracellular matrix; and 
an adventitia composed primarily of connective tissue enclosing the 
vasa vasorum and nervi vascularis. In addition to the conduit function 
of the aorta, its viscoelastic and compliant properties serve a buffering 
function. The aorta is distended during systole to allow a portion of 
the stroke volume and elastic energy to be stored, and it recoils during 
diastole so that blood continues to flow to the periphery. Owing to its 
continuous exposure to high pulsatile pressure and shear stress, the 
aorta is particularly prone to injury and disease resulting from mechan-
ical trauma. The aorta is also more prone to rupture than is any other 
vessel, especially with the development of aneurysmal dilation, since 
its wall tension, as governed by Laplace’s law (i.e., proportional to the 
product of pressure and radius), will be increased.
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES OF THE AORTA
Congenital anomalies of the aorta usually involve the aortic arch and 
its branches. Symptoms such as dysphagia, stridor, and cough may 
occur if an anomaly causes a ring around or otherwise compresses the 
esophagus or trachea. Anomalies associated with symptoms include 
double aortic arch, origin of the right subclavian artery distal to the 
left subclavian artery, and right-sided aortic arch with an aberrant left 
subclavian artery. A Kommerell’s diverticulum is an anatomic remnant 
of a right aortic arch. Most congenital anomalies of the aorta do not 
cause symptoms and are detected during catheter-based procedures. 
The diagnosis of suspected congenital anomalies of the aorta typically 
is confirmed by computed tomographic (CT) or magnetic resonance 
(MR) angiography. Surgery is used to treat symptomatic anomalies.
Coarctation of the aorta (Chap. 264) typically occurs near the inser-
tion of the ligamentum arteriosum, adjacent to the left subclavian 
artery. It may be associated with a bicuspid aortic valve, aortic arch 
hypoplasia, other congenital heart defects, and intracranial aneu-
rysms. A pulse delay or pressure differential between the upper and 
lower extremities should raise suspicion of aortic coarctation. Imaging 
modalities, including echocardiography, CT and MR angiography are 
used to confirm the diagnosis. If untreated, hypertension develops in 
the arteries proximal to the coarctation. Treatment of hemodynamically 
significant aortic coarctation includes endovascular stent implantation 
if feasible or surgical repair.
AORTIC ANEURYSM
An aneurysm is defined as a pathologic dilation of a segment of a blood 
vessel. A true aneurysm involves all three layers of the vessel wall and is 
distinguished from a pseudoaneurysm, in which the intimal and medial 
layers are disrupted and the dilated segment of the aorta is lined by 
adventitia only and, at times, by perivascular clot. Aneurysms also may 
be classified according to their gross appearance. A fusiform aneurysm 
affects the entire circumference of a segment of the vessel, resulting 
in a diffusely dilated artery. In contrast, a saccular aneurysm involves 
only a portion of the circumference, resulting in an outpouching of the 
vessel wall. Aortic aneurysms also are classified according to location, 
i.e., abdominal versus thoracic. Aneurysms of the descending thoracic 
aorta are usually contiguous with infradiaphragmatic aneurysms and 
are referred to as thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms.
■
■ETIOLOGY
Aortic aneurysms result from conditions that cause degradation or 
abnormal production of the structural components of the aortic wall: 
274 Diseases of the Aorta
Mark A. Creager, Joseph Loscalzo 
TABLE 274-1  Diseases of the Aorta: Etiology and Associated Factors
Aortic aneurysm
  Degenerative
    Aging
    Cigarette smoking
    Hypercholesterolemia
    Hypertension
    Atherosclerosis
  Genetic or developmental
    Marfan’s syndrome
    Loeys-Dietz syndrome
    Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV
    Turner’s syndrome
    Familial
    Bicuspid aortic valve
  Chronic aortic dissection
  Aortitis (see below)
  Infective (see below)
  Trauma
Acute aortic syndromes (aortic dissection, acute intramural hematoma, 
penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer)
  Degenerative disorders (see above)
  Genetic/developmental disorders (see above)
  Hypertension
  Aortitis (see below)
  Pregnancy
  Trauma
Aortic occlusion
  Atherosclerosis
  Thromboembolism
Aortitis
  Vasculitis
    Takayasu’s arteritis
    Giant cell arteritis
  Rheumatic
    Rheumatoid aortitis
    HLA-B27–associated spondyloarthropathies
    Behçet’s syndrome
    Cogan’s syndrome
    IgG4-related systemic disease
    Idiopathic aortitis
  Infective
    Syphilis
    Tuberculosis
    Mycotic (Salmonella, staphylococcal, streptococcal, fungal)
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1918
FIGURE 274-1  A chest x-ray of a patient with a thoracic aortic aneurysm.
Medial degeneration, previously designated cystic medial necrosis, is 
the histopathologic term used to describe the degeneration of collagen 
and elastic fibers in the tunica media of the aorta as well as the loss of 
medial cells that are replaced by multiple clefts of mucoid material, 
such as proteoglycans. Medial degeneration characteristically affects 
the proximal aorta, results in circumferential weakness and dilation, 
and leads to the development of fusiform aneurysms involving the 
ascending aorta and the sinuses of Valsalva. This pathologic condition 
occurs in patients with Marfan’s syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV (Chap. 406), hypertension, congenital 
bicuspid aortic valves, Turner’s syndrome, and familial thoracic aortic 
aneurysm syndromes; sometimes it appears as an isolated condition in 
patients without any other apparent disease.
Familial clusterings of aortic aneurysms occur in 20% of patients, 
suggesting a hereditary basis for the disease. Mutations of the gene 
that encodes fibrillin-1 are present in patients with Marfan’s syndrome. 
Fibrillin-1 is an important component of extracellular microfibrils, 
which support the architecture of elastic fibers and other connective 
tissue. Deficiency of fibrillin-1 in the extracellular matrix leads to 
excessive signaling by transforming growth factor β (TGF-β). Loeys- 
Dietz syndrome is caused by mutations in the genes that encode TGF-β 
receptors 1 (TGFBR1) and 2 (TGFBR2). Increased signaling by TGF-β 
and mutations of TGFBR1, TGFBR2, TGFBR3, as well as TGFB2 and 
TGFB3, may cause thoracic aortic aneurysms. Mutations of SMAD3, 
which encodes a downstream signaling protein involved with TGF 
binding to its receptors, have been described in a syndrome of thoracic 
aortic aneurysm; craniofacial, skeletal, and cutaneous anomalies; and 
osteoarthritis. Mutations of the genes encoding the smooth muscle–
specific alpha-actin (ACTA2), smooth muscle cell–specific myosin 
heavy chain 11 (MHC11), and myosin light chain kinase (MYLK) and 
mutations of TGFBR2 and SMAD3 have been reported in some patients 
with nonsyndromic familial thoracic aortic aneurysms. Mutations of 
type III procollagen have been implicated in Ehlers-Danlos type IV 
syndrome.
The infectious causes of aortic aneurysms include syphilis, tuber-
culosis, and other bacterial infections. Syphilis (Chap. 177) is a rela-
tively uncommon cause of aortic aneurysm. Syphilitic periaortitis and 
mesoaortitis damage elastic fibers, resulting in thickening and weak-
ening of the aortic wall. Approximately 90% of syphilitic aneurysms 
are located in the ascending aorta or aortic arch. Tuberculous aneurysms 
(Chap. 173) typically affect the thoracic aorta and result from direct 
extension of infection from hilar lymph nodes or contiguous abscesses 
as well as from bacterial seeding. Loss of aortic wall elasticity results 
from granulomatous destruction of the medial layer. A mycotic aneurysm 
is a rare condition that develops as a result of staphylococcal, strepto-
coccal, Salmonella, or other bacterial or fungal infections of the aorta, 
usually at an atherosclerotic plaque. These aneurysms are usually 
saccular. Blood cultures are often positive and reveal the nature of the 
infective agent.
Vasculitides associated with aortic aneurysm include Takayasu’s 
arteritis and giant cell arteritis, which may cause aneurysms of the aor-
tic arch and descending thoracic aorta. Spondyloarthropathies such as 
ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, relapsing 
polychondritis, and reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter’s syn-
drome) are associated with dilation of the ascending aorta. Aortic aneu-
rysms occur in patients with Behçet’s syndrome (Chap. 357), Cogan’s 
syndrome, and IgG4-related systemic disease. Aortic aneurysms also 
result from idiopathic aortitis. Traumatic aneurysms may occur after 
penetrating or nonpenetrating chest trauma and most commonly 
affect the descending thoracic aorta just beyond the site of insertion of 
the ligamentum arteriosum. Chronic aortic dissections are associated 
with weakening of the aortic wall that may lead to the development of 
aneurysmal dilatation.
■
■THORACIC AORTIC ANEURYSMS
The clinical manifestations and natural history of thoracic aortic 
aneurysms depend on their location. Medial degeneration is the most 
common pathology associated with ascending aortic aneurysms, 
whereas atherosclerosis is the condition most frequently associated 
with aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta. The average growth 
rate of thoracic aneurysms is 0.1–0.2 cm per year. Thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms associated with Marfan’s syndrome or aortic dissection may 
expand at a greater rate. The risk of rupture is related to the size of the 
aneurysm and the presence of symptoms, ranging approximately from 
2–3% per year for thoracic aortic aneurysms <4.0 cm in diameter to 7% 
per year for those >6 cm in diameter. Most thoracic aortic aneurysms 
are asymptomatic; however, compression or erosion of adjacent tissue 
by aneurysms may cause symptoms such as chest pain, shortness of 
breath, cough, hoarseness, and dysphagia. Aneurysmal dilation of the 
ascending aorta may cause congestive heart failure as a consequence of 
aortic regurgitation, and compression of the superior vena cava may 
produce congestion of the head, neck, and upper extremities.
A chest x-ray may be the first test that suggests the diagnosis of a 
thoracic aortic aneurysm (Fig. 274-1). Findings include widening of the 
mediastinal shadow and displacement or compression of the trachea or 
left main stem bronchus. Echocardiography, particularly transesopha-
geal echocardiography, can be used to assess the proximal ascending 
aorta and descending thoracic aorta. Contrast-enhanced CT, magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), and conventional invasive aortography are 
sensitive and specific tests for assessment of aneurysms of the thoracic 
aorta and involvement of branch vessels (Fig. 274-2). In asymptomatic 
patients whose aneurysms are too small to justify surgery, noninvasive 
testing with either contrast-enhanced CT or MRI should be performed 
at least every 6–12 months to monitor expansion.
TREATMENT
Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
β-Adrenergic blockers currently are recommended for patients with 
thoracic aortic aneurysms, particularly those with Marfan’s syn-
drome, who have evidence of aortic root dilatation to reduce the 
rate of further expansion. Additional medical therapy should be 
given as necessary to control hypertension. Angiotensin receptor 
antagonists may reduce the rate of aortic dilation in patients with 
Marfan’s syndrome by blocking TGF-β signaling. Clinical outcome 
trials have found that the rate of aortic root enlargement in patients 
with Marfan’s syndrome was similar with atenolol and losartan. 
Operative repair with placement of a prosthetic graft is indicated 
CHAPTER 274 Diseases of the Aorta
1919
FIGURE 274-2  A magnetic resonance angiogram demonstrating a fusiform 
aneurysm of the ascending thoracic aorta. (Courtesy of Dr. Michael Steigner, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, with permission.)
in patients with symptomatic ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms 
and for most asymptomatic aneurysms, including those associated 
with bicuspid aortic valves, when the aortic root or ascending aortic 
diameter is ≥5.5 cm, or when the growth rate is >0.5 cm per year. 
Replacement of the ascending aorta >4.5 cm is reasonable in patients 
with bicuspid aortic valves undergoing aortic valve replacement 
because of severe aortic stenosis or aortic regurgitation. In patients 
with Marfan’s syndrome, ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms of 
4–5 cm should be considered for surgery. Operative repair is indi-
cated for patients with degenerative descending thoracic aortic 
aneurysms when the diameter is >6 cm, and endovascular repair 
should be considered if feasible when the diameter is >5.5 cm. 
Repair is also recommended when the diameter of a descending 
thoracic aortic aneurysm has increased >1 cm per year.
■
■ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEURYSMS
Abdominal aortic aneurysms occur more frequently in males than in 
females, and the incidence increases with age. Cigarette smoking is 
a potent modifiable risk factor. Abdominal aortic aneurysms ≥4.0 cm 
may affect 1–2% men aged >50 years. At least 90% of all abdominal aor-
tic aneurysms >4.0 cm are related to atherosclerotic disease, and most 
of these aneurysms are below the level of the renal arteries. Prognosis 
is related to both the size of the aneurysm and the severity of coexist-
ing coronary artery and cerebrovascular disease. The risk of rupture 
increases with the size of the aneurysm: the 5-year risk for aneurysms 
<5 cm is 1–2%, whereas it is 20–40% for aneurysms >5 cm in diameter. 
The formation of mural thrombi within aneurysms may predispose to 
peripheral embolization.
An abdominal aortic aneurysm commonly produces no symptoms. 
It usually is detected on routine examination as a palpable, pulsatile, 
expansile, and nontender mass, or it is an incidental finding observed 
on an abdominal imaging study performed for other reasons. As 
abdominal aortic aneurysms expand, however, they may become 
painful. Some patients complain of strong pulsations in the abdomen; 
others experience pain in the chest, lower back, or scrotum. Aneurys-
mal pain is usually a harbinger of rupture and represents a medical 
emergency. More often, acute rupture occurs without any prior warn-
ing, and this complication is always life-threatening. Rarely, there is 
leakage of the aneurysm with severe pain and tenderness. Acute pain 
and hypotension occur with rupture of the aneurysm, which requires 
an emergency operation.
Abdominal radiography may demonstrate the calcified outline of 
the aneurysm; however, about 25% of aneurysms are not calcified and 
cannot be visualized by x-ray imaging. An abdominal ultrasound can 
delineate the transverse and longitudinal dimensions of an abdominal 
aortic aneurysm and may detect mural thrombus. Abdominal ultra-
sound is useful for serial documentation of aneurysm size and can be 
used to screen patients at risk for developing an aortic aneurysm. In 
one large study, ultrasound screening of men aged 65–74 years was 
associated with a risk reduction in aneurysm-related death of 42%. 
For this reason, screening by ultrasonography is recommended for 
men aged 65–75 years who have ever smoked. In addition, siblings or 
offspring of persons with abdominal aortic aneurysms, as well as indi-
viduals with thoracic aortic or peripheral arterial aneurysms, should 
be considered for screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms. CT with 
contrast and MRI are accurate noninvasive tests to determine the loca-
tion and size of abdominal aortic aneurysms and to plan endovascular 
or open surgical repair (Fig. 274-3). Contrast aortography may be used 
for the evaluation of patients with aneurysms, but the procedure car-
ries a small risk of complications such as bleeding, allergic reactions, 
and atheroembolism. Since the presence of mural thrombi may reduce 
the luminal size, aortography may underestimate the diameter of an 
aneurysm.
TREATMENT
Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms
Statins are indicated to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events 
related to atherosclerosis. Medical therapies, such as β-adrenergic 
blockers and renin-angiotensin inhibitors, have not proven effective 
in reducing the rate of aneurysm growth. Operative repair of the 
aneurysm with insertion of a prosthetic graft or endovascular place-
ment of an aortic stent graft (Fig. 274-3) is indicated for abdominal 
aortic aneurysms of any size that are expanding rapidly or are 
associated with symptoms. For asymptomatic aneurysms, abdom-
inal aortic aneurysm repair is indicated if the diameter is ≥5.5 cm. 
In randomized trials of patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms 
<5.5 cm, there was no difference in the long-term (5- to 8-year) mor-
tality rate between those followed with ultrasound surveillance and 
those undergoing elective surgical repair. Thus, serial noninvasive 
follow-up of smaller aneurysms (<5.5 cm) is an alternative to imme-
diate repair. The decision to perform an open surgical operation or 
endovascular repair is based in part on the vascular anatomy and 
comorbid conditions. Endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms has a lower short-term morbidity rate, but a comparable long-
term mortality rate with open surgical reconstruction. Long-term 
surveillance with CT or MR aortography is indicated after endovas-
cular repair to detect leaks and possible aneurysm expansion.
In surgical candidates, careful preoperative cardiac and general 
medical evaluations (followed by appropriate therapy for compli-
cating conditions) are essential. Preexisting coronary artery disease, 
congestive heart failure, pulmonary disease, diabetes mellitus, and 
advanced age add to the risk of surgery. With careful preoperative 
cardiac evaluation and postoperative care, the operative mortality 
rate approximates 1–2%. After acute rupture, the mortality rate 
of emergent operation is 45–50%. Endovascular repair with stent 
placement is an alternative approach to treat ruptured aneurysms 
and may be associated with a lower mortality rate.
ACUTE AORTIC SYNDROMES
The four major acute aortic syndromes are aortic rupture (discussed 
earlier), aortic dissection, intramural hematoma, and penetrating 
atherosclerotic ulcer. Aortic dissection is caused by a circumferential 
or, less frequently, transverse tear of the intima. It often occurs along 
the right lateral wall of the ascending aorta where the hydraulic shear 
stress is high. Another common site is the descending thoracic aorta 
just below the ligamentum arteriosum. The initiating event is either 
a primary intimal tear with secondary dissection into the media or 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1920
Type A
Type B
FIGURE 274-4  Classification of aortic dissections. Stanford classification: Type A 
dissections (top) involve the ascending aorta independent of site of tear and distal 
extension; type B dissections (bottom) involve transverse and/or descending 
aorta without involvement of the ascending aorta. DeBakey classification: Type I 
dissection involves ascending to descending aorta (top left); type II dissection is 
limited to ascending or transverse aorta, without descending aorta (top center + 
top right); type III dissection involves descending aorta only (bottom left). (From 
DC Miller, in RM Doroghazi, EE Slater [eds]: Aortic Dissection. New York, McGraw-Hill, 
1983, with permission.)
FIGURE 274-3  A computed tomographic angiogram depicting a fusiform abdominal aortic aneurysm before (left) and after (right) treatment with a bifurcated stent 
graft. (Courtesy of Drs. Elizabeth George and Frank Rybicki, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, with permission.)
a medial hemorrhage that dissects into and disrupts the intima. The 
pulsatile aortic flow then dissects along the elastic lamellar plates of 
the aorta and creates a false lumen. The dissection usually propagates 
distally down the descending aorta and into its major branches, but 
it may propagate proximally. Distal propagation may be limited by 
atherosclerotic plaque. In some cases, a secondary distal intimal dis-
ruption occurs, resulting in the reentry of blood from the false to the 
true lumen.
There are at least two important pathologic and radiologic variants 
of aortic dissection: intramural hematoma without an intimal flap 
and penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer. Acute intramural hematoma is 
thought to result from rupture of the vasa vasorum with hemorrhage 
into the wall of the aorta. Most of these hematomas occur in the 
descending thoracic aorta. Acute intramural hematomas may progress 
to dissection and rupture. Penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers are caused 
by erosion of a plaque into the aortic media, are usually localized, and 
are not associated with extensive propagation. They are found primar-
ily in the middle and distal portions of the descending thoracic aorta 
and are associated with extensive atherosclerotic disease. The ulcer can 
erode beyond the internal elastic lamina, leading to medial hematoma, 
and may progress to false aneurysm formation or rupture.
Several classification schemes have been developed for thoracic 
aortic dissections. DeBakey and colleagues initially classified aortic 
dissections as type I, in which an intimal tear occurs in the ascending 
aorta but involves the descending aorta as well; type II, in which the 
dissection is limited to the ascending aorta; and type III, in which the 
intimal tear is located in the descending aorta with distal propagation 
of the dissection (Fig. 274-4). Another classification (Stanford) is that 
of type A, in which the dissection involves the ascending aorta (prox-
imal dissection), and type B, in which it is limited to the arch and/or 
descending aorta (distal dissection). From a management standpoint, 
classification of aortic dissections and intramural hematomas into type 
A or B is more practical and useful, since DeBakey types I and II are 
managed in a similar manner.
The factors that predispose to aortic dissection include those asso-
ciated with medial degeneration and others that increase aortic wall 
stress (Table 274-1). Systemic hypertension is a coexisting condition 
in 70% of patients. Aortic dissection is the major cause of morbid-
ity and mortality in patients with Marfan’s syndrome (Chap. 406) 
or Loeys-Dietz syndrome, and similarly may affect patients with 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. The incidence also is increased in patients 
with inflammatory aortitis (i.e., Takayasu’s arteritis, giant cell arteritis), 
congenital aortic valve anomalies (e.g., bicuspid valve), coarctation of 
CHAPTER 274 Diseases of the Aorta
1921
the aorta, and a history of aortic trauma. In addition, the risk of dissec-
tion is increased in otherwise normal women during the third trimester 
of pregnancy. Aortic dissection also may occur as a consequence of 
weight lifting, cocaine use, or deceleration injury.
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The peak incidence of aortic dissection is in the sixth and seventh 
decades. Men are more affected than women by a ratio of 2:1. The 
presentations of aortic dissection and its variants are the consequences 
of intimal tear, dissecting hematoma, occlusion of involved arteries, 
and compression of adjacent tissues. Acute aortic dissection presents 
with the sudden onset of pain (Chap. 11), which often is described as 
very severe and tearing and is associated with diaphoresis. The pain 
may be localized to the front or back of the chest, often the interscap-
ular region, and typically migrates with propagation of the dissection. 
Other symptoms include syncope, dyspnea, and weakness. Physical 
findings may include hypertension or hypotension, loss of pulses, 
aortic regurgitation, pulmonary edema, and neurologic findings due 
to carotid artery obstruction (hemiplegia, hemianesthesia) or spinal 
cord ischemia (paraplegia). Bowel ischemia, hematuria, and myocar-
dial ischemia have all been observed. These clinical manifestations 
reflect complications resulting from the dissection occluding the 
major arteries. Furthermore, clinical manifestations may result from 
the compression of adjacent structures (e.g., superior cervical ganglia, 
superior vena cava, bronchus, esophagus) by the expanding dissection 
causing aneurysmal dilation, and include Horner’s syndrome, superior 
vena cava syndrome, hoarseness, dysphagia, and airway compromise. 
Hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade may complicate a type 
A lesion with retrograde dissection. Acute aortic regurgitation is an 
important and common (>50%) complication of proximal dissection. 
It is the outcome of either a circumferential tear that widens the aortic 
root or a disruption of the annulus by a dissecting hematoma that 
tears a leaflet(s) or displaces it, inferior to the line of closure. Signs of 
aortic regurgitation include bounding pulses, a wide pulse pressure, 
a diastolic murmur often radiating along the right sternal border, and 
evidence of congestive heart failure. The clinical manifestations depend 
on the severity of the regurgitation.
In dissections involving the ascending aorta, the chest x-ray often 
reveals a widened superior mediastinum. A pleural effusion (usually 
left-sided) also may be present. This effusion is typically serosanguine-
ous and not indicative of rupture unless accompanied by hypotension 
and falling hematocrit. In dissections of the descending thoracic aorta, 
a widened mediastinum may be observed on chest x-ray. In addition, 
the descending aorta may appear to be wider than the ascending 
portion. An electrocardiogram that shows no evidence of myocardial 
ischemia is helpful in distinguishing aortic dissection from myocardial 
infarction. Rarely, the dissection involves the right or, less commonly, 
left coronary ostium and causes acute myocardial infarction.
The diagnosis of aortic dissection can be established by noninvasive 
techniques such as echocardiography, CT, and MRI. Aortography is 
used less commonly because of the accuracy of these noninvasive tech-
niques. Transthoracic echocardiography can be performed simply and 
rapidly and has an overall sensitivity of 60–85% for aortic dissection. 
For diagnosing proximal ascending aortic dissections, its sensitivity 
exceeds 80%; it is less useful for detecting dissection of the arch and 
descending thoracic aorta. Transesophageal echocardiography requires 
greater skill and patient cooperation, but is very accurate in identifying 
dissections of the ascending and descending thoracic aorta but not the 
arch, achieving 98% sensitivity and ~90% specificity. Echocardiogra-
phy also provides important information regarding the presence and 
severity of aortic regurgitation and pericardial effusion. CT and MRI 
are both highly accurate in identifying the intimal flap and the extent 
of the dissection and involvement of major arteries; each has a sensi-
tivity and specificity >90%. They are useful in recognizing intramural 
hemorrhage and penetrating ulcers. The relative utility of transesoph-
ageal echocardiography, CT, and MRI depends on the availability and 
expertise in individual institutions as well as on the hemodynamic 
stability of the patient, with CT and MRI obviously less suitable for 
unstable patients.
TREATMENT
Aortic Dissection
Medical therapy should be initiated as soon as the diagnosis is 
considered. The patient should be admitted to an intensive care 
unit for hemodynamic monitoring. Unless hypotension is present, 
therapy should be aimed at reducing cardiac contractility and sys-
temic arterial pressure, and thus shear stress. For acute dissection, 
unless contraindicated, β-adrenergic blockers should be adminis-
tered parenterally, using intravenous propranolol, metoprolol, or the 
short-acting esmolol to achieve a heart rate of ~60 beats/min. This 
should be accompanied by sodium nitroprusside infusion to lower 
systolic blood pressure to ≤120 mmHg. Labetalol (Chap. 271), a drug 
with both β- and α-adrenergic blocking properties, also may be used 
as a parenteral agent in acute therapy for dissection.
The calcium channel antagonists verapamil and diltiazem may be 
used intravenously if nitroprusside or β-adrenergic blockers cannot 
be employed. The addition of a parenteral angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor such as enalaprilat to a β-adrenergic blocker 
also may be considered. Isolated use of a direct vasodilator such as 
hydralazine is contraindicated because these agents can increase 
hydraulic shear and may propagate the dissection.
Emergent or urgent surgical correction is the preferred treatment 
for acute ascending aortic dissections and intramural hematomas 
(type A). Surgery involves excision of the intimal flap, obliteration 
of the false lumen, and placement of an interposition graft. Aortic 
valve repair or a composite valve-graft conduit is used if the aortic 
valve is disrupted. The overall in-hospital mortality rate after sur-
gical treatment of patients with aortic dissection is reported to be 
15–25%. The major causes of perioperative mortality and morbidity 
include myocardial infarction, paraplegia, renal failure, tampon-
ade, hemorrhage, and sepsis. Thoracic endovascular aortic repair  
with an endoluminal stent graft is indicated for complicated type B 
dissections, including those characterized by propagation, com-
promise of major aortic branches, impending rupture, or continued 
pain. Other transcatheter techniques, such as fenestration of the 
intimal flaps and stenting of narrowed branch vessels to increase 
flow to compromised organs, are used in selected patients. Surgical 
correction is indicated for complicated type B dissections, partic-
ularly if endovascular repair is not feasible. Hybrid procedures 
consisting of both surgery and endovascular repair may be used 
when the dissection involves both the aortic arch and the descend-
ing thoracic aorta. For uncomplicated and stable distal dissections 
and intramural hematomas (type B), medical therapy is the pre-
ferred treatment. The in-hospital mortality rate of medically treated 
patients with type B dissection is ~10%. Long-term therapy for patients 
with aortic dissection and intramural hematomas (with or without 
surgery) consists of control of hypertension and reduction of cardiac 
contractility with the use of β-adrenergic blockers plus other anti-
hypertensive agents, such as ACE inhibitors or calcium antagonists. 
Patients with chronic type B dissection and intramural hematomas 
should be followed on an outpatient basis every 6–12 months with 
contrast-enhanced CT or MRI to detect propagation or expansion. 
Patients with Marfan’s syndrome are at high risk for postdissection 
complications. The long-term prognosis for patients with treated 
dissections is generally good with careful follow-up; the 10-year 
survival rate is ~60%.
■
■CHRONIC ATHEROSCLEROTIC OCCLUSIVE DISEASE
Atherosclerosis may affect the thoracic and abdominal aorta. Occlu-
sive aortic disease caused by atherosclerosis usually is confined to the 
distal abdominal aorta below the renal arteries. Frequently the disease 
extends to the iliac arteries (Chap. 275). Claudication characteristically 
involves the buttocks, thighs, and calves and may be associated with 
impotence in males (Leriche’s syndrome). The severity of the symp-
toms depends on the adequacy of collaterals. With sufficient collateral 
blood flow, a complete occlusion of the abdominal aorta may occur 
without the development of ischemic symptoms. The physical findings 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1922 include the absence of femoral and other distal pulses bilaterally and 
the detection of an audible bruit over the abdomen (usually at or below 
the umbilicus) and the common femoral arteries. Atrophic skin, loss 
of hair, and coolness of the lower extremities usually are observed. In 
advanced ischemia, rubor on dependency and pallor on elevation can 
be seen.
The diagnosis usually is established by physical examination and 
noninvasive testing, including leg pressure measurements, Doppler 
velocity analysis, pulse volume recordings, and duplex ultrasonogra-
phy. The anatomy may be defined by MRI, CT, or conventional aortog-
raphy, typically performed when one is considering revascularization. 
Catheter-based endovascular or operative treatment is indicated in 
patients with lifestyle-limiting or debilitating symptoms of claudica-
tion and patients with critical limb ischemia.
■
■ACUTE AORTIC OCCLUSION
Acute occlusion in the distal abdominal aorta constitutes a medical 
emergency because it threatens the viability of the lower extremities; it 
usually results from an occlusive (saddle) embolus that almost always 
originates from the heart. Rarely, acute occlusion may occur as the 
result of in situ thrombosis in a preexisting severely narrowed segment 
of the aorta.
The clinical picture is one of acute ischemia of the lower extremities. 
Severe rest pain, coolness, and pallor of the lower extremities and 
the absence of distal pulses bilaterally are the usual manifestations. 
Diagnosis should be established rapidly by MRI, CT, or aortography. 
Emergency thrombectomy or revascularization is indicated.
AORTITIS
Aortitis, a term referring to inflammatory disease of the aorta, may 
be caused by large vessel vasculitides such as Takayasu’s arteritis and 
giant cell arteritis, rheumatic and HLA-B27–associated spondyloar-
thropathies, Behçet’s syndrome, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody 
(ANCA)–associated vasculitides, Cogan’s syndrome, Erdheim-Chester 
disease, IgG4-related systemic disease, and infections such as syphilis, 
tuberculosis, and Salmonella, or may be associated with retroperitoneal 
fibrosis. Aortitis may result in aneurysmal dilation and aortic regur-
gitation, occlusion of the aorta and its branch vessels, or acute aortic 
syndromes.
■
■TAKAYASU’S ARTERITIS
(See also Chap. 356) This inflammatory disease often affects the 
ascending aorta and aortic arch, causing obstruction of the aorta and 
its major arteries. Takayasu’s arteritis is also termed pulseless disease 
because of the frequent occlusion of the large arteries originating from 
the aorta. It also may involve the descending thoracic and abdominal 
aorta and occlude large branches such as the renal arteries. Aortic aneu-
rysms also may occur. The pathology is a panarteritis characterized by 
mononuclear cells and occasionally giant cells, with marked intimal 
hyperplasia, medial and adventitial thickening, and, in the chronic 
form, fibrotic occlusion. The disease is most prevalent in young females 
of Asian descent but does occur in women of other geographic and 
ethnic origins and also in young men. During the acute stage, fever, 
malaise, weight loss, and other systemic symptoms may be evident. 
Elevations of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein 
are common. The chronic stages of the disease, which is intermittently 
active, present with symptoms related to large artery occlusion, such as 
upper extremity claudication, cerebral ischemia, and syncope. The pro-
cess is progressive, and there is no definitive therapy. Glucocorticoids 
and immunosuppressive agents are effective in some patients during 
the acute phase. Biologically targeted agents are under investigation. 
Surgical bypass or endovascular intervention of a critically stenotic 
artery may be necessary.
■
■GIANT CELL ARTERITIS
(See also Chap. 356) This vasculitis occurs in older individuals and 
affects women more often than men. Primarily large and medium-size 
arteries are affected. The pathology is that of focal granulomatous 
lesions involving the entire arterial wall; it frequently is associated with 
polymyalgia rheumatica. Obstruction of medium-size arteries (e.g., 
temporal and ophthalmic arteries) and major branches of the aorta 
and the development of aortitis and aortic regurgitation are important 
complications of the disease. High-dose glucocorticoid therapy should 
be administered early and then gradually tapered. Immunosuppressive 
therapy with methotrexate may allow reduction in steroid dosage and 
reduce the risk of relapse. Biologically targeted therapies are under 
investigation.
■
■RHEUMATIC AORTITIS
Rheumatoid arthritis (Chap. 351), ankylosing spondylitis (Chap. 355), 
psoriatic arthritis (Chap. 355), reactive arthritis (formerly known as 
Reiter’s syndrome) (Chap. 355), relapsing polychondritis, and inflam-
matory bowel disorders may all be associated with aortitis involving 
the ascending aorta. The inflammatory lesions usually involve the 
ascending aorta and may extend to the sinuses of Valsalva, the mitral 
valve leaflets, and adjacent myocardium. The clinical manifestations 
are aneurysm, aortic regurgitation, and involvement of the cardiac 
conduction system.
■
■IDIOPATHIC AORTITIS
Idiopathic abdominal aortitis is characterized by adventitial and 
periaortic inflammation with thickening of the aortic wall. It is associ-
ated with abdominal aortic aneurysms and idiopathic retroperitoneal 
fibrosis. Affected individuals may present with vague constitutional 
symptoms, fever, and abdominal pain. Retroperitoneal fibrosis can 
cause ureteral obstruction and hydronephrosis. Glucocorticoids and 
immunosuppressive agents may reduce the inflammation.
■
■INFECTIVE AORTITIS
Infective aortitis may result from direct invasion of the aortic wall by 
bacterial pathogens such as Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Salmonella 
or by fungi. These bacteria cause aortitis by infecting the aorta at sites 
of atherosclerotic plaque. Bacterial proteases lead to degradation of col-
lagen, and the ensuing destruction of the aortic wall leads to the forma-
tion of a saccular aneurysm referred to as a mycotic aneurysm. Mycotic 
aneurysms have a predilection for the suprarenal abdominal aorta. The 
pathologic characteristics of the aortic wall include acute and chronic 
inflammation, abscesses, hemorrhage, and necrosis. Mycotic aneu-
rysms typically affect the elderly and occur in men three times more 
frequently than in women. Patients may present with fever, sepsis, 
and chest, back, or abdominal pain; there may have been a preceding 
diarrheal illness. Blood cultures are positive in the majority of patients. 
Both CT and MRI are useful to diagnose mycotic aneurysms. Treatment 
includes antibiotic therapy and surgical removal of the affected part 
of the aorta and revascularization of the lower extremities with grafts 
placed in uninfected tissue.
Syphilitic aortitis is a late manifestation of luetic infection (Chap. 177) 
that usually affects the proximal ascending aorta, particularly the aortic 
root, resulting in aortic dilation and aneurysm formation. Syphilitic 
aortitis occasionally may involve the aortic arch or the descending 
aorta. The aneurysms may be saccular or fusiform and are usually 
asymptomatic, but compression of and erosion into adjacent structures 
may result in symptoms; rupture also may occur.
The initial lesion is an obliterative endarteritis of the vasa vasorum, 
especially in the adventitia. This is an inflammatory response to the 
invasion of the adventitia by the spirochetes. Destruction of the aortic 
media occurs as the spirochetes spread into this layer, usually via the 
lymphatics accompanying the vasa vasorum. Destruction of collagen 
and elastic tissues leads to dilation of the aorta, scar formation, and 
calcification. These changes account for the characteristic radiographic 
appearance of linear calcification of the ascending aorta.
The disease typically presents as an incidental chest radiographic 
finding 15–30 years after initial infection. Symptoms may result from 
aortic regurgitation, narrowing of coronary ostia due to syphilitic aor-
titis, compression of adjacent structures (e.g., esophagus), or rupture. 
Diagnosis is established by a positive serologic test, i.e., rapid plasmin 
reagin (RPR) or fluorescent treponemal antibody. Treatment includes 
penicillin and surgical excision and repair.
CHAPTER 275 Arterial Diseases of the Extremities
1923
■
■FURTHER READING
Buck DB et al: Endovascular treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysms. 
Nat Rev Cardiol 11:112, 2014.
Erbel R et al: 2014 ESC Guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of 
aortic diseases: Document covering acute and chronic aortic diseases 
of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task Force for 
the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 35:2873, 2014.
Gornik HL, Creager MA: Aortitis. Circulation 117:3039, 2008.
Guirguis-Blake JM et al: Ultrasonography screening for abdominal 
aortic aneurysms: A systematic evidence review for the US Preventive 
Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 160:321, 2014.
Hiratzka LF et al: 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/
SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 
patients with Thoracic Aortic Disease: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Sur-
gery, American College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, 
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascu-
lar Angiography and Interventions, Society of Interventional Radiol-
ogy, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine. 
Circulation 121:e266, 2010.
Isselbacher EM et al: Hereditary influence in thoracic aortic aneurysm 
and dissection. Circulation 133:2516, 2016.
Kent KC: Clinical practice. Abdominal aortic aneurysms. N Engl J Med 
371:2101, 2014.
Nienaber CA, Clough RE: Management of acute aortic dissection. 
Lancet 385:800, 2015.
■
■PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASE
Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is defined as a clinical disorder in 
which there is a stenosis or occlusion in the aorta or the arteries of the 
limbs. Atherosclerosis is the leading cause of PAD in patients >40 years 
old. Other causes include thrombosis, embolism, vasculitis, fibromus-
cular dysplasia, entrapment, cystic adventitial disease, and trauma. 
The highest prevalence of atherosclerotic PAD occurs in the sixth and 
seventh decades of life. As in patients with atherosclerosis of the coro-
nary and cerebral vasculature, there is an increased risk of developing 
PAD in cigarette smokers and in persons with diabetes mellitus, hyper-
cholesterolemia, hypertension, or renal insufficiency.
Pathology  (See also Chap. 291e from HPIM 19e) Segmental 
lesions that cause stenosis or occlusion are usually localized to large 
and medium-size vessels. The pathology of the lesions includes ath-
erosclerotic plaques with calcium deposition, thinning of the media, 
patchy destruction of muscle and elastic fibers, fragmentation of the 
internal elastic lamina, and thrombi composed of platelets and fibrin. 
The primary sites of involvement are the abdominal aorta and iliac 
arteries (30% of symptomatic patients), the femoral and popliteal 
arteries (80–90% of patients), and the more distal vessels, including 
the tibial and peroneal arteries (40–50% of patients). Atherosclerotic 
lesions occur preferentially at arterial branch points, which are sites of 
increased turbulence, altered shear stress, and intimal injury. Involve-
ment of the distal vasculature is most common in elderly individuals 
and patients with diabetes mellitus.
Clinical Evaluation  Fewer than 50% of patients with PAD are 
symptomatic, although many have a slow or impaired gait. The most 
Arterial Diseases of the 
Extremities
Mark A. Creager, Joseph Loscalzo 
275
common symptom is intermittent claudication, which is defined as a 
pain, ache, cramp, numbness, or a sense of fatigue in the muscles; it 
occurs during exercise and is relieved by rest. The site of claudication is 
distal to the location of the occlusive lesion. For example, buttock, hip, 
thigh, and calf discomfort occurs in patients with aortoiliac disease, 
whereas calf claudication develops in patients with femoral-popliteal 
disease. Symptoms are far more common in the lower than in the upper 
extremities because of the higher incidence of obstructive lesions in 
the former region. In patients with severe arterial occlusive disease in 
whom resting blood flow cannot accommodate basal nutritional needs 
of the tissues, critical limb ischemia may develop. Patients complain 
of rest pain or a feeling of cold or numbness in the foot and toes. Fre-
quently, these symptoms occur at night when the legs are horizontal 
and improve when the legs are in a dependent position. With severe 
ischemia, rest pain may be persistent.
Important physical findings of PAD include decreased or absent 
pulses distal to the obstruction, the presence of bruits over the nar-
rowed artery, and muscle atrophy. With more severe disease, hair loss, 
thickened nails, smooth and shiny skin, reduced skin temperature, and 
pallor or cyanosis are common physical signs. In patients with critical 
limb ischemia, ulcers or gangrene may occur. Elevation of the legs and 
repeated flexing of the calf muscles produce pallor of the soles of the 
feet, whereas rubor, secondary to reactive hyperemia, may develop 
when the legs are dependent. The time required for rubor to develop 
or for the veins in the foot to fill when the patient’s legs are transferred 
from an elevated to a dependent position is related to the severity of 
the ischemia and the presence of collateral vessels. Patients with severe 
ischemia may develop peripheral edema because they keep their legs 
in a dependent position much of the time. Ischemic neuropathy can 
result in numbness and hyporeflexia.
Noninvasive Testing  The history and physical examination are 
often sufficient to establish the diagnosis of PAD. An objective assess-
ment of the presence and severity of disease is obtained by noninvasive 
techniques. Arterial pressure can be recorded noninvasively in the legs 
by placement of sphygmomanometric cuffs at the ankles and the use of 
a Doppler device to auscultate or record blood flow from the dorsalis 
pedis and posterior tibial arteries. Normally, systolic blood pressure 
in the legs and arms is similar. Indeed, ankle pressure may be slightly 
higher than arm pressure due to pulse-wave amplification. In the pres-
ence of hemodynamically significant stenoses, the systolic blood pres-
sure in the leg is decreased. Thus, the ratio of the ankle and brachial 
artery pressures (termed the ankle:brachial index, or ABI) is 1.00–1.40 in 
normal individuals. ABI values of 0.91–0.99 are considered “border-
line,” and those <0.90 are abnormal and diagnostic of PAD. ABIs >1.40 
indicate noncompressible arteries secondary to vascular calcification.
Other noninvasive tests include segmental pressure measurements, 
segmental pulse volume recordings, duplex ultrasonography (which 
combines B-mode imaging and Doppler flow velocity waveform 
analysis), transcutaneous oximetry, and stress testing (usually using a 
treadmill). Placement of pneumatic cuffs enables assessment of systolic 
pressure along the legs. The presence of pressure gradients between 
sequential cuffs provides evidence of the presence and location of 
hemodynamically significant stenoses. In addition, the amplitude of 
the pulse volume contour becomes blunted in the presence of signifi-
cant PAD. Duplex ultrasonography is used to image and detect stenotic 
lesions in native arteries and bypass grafts.
Treadmill testing allows the physician to assess functional limita-
tions objectively. Decline of the ABI immediately after exercise provides 
further support for the diagnosis of PAD in patients with equivocal 
symptoms and findings on examination.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), computed tomographic 
angiography (CTA), and conventional catheter-based angiography 
should not be used for routine diagnostic testing, but are performed 
before potential revascularization (Fig. 275-1). Each test is useful in 
defining the anatomy to assist planning for endovascular and surgical 
revascularization procedures.
Prognosis  The natural history of patients with PAD is influ-
enced primarily by the extent of coexisting coronary artery and 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1924
FIGURE 275-1  Magnetic resonance angiography of a patient with intermittent claudication, showing stenoses of the distal abdominal aorta and right common iliac 
artery (A) and stenoses of the right and left superficial femoral arteries (B). (Courtesy of Dr. Edwin Gravereaux, with permission.)
cerebrovascular disease. Approximately one-third to one-half of 
patients with symptomatic PAD have evidence of coronary artery 
disease (CAD) based on clinical presentation and electrocardiogram, 
and over one-half have significant CAD by coronary angiography. 
Patients with PAD have a 15–25% 5-year mortality rate and a two- to 
sixfold increased risk of death from coronary heart disease. Mortality 
rates are highest in those with the most severe PAD. Measurement 
of ABI is useful for detecting PAD and identifying persons at risk 
for future atherothrombotic events. The likelihood of symptomatic 
progression of PAD is lower than the chance of succumbing to CAD. 
Approximately 75–80% of nondiabetic patients who present with mild 
to moderate claudication remain symptomatically stable. Deterioration 
is likely to occur in the remainder, with ~1–2% of the group ultimately 
developing critical limb ischemia each year. Approximately 25–30% of 
patients with critical limb ischemia undergo amputation within 1 year. 
The prognosis is worse in patients who continue to smoke cigarettes or 
have diabetes mellitus.
TREATMENT
Peripheral Artery Disease
Patients with PAD should receive therapies to reduce the risk of 
associated cardiovascular events, such as myocardial infarction 
and death, and to improve limb symptoms, prevent progression 
to critical limb ischemia, and preserve limb viability. Risk fac-
tor modification and antiplatelet therapy should be initiated to 
improve cardiovascular outcomes. The importance of discontinuing  
cigarette smoking cannot be overemphasized. The physician must 
assume a major role in this lifestyle modification. Counseling and 
adjunctive drug therapy with the nicotine patch, bupropion, or 
varenicline increase smoking cessation rates and reduce recidivism. 
It is important to control blood pressure in hypertensive patients. 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor 
blockers may reduce the risk of cardiovascular events in patients 
with symptomatic PAD. β-Adrenergic blockers do not worsen clau-
dication and may be used to treat hypertension, especially in 
patients with coexistent CAD. Treatment of hypercholesterolemia 
with statins is advocated to reduce the risk of myocardial infarction, 
stroke, and death. The 2013 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Treatment 
of Blood Cholesterol to Reduce Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk 
in Adults recommends high intensity statin treatment in patients 
with atherosclerotic disorders, including PAD. Platelet inhibitors, 
including aspirin and the ADP antagonist, clopidogrel, reduce the 
risk of adverse cardiovascular events in patients with atherosclerosis 
and are recommended for patients with symptomatic PAD, includ-
ing those with intermittent claudication or critical limb ischemia or 
prior lower extremity revascularization. Outcomes with ticragrelor 
are similar to those with clopidogrel. The benefit of dual antiplatelet 
therapy with both aspirin and clopidogrel compared with aspirin 
alone in reducing cardiovascular morbidity and mortality rates in 
patients with PAD is uncertain. When added to other antiplatelet 
therapy, vorapaxar, a protease activated receptor-1 antagonist that 
inhibits thrombin-mediated platelet activation, decreases the risk 
of adverse cardiovascular events in patients with atherosclerosis, 
including PAD. It also reduces the risk of acute limb ischemia 
and peripheral revascularization; however, it is associated with an 
increased rate of moderate bleeding. The anticoagulant warfarin 
is as effective as antiplatelet therapy in preventing adverse cardio-
vascular events but causes more major bleeding; therefore, it is not 
indicated to improve outcomes in patients with chronic PAD. The 
combination of a low dose of the oral factor Xa inhibitor, rivarox-
aban, and aspirin improves cardiovascular outcomes in patients 
with established atherosclerosis, including PAD, but is associated 
with increased risk of bleeding.
Therapies for intermittent claudication and critical limb ische-
mia include supportive measures, medications, exercise training, 
endovascular interventions, and surgery. Supportive measures 
include meticulous care of the feet, which should be kept clean 
and protected against excessive drying with moisturizing creams. 
Well-fitting and protective shoes are advised to reduce trauma. 
Elastic support hose should be avoided, as it reduces blood flow 
to the skin. In patients with critical limb ischemia, shock blocks 
under the head of the bed together with a canopy over the feet may 
improve perfusion pressure and ameliorate some of the rest pain.
Patients with claudication should be encouraged to exercise 
regularly and at progressively more strenuous levels. Supervised 
exercise training programs for 30- to 45-min sessions, three to five 
times per week for at least 12 weeks, prolong walking distance. The 
beneficial effect of supervised exercise training on walking perfor-
mance in patients with claudication often is similar to or greater 
than that realized after a revascularization procedure. Structured 
home and community-based exercise programs are also effective. 
Pharmacologic treatment of PAD has not been as successful as the 
medical treatment of CAD (Chap. 267). In particular, vasodilators as 
a class have not proved to be beneficial. During exercise, peripheral 
CHAPTER 275 Arterial Diseases of the Extremities
1925
vasodilation occurs distal to sites of significant arterial stenoses. As 
a result, perfusion pressure falls, often to levels lower than that gen-
erated in the interstitial tissue by the exercising muscle. Drugs such 
as α-adrenergic blocking agents, calcium channel antagonists, and 
other vasodilators have not been shown to be effective in patients 
with PAD.
Cilostazol, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor with vasodilator and 
antiplatelet properties, increases claudication distance by 40–60% 
and improves measures of quality of life. The mechanism of action 
accounting for its beneficial effects is not known. Pentoxifylline, a 
substituted xanthine derivative, increases blood flow to the micro-
circulation and enhances tissue oxygenation. Although several  
placebo-controlled studies have found that pentoxifylline modestly 
increases the duration of exercise, its efficacy has not been confirmed 
in other clinical trials. Statins appeared effective for treatment of 
intermittent claudication in initial clinical trials, but more studies are 
needed to confirm the efficacy of this class of drugs.
There is no definitive medical therapy for critical limb ischemia. 
Vasodilator prostaglandins are not effective in relieving symp-
toms or preventing limb loss. Enthusiasm for therapy with angio-
genic growth factors abated when clinical trials of intramuscular 
gene transfer of DNA encoding vascular endothelial growth factor, 
fibroblast growth factor, hepatocyte growth factor, or hypoxia- 
inducible factor 1α failed to demonstrate improvement in symptoms 
or outcomes in patients with intermittent claudication or critical 
limb ischemia. Most clinical trials of bone marrow–derived vascular 
progenitor cells to promote angiogenesis and preserve limb viability 
in patients with critical limb ischemia have failed to demonstrate 
benefit, though a meta-analysis of these trials suggested a modest 
reduction in the risk of amputation. This remains an active area of 
preclinical and clinical investigation.
REVASCULARIZATION
Revascularization procedures, including catheter-based and surgi-
cal interventions, are usually indicated for patients with disabling, 
progressive, or severe symptoms of intermittent claudication despite 
medical therapy in order to improve walking distance and func-
tional capacity. These are also indicated in patients with critical 
limb ischemia to relieve pain and prevent limb loss. MRA, CTA, or 
conventional angiography should be performed to assess vascular 
anatomy in patients who are being considered for revasculariza-
tion. Endovascular interventions include percutaneous transluminal 
balloon angioplasty (PTA) (including drug coated balloons), stent 
placement (including drug eluting stents), stent grafts, and atherec-
tomy (Chap. 270). When endovascular intervention is performed in 
conjunction with a supervised exercise program, walking distance 
improves more than with exercise training alone.
PTA and stenting of the iliac artery are associated with higher 
success rates than are PTA and stenting of the femoral and popliteal 
arteries. Approximately 90–95% of iliac PTAs are initially successful, 
and the 3-year patency rate is >75%. Patency rates may be higher 
if a stent is placed in the iliac artery. The initial success rate for  
femoral-popliteal PTA and stenting approximate 90% with 60% 
3-year patency rates. Outcomes following stenting of longer femoral- 
popliteal lesions (>5–10 cm) generally are better than after PTA. Sev-
eral clinical trials have found lower restenosis rates with drug-coated 
balloons than with PTA, and with drug eluting stents compared with 
bare metal stents. Patency rates are influenced by the severity and 
length of pretreatment stenoses; the prognosis of occlusive lesions 
is worse than that of nonocclusive stenotic lesions. Endovascular 
interventions of the infrapoplital, tibial, and peroneal arteries, often 
in conjunction with treatment of more proximal lesions, can be used 
to treat critical limb ischemia and prevent limb loss.
Several operative procedures are available for treating patients 
with aortoiliac and femoral-popliteal artery disease. The preferred 
operative procedure depends on the location and extent of the 
obstruction(s) and the general medical condition of the patient. 
Operative procedures for aortoiliac disease include aortobifemoral 
bypass, axillofemoral bypass, femoro-femoral bypass, and aortoiliac 
endarterectomy. The most frequently used procedure is the aor-
tobifemoral bypass using knitted Dacron grafts. Immediate graft 
patency approaches 99%, and 5- and 10-year graft patency rates in 
survivors are >90% and 80%, respectively. Operative complications 
include myocardial infarction and stroke, infection of the graft, 
peripheral embolization, and sexual dysfunction from interruption 
of autonomic nerves in the pelvis. The operative mortality rate 
ranges from 1 to 3%, mostly due to ischemic heart disease.
Operative therapy for femoral-popliteal artery disease includes 
in situ and reverse autogenous saphenous vein bypass grafts, place-
ment of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) or other synthetic grafts, and 
thromboendarterectomy. The operative mortality rate ranges from 1 
to 3%. The long-term patency rate depends on the type of graft used, 
the location of the distal anastomosis, and the patency of runoff 
vessels beyond the anastomosis. Patency rates of femoral-popliteal 
saphenous vein bypass grafts approach 90% at 1 year and 70–80% 
at 5 years. Five-year patency rates of infrapopliteal saphenous vein 
bypass grafts are 60–70%. In contrast, 5-year patency rates of infrap-
opliteal PTFE grafts are <30%.
Preoperative cardiac risk assessment may identify individuals 
who are especially likely to experience an adverse cardiac event 
during the perioperative period. Patients with angina, prior myo-
cardial infarction, heart failure, diabetes, or renal insufficiency are 
among those at increased risk. Stress testing with treadmill exercise 
(if feasible), radionuclide myocardial perfusion imaging, or echoc-
ardiography permits further stratification of risk in these patients, 
particularly those with poor or unknown functional capacity  
(Chap. 270). Patients with abnormal test results require close super-
vision and adjunctive management with anti-ischemic medications. 
Coronary angiography and coronary artery revascularization com-
pared with optimal medical therapy do not improve outcomes in 
most patients undergoing peripheral vascular surgery, but car-
diac catheterization should be considered in patients with unstable 
angina and angina refractory to medical therapy as well as those 
suspected of having left main or three-vessel CAD.
■
■FIBROMUSCULAR DYSPLASIA
Fibromuscular dysplasia is a hyperplastic disorder that affects 
medium-size and small arteries. It occurs predominantly in females 
and usually involves the renal and carotid arteries but can affect 
extremity vessels such as the iliac and subclavian arteries. The histo-
logic classification includes intimal fibroplasia (also classified as focal), 
medial dysplasia (multifocal), and adventitial hyperplasia. Medial 
dysplasia is subdivided into medial fibroplasia, perimedial fibropla-
sia, and medial hyperplasia. Medial fibroplasia is the most common 
type and is characterized by alternating areas of thinned media and 
fibromuscular ridges. The internal elastic lamina usually is preserved. 
The iliac arteries are the limb arteries most likely to be affected by 
fibromuscular dysplasia. It is identified angiographically by a “string 
of beads” appearance caused by thickened fibromuscular ridges con-
tiguous with thin, less-involved portions of the arterial wall, which 
is typical of medial fibroplasia, or less commonly, as a focal tubular 
stenosis, and which is more typical of intimal fibroplasia. When limb 
vessels are involved, clinical manifestations are similar to those for 
atherosclerosis, including claudication and rest pain. PTA and surgical 
reconstruction have been beneficial in patients with debilitating symp-
toms or threatened limbs.
■
■THROMBOANGIITIS OBLITERANS
Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger’s disease) is an inflammatory 
occlusive vascular disorder involving small and medium-size arteries 
and veins in the distal upper and lower extremities. Cerebral, visceral, 
and coronary vessels may be affected rarely. This disorder develops 
most frequently in men <40 years of age. The prevalence is higher in 
Asians and individuals of Eastern European descent. Although the 
cause of thromboangiitis obliterans is not known, there is a definite 
relationship to cigarette smoking in patients with this disorder.
In the initial stages of thromboangiitis obliterans, polymorpho-
nuclear leukocytes infiltrate the walls of the small and medium-size 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1926 arteries and veins. The internal elastic lamina is preserved, and a 
cellular, inflammatory thrombus develops in the vascular lumen. As 
the disease progresses, mononuclear cells, fibroblasts, and giant cells 
replace the neutrophils. Later stages are characterized by perivascular 
fibrosis, organized thrombus, and recanalization.
The clinical features of thromboangiitis obliterans often include a 
triad of claudication of the affected extremity, Raynaud’s phenome-
non, and migratory superficial vein thrombophlebitis. Claudication 
usually is confined to the calves and feet or the forearms and hands 
because this disorder primarily affects distal vessels. In the presence of 
severe digital ischemia, trophic nail changes, painful ulcerations, and 
gangrene may develop at the tips of the fingers or toes. The physical 
examination shows normal brachial and popliteal pulses but reduced 
or absent radial, ulnar, and/or tibial pulses. MRA, CTA, and conven-
tional arteriography are helpful in making the diagnosis. Smooth, 
tapering segmental lesions in the distal vessels are characteristic, as are 
collateral vessels at sites of vascular occlusion. Proximal atherosclerotic 
disease is usually absent. The diagnosis can be confirmed by excisional 
biopsy and pathologic examination of an involved vessel.
There is no specific treatment except abstention from tobacco. The 
prognosis is worse in individuals who continue to smoke, but results 
are discouraging even in those who stop smoking. Arterial bypass of 
the larger vessels may be used in selected instances, as well as local 
debridement, depending on the symptoms and severity of ischemia. 
Antibiotics may be useful; anticoagulants and glucocorticoids are not 
helpful. If these measures fail, amputation may be required.
■
■VASCULITIS
Other vasculitides may affect the arteries that supply the upper and 
lower extremities. Takayasu’s arteritis and giant cell (temporal) arteri-
tis are discussed in Chap. 356.
■
■ACUTE LIMB ISCHEMIA
Acute limb ischemia occurs when arterial occlusion results in the sud-
den cessation of blood flow to an extremity. The severity of ischemia 
and the viability of the extremity depend on the location and extent of 
the occlusion and the presence and subsequent development of collat-
eral blood vessels. Principal causes of acute arterial occlusion include 
embolism, thrombus in situ, arterial dissection, and trauma.
The most common sources of arterial emboli are the heart, aorta, and 
large arteries. Cardiac disorders that cause thromboembolism include 
atrial fibrillation; acute myocardial infarction; ventricular aneurysm; 
cardiomyopathy; infectious and marantic endocarditis; thrombi asso-
ciated with prosthetic heart valves; and atrial myxoma. Emboli to the 
distal vessels may also originate from proximal sites of atherosclerosis 
and aneurysms of the aorta and large vessels. Less frequently, an arte-
rial occlusion results paradoxically from a venous thrombus that has 
entered the systemic circulation via a patent foramen ovale or another 
septal defect. Arterial emboli tend to lodge at vessel bifurcations 
because the vessel caliber decreases at those sites; in the lower extrem-
ities, emboli lodge most frequently in the femoral artery, followed by 
the iliac artery, aorta, and popliteal and tibioperoneal arteries.
Acute arterial thrombosis in situ occurs most frequently in athero-
sclerotic vessels at the site of an atherosclerotic plaque or aneurysm and 
in arterial bypass grafts. Trauma to an artery may disrupt continuity 
of blood flow and cause acute limb ischemia via formation of an acute 
arterial thrombus or by disruption of an artery’s integrity and extrava-
sation of blood. Arterial occlusion may complicate arterial punctures 
and placement of catheters; it also may result from arterial dissection 
if the intimal flap obstructs the artery. Less common causes include 
thoracic outlet compression syndrome, which causes subclavian artery 
occlusion, and entrapment of the popliteal artery by abnormal place-
ment of the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle. Polycythemia 
and hypercoagulable disorders (Chaps. 99 and 112) are also associated 
with acute arterial thrombosis.
■
■CLINICAL FEATURES
The symptoms of an acute arterial occlusion depend on the location, 
duration, and severity of the obstruction. Often severe pain, paresthe-
sia, numbness, and coldness develop in the involved extremity within 
1 h. Paralysis may occur with severe and persistent ischemia. Physical 
findings include loss of pulses distal to the occlusion, cyanosis or pal-
lor, mottling, decreased skin temperature, muscle stiffening, loss of sen-
sation, weakness, and/or absent deep tendon reflexes. If acute arterial 
occlusion occurs in the presence of an adequate collateral circulation, 
as is often the case in acute graft occlusion, the symptoms and findings 
may be less severe. In this situation, the patient complains about an 
abrupt decrease in the distance walked before claudication occurs or 
of modest pain and paresthesia. Pallor and coolness are evident, but 
sensory and motor functions generally are preserved. The clinical 
evaluation includes Doppler assessment of peripheral blood flow. The 
diagnosis of acute limb ischemia is usually apparent from the clinical 
presentation. In most circumstances, MRA, CTA, or catheter-based 
arteriography is used to confirm the diagnosis and demonstrate the 
location and extent of arterial occlusion.
TREATMENT
Acute Limb Ischemia
Once the diagnosis is made, the patient should be anticoagulated 
with intravenous heparin to prevent propagation of the clot and 
recurrent embolism. In cases of severe ischemia of recent onset, par-
ticularly when limb viability is jeopardized, immediate intervention 
to ensure reperfusion is indicated. Catheter-directed thrombolysis/
thrombectomy, surgical thromboembolectomy, and arterial bypass 
procedures are used to restore blood flow to the ischemic extremity 
promptly, particularly when a large proximal vessel is occluded.
Intraarterial thrombolytic therapy with recombinant tissue plas-
minogen activator, reteplase, or tenecteplase is most effective when 
acute arterial occlusion is recent (<2 weeks) and caused by a throm-
bus in an atherosclerotic vessel, arterial bypass graft, or occluded 
stent. Thrombolytic therapy is also indicated when the patient’s 
overall condition contraindicates surgical intervention or when 
smaller distal vessels are occluded, thus preventing surgical access. 
Meticulous observation for hemorrhagic complications is required 
during intraarterial thrombolytic therapy. Another endovascu-
lar approach to thrombus removal is percutaneous mechanical 
thrombectomy using devices that employ hydrodynamic forces 
or rotating baskets to fragment and remove the clot. These treat-
ments may be used alone but usually are used in conjunction with 
pharmacologic thrombolysis. Surgical revascularization is preferred 
when restoration of blood flow must occur within 24 h to prevent 
limb loss or when symptoms of occlusion have been present for 
>2 weeks. Amputation is performed when the limb is not viable, 
as characterized by loss of sensation, paralysis, and the absence of 
Doppler-detected blood flow in both arteries and veins.
Long-term anticoagulation is indicated when acute limb ischemia 
is caused by cardiac thromboembolism. Emboli resulting from infec-
tive endocarditis, the presence of prosthetic heart valves, or atrial 
myxoma often require surgical intervention to remove the cause.
■
■ATHEROEMBOLISM
Atheroembolism is another cause of limb ischemia. In this condition, 
multiple small deposits of fibrin, platelets, and cholesterol debris 
embolize from proximal atherosclerotic lesions or aneurysmal sites. 
Large protruding aortic atheromas are a source of emboli that may 
lead to limb ischemia, as well as stroke and renal insufficiency. Athero-
embolism may occur after intraarterial procedures. Since atheroemboli 
to limbs tend to lodge in the small vessels of the muscle and skin 
and may not occlude the large vessels, distal pulses usually remain 
palpable. Patients complain of acute pain and tenderness at the site of 
embolization. Digital vascular occlusion may result in ischemia and 
the “blue toe” syndrome; digital necrosis and gangrene may develop 
(Fig. 275-2). Localized areas of tenderness, pallor, and livedo reticularis 
(see below) occur at sites of emboli. Skin or muscle biopsy may demon-
strate cholesterol crystals.
Ischemia resulting from atheroemboli is notoriously difficult to 
treat. Local foot care and occasionally amputation may be needed to 
CHAPTER 275 Arterial Diseases of the Extremities
1927
FIGURE 275-2  Atheroembolism causing cyanotic discoloration and impending 
necrosis of the toes (“blue toe” syndrome).
demonstrate thoracic outlet compression of the subclavian artery. 
Neurophysiologic tests such as the electromyogram, nerve conduc-
tion studies, and somatosensory evoked potentials may be abnormal 
if the brachial plexus is involved, but the diagnosis of neurogenic 
thoracic outlet syndrome is not necessarily excluded if these tests are 
normal owing to their low sensitivity.
Most patients can be managed conservatively. They should be 
advised to avoid the positions that cause symptoms. Many patients 
benefit from shoulder girdle exercises. Surgical procedures such as 
removal of the first rib and resection of the scalenus anticus muscle 
are necessary occasionally for relief of symptoms or treatment of 
ischemia.
■
■POPLITEAL ARTERY ENTRAPMENT
Popliteal artery entrapment typically affects young athletic men and 
women when the gastrocnemius or popliteus muscle compresses 
the popliteal artery and causes intermittent claudication. Thrombo-
sis, embolism, or popliteal artery aneurysm may occur. The pulse 
examination may be normal unless provocative maneuvers such as 
ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion are performed. The diagnosis 
is confirmed by duplex ultrasound, CTA, MRA, or conventional angi-
ography. Treatment involves surgical release of the popliteal artery or 
vascular reconstruction.
■
■POPLITEAL ARTERY ANEURYSM
Popliteal artery aneurysms are the most common peripheral artery 
aneurysms. Approximately 50% are bilateral. Patients with popliteal 
artery aneurysms often have aneurysms of other arteries, especially 
the aorta. The most common clinical presentation is limb ischemia 
secondary to thrombosis or embolism. Rupture occurs less frequently. 
Other complications include compression of the adjacent popliteal vein 
or peroneal nerve. Popliteal artery aneurysm can be detected by palpa-
tion and confirmed by duplex ultrasonography. Repair is indicated for 
symptomatic aneurysms or when the diameter exceeds 2–3 cm, owing 
to the risk of thrombosis, embolism, or rupture.
■
■ARTERIOVENOUS FISTULA
Abnormal communications between an artery and a vein, bypassing 
the capillary bed, may be congenital or acquired. Congenital arte-
riovenous fistulas are a result of persistent embryonic vessels that 
fail to differentiate into arteries and veins; they may be associated 
with birthmarks, can be located in almost any organ of the body, and 
frequently occur in the extremities. Acquired arteriovenous fistulas 
either are created to provide vascular access for hemodialysis or occur 
as a result of a penetrating injury such as a gunshot or knife wound 
or as complications of arterial catheterization or surgical dissection. 
An uncommon cause of arteriovenous fistula is rupture of an arterial 
aneurysm into a vein.
The clinical features depend on the location and size of the fistula. 
Frequently, a pulsatile mass is palpable, and a thrill and a bruit lasting 
throughout systole and diastole are present over the fistula. With long-
standing fistulas, clinical manifestations of chronic venous insufficiency, 
including peripheral edema; large, tortuous varicose veins; and stasis 
pigmentation become apparent because of the high venous pressure. 
Evidence of ischemia may occur in the distal portion of the extremity. 
Skin temperature is higher over the arteriovenous fistula. Large arteri-
ovenous fistulas may result in an increased cardiac output with conse-
quent cardiomegaly and high-output heart failure (Chap. 252).
The diagnosis is often evident from the physical examination. Com-
pression of a large arteriovenous fistula may cause reflex slowing of the 
heart rate (Nicoladoni-Branham sign). Duplex ultrasonography may 
detect an arteriovenous fistula, especially one that affects the femoral 
artery and vein at the site of catheter access. CTA and conventional 
angiography can confirm the diagnosis and are useful in demonstrat-
ing the site and size of the arteriovenous fistula.
Management of arteriovenous fistulas may involve surgery, radio-
therapy, or embolization. Congenital arteriovenous fistulas are often 
difficult to treat because the communications may be numerous and 
extensive, and new communications frequently develop after ligation 
treat necrotic areas. Analgesics are indicated for pain relief. Usually 
neither surgical revascularization procedures nor thrombolytic therapy 
is helpful because of the multiplicity, composition, and distal location 
of the emboli. Therapy with antiplatelet drugs and statins improves 
cardiovascular outcome in patients with atherosclerosis, but it is not 
established whether either class of drugs prevents recurrent athero-
embolism. Similarly, it is not known whether anticoagulant therapy is 
effective. Surgical intervention to remove or bypass the atherosclerotic 
vessel or aneurysm that causes the recurrent atheroemboli may be 
necessary.
■
■THORACIC OUTLET COMPRESSION SYNDROME
This is a symptom complex resulting from compression of the neu-
rovascular bundle (artery, vein, or nerves) at the thoracic outlet as it 
courses through the neck and shoulder. Cervical ribs, abnormalities of 
the scalenus anticus muscle, proximity of the clavicle to the first rib, 
or abnormal insertion of the pectoralis minor muscle may compress 
the subclavian artery, subclavian vein, and brachial plexus as these 
structures pass from the thorax to the arm. Depending on the structures 
affected, thoracic outlet compression syndrome is divided into arterial, 
venous, and neurogenic forms. Patients with neurogenic thoracic out-
let compression may develop shoulder and arm pain, weakness, and 
paresthesias. Patients with arterial compression may experience clau-
dication, Raynaud’s phenomenon, and even ischemic tissue loss and 
gangrene. Venous compression may cause thrombosis of the subclavian 
and axillary veins; this is often associated with effort and is referred to 
as Paget-Schroetter syndrome.
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome
Examination of a patient with arterial thoracic outlet compression 
syndrome is often normal unless provocative maneuvers are per-
formed. Occasionally, distal pulses are decreased or absent and 
digital cyanosis and ischemia may be evident.
Several maneuvers that support the diagnosis of arterial thoracic 
outlet compression syndrome may be used to precipitate symp-
toms, cause a subclavian artery bruit, and diminish arm pulses. 
These maneuvers include the abduction and external rotation test, 
in which the affected arm is abducted by 90° and the shoulder is 
externally rotated; the scalene maneuver (extension of the neck and 
rotation of the head to the side of the symptoms); the costoclavicular 
maneuver (posterior rotation of shoulders); and the hyperabduction 
maneuver (raising the arm 180°). A chest x-ray will indicate the pres-
ence of cervical ribs. Duplex ultrasonography, MRA, and contrast 
angiography can be performed during provocative maneuvers to 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1928 of the most obvious ones. Many of these lesions are best treated con-
servatively using elastic support hose to reduce the consequences of 
venous hypertension. Occasionally, embolization with autologous 
material, such as fat or muscle, or with hemostatic agents, such as gela-
tin sponges or silicon spheres, is used to obliterate the fistula. Acquired 
arteriovenous fistulas are usually amenable to surgical treatment that 
involves division or excision of the fistula. Occasionally, autogenous 
or synthetic grafting is necessary to reestablish continuity of the artery 
and vein.
■
■RAYNAUD’S PHENOMENON
Raynaud’s phenomenon is characterized by episodic digital ischemia, 
manifested clinically by the sequential development of digital blanching, 
cyanosis, and rubor of the fingers or toes after cold exposure and sub-
sequent rewarming. Emotional stress may also precipitate Raynaud’s 
phenomenon. The color changes are usually well demarcated and are 
confined to the fingers or toes. Typically, one or more digits will appear 
white when the patient is exposed to a cold environment or touches a 
cold object (Fig. 275-3A). The blanching, or pallor, represents the ische-
mic phase of the phenomenon and results from vasospasm of digital 
arteries. During the ischemic phase, capillaries and venules dilate, and 
cyanosis results from the deoxygenated blood that is present in these 
vessels. A sensation of cold or numbness or paresthesia of the digits 
often accompanies the phases of pallor and cyanosis.
With rewarming, the digital vasospasm resolves, and blood flow 
into the dilated arterioles and capillaries increases dramatically. 
This “reactive hyperemia” imparts a bright red color to the digits. In 
addition to rubor and warmth, patients often experience a throbbing, 
painful sensation during the hyperemic phase. Although the triphasic 
color response is typical of Raynaud’s phenomenon, some patients may 
develop only pallor and cyanosis; others may experience only cyanosis.
Raynaud’s phenomenon is broadly separated into two categories: 
idiopathic, termed primary Raynaud’s phenomenon, and secondary 
Raynaud’s phenomenon, which is associated with other disease states 
or known causes of vasospasm (Table 275-1).
Primary Raynaud’s Phenomenon  This appellation is applied 
when the secondary causes of Raynaud’s phenomenon have been 
excluded. Over 50% of patients with Raynaud’s phenomenon have the 
primary form. Women are affected about five times more often than 
men, and the age of presentation is usually between 20 and 40 years. 
The fingers are involved more frequently than the toes. Initial episodes 
B
C
A
E
F
D
FIGURE 275-3  Vascular diseases associated with temperature: A. Raynaud’s phenomenon; B. acrocyanosis; C. livedo reticularis; D. pernio; E. erythromelalgia; and 
F. frostbite.
TABLE 275-1  Classification of Raynaud’s Phenomenon
Primary or idiopathic Raynaud’s phenomenon
Secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon
  Collagen vascular diseases: scleroderma, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
rheumatoid arthritis, dermatomyositis, polymyositis, mixed connective tissue 
disease, Sjögren’s syndrome
  Arterial occlusive diseases: atherosclerosis of the extremities, thromboangiitis 
obliterans, acute arterial occlusion, thoracic outlet syndrome
  Pulmonary hypertension
  Neurologic disorders: intervertebral disk disease, syringomyelia, spinal cord 
tumors, stroke, poliomyelitis, carpal tunnel syndrome, complex regional pain 
syndrome
  Blood dyscrasias: cold agglutinins, cryoglobulinemia, cryofibrinogenemia, 
myeloproliferative disorders, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
  Trauma: vibration injury, hammer hand syndrome, electric shock, cold injury, 
typing, piano playing
  Drugs and toxins: ergot derivatives, methysergide, β-adrenergic receptor 
blockers, bleomycin, vinblastine, cisplatin, gemcitabine, vinyl chloride
CHAPTER 275 Arterial Diseases of the Extremities
1929
may involve only one or two fingertips, but subsequent attacks may 
involve the entire finger and may include all the fingers. The toes are 
affected in 40% of patients. Although vasospasm of the toes usually 
occurs in patients with symptoms in the fingers, it may happen alone. 
Rarely, the earlobes, the tip of the nose, tongue, nipple, or penis are 
involved. Raynaud’s phenomenon occurs frequently in patients who 
also have migraine headaches or variant angina. These associations 
suggest that there may be a common predisposing cause for the 
vasospasm.
Results of physical examination are often entirely normal; the radial, 
ulnar, and pedal pulses are normal. The fingers and toes may be cool 
between attacks and may perspire excessively. Nailfold capillaroscopy 
reveals normal superficial capillaries, which appear as regularly spaced 
hairpin loops. Thickening and tightening of the digital subcutaneous 
tissue (sclerodactyly) develop in 10% of patients. Angiography of the 
digits for diagnostic purposes is not indicated.
In general, patients with primary Raynaud’s disease have milder 
clinical manifestations. Fewer than 1% of these patients lose a part of a 
digit. After the diagnosis is made, the disease improves spontaneously 
in ~15% of patients and progresses in about 30%.
Secondary Causes of Raynaud’s Phenomenon  Raynaud’s 
phenomenon occurs in 80–90% of patients with systemic sclerosis 
(scleroderma) and is the presenting symptom in 30% (Chap. 353). It 
may be the only symptom of scleroderma for many years. Abnor-
malities of the digital vessels may contribute to the development of 
Raynaud’s phenomenon in this disorder. Ischemic fingertip ulcers may 
develop and progress to gangrene and autoamputation. About 20% 
of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have Raynaud’s 
phenomenon (Chap. 349). Occasionally, persistent digital ischemia 
develops and may result in ulcers or gangrene. In most severe cases, 
the small vessels are occluded by a proliferative endarteritis. Ray-
naud’s phenomenon occurs in about 30% of patients with dermatomy-
ositis or polymyositis (Chap. 358). It frequently develops in patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis and may be related to the intimal prolifera-
tion that occurs in the digital arteries.
Atherosclerosis of the extremities is a common cause of Raynaud’s 
phenomenon in men aged >50 years. Thromboangiitis obliterans is an 
uncommon cause of Raynaud’s phenomenon but should be considered 
in young men, particularly those who are cigarette smokers. The devel-
opment of cold-induced pallor in these disorders may be confined to 
one or two digits of the involved extremity. Occasionally, Raynaud’s 
phenomenon may follow acute occlusion of large and medium-sized 
arteries by a thrombus or embolus. Embolization of atheroembolic 
debris may cause digital ischemia. The latter situation often involves 
one or two digits and should not be confused with Raynaud’s phe-
nomenon. In patients with thoracic outlet compression syndrome, 
Raynaud’s phenomenon may result from diminished intravascular 
pressure, stimulation of sympathetic fibers in the brachial plexus, or a 
combination of both. Raynaud’s phenomenon occurs in patients with 
primary pulmonary hypertension (Chap. 277); this is more than coin-
cidental and may reflect a neurohumoral abnormality that affects both 
the pulmonary and digital circulations.
A variety of blood dyscrasias may be associated with Raynaud’s 
phenomenon. Cold-induced precipitation of plasma proteins, hyper-
viscosity, and aggregation of red cells and platelets may occur in 
patients with cold agglutinins, cryoglobulinemia, or cryofibrinogen-
emia. Hyperviscosity syndromes that accompany myeloprolifera-
tive disorders and lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (Waldenström’s 
macroglobulinemia) should also be considered in the initial evaluation 
of patients with Raynaud’s phenomenon.
Raynaud’s phenomenon occurs often in patients whose vocations 
require the use of vibrating hand tools, such as chain saws or jack-
hammers. The frequency of Raynaud’s phenomenon also seems to be 
increased in pianists and keyboard operators. Electric shock injury to 
the hands or frostbite may lead to the later development of Raynaud’s 
phenomenon.
Several drugs have been causally implicated in Raynaud’s phenom-
enon. They include ergot preparations, methysergide, β-adrenergic 
receptor antagonists, and the chemotherapeutic agents bleomycin, 
vinblastine, cisplatin, and gemcitabine.
TREATMENT
Raynaud’s Phenomenon
Most patients with Raynaud’s phenomenon experience only mild 
and infrequent episodes. These patients need reassurance and 
should be instructed to dress warmly and avoid unnecessary cold 
exposure. In addition to gloves and mittens, patients should pro-
tect the trunk, head, and feet with warm clothing to prevent cold- 
induced reflex vasoconstriction. Tobacco use is contraindicated.
Drug treatment should be reserved for severe cases. Dihydro-
pyridine calcium channel antagonists such as nifedipine, isradipine, 
felodipine, and amlodipine decrease the frequency and severity 
of Raynaud’s phenomenon. Diltiazem may be considered but is 
less effective. The postsynaptic α1-adrenergic antagonist prazosin 
has been used with favorable responses; doxazosin and terazosin 
may also be effective. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors such 
as sildenafil, tadalafil, and vardenafil may improve symptoms in 
patients with secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon, as occurs with 
systemic sclerosis. There is limited evidence that topical nitroglyc-
erin preparations are effective. Digital sympathectomy is helpful in 
some patients who are unresponsive to medical therapy. Injection 
of botulinum toxin into the perivascular tissue of the wrist or palm 
improved ischemic manifestations of severe Raynaud’s phenome-
non in case series, but controlled clinical trials are lacking.
■
■ACROCYANOSIS
In this condition, there is arterial vasoconstriction and secondary dila-
tion of the capillaries and venules with resulting persistent cyanosis of 
the hands and, less frequently, the feet. Cyanosis may be intensified by 
exposure to a cold environment. Acrocyanosis may be categorized as 
primary or secondary to an underlying condition. In primary acrocyano-
sis, women are affected much more frequently than men, and the age of 
onset is usually <30 years. Generally, patients are asymptomatic but seek 
medical attention because of the discoloration. The prognosis is favor-
able, and pain, ulcers, and gangrene do not occur. Examination reveals 
normal pulses, peripheral cyanosis, and moist palms (Fig. 275-3B). 
Trophic skin changes and ulcerations do not occur. The disorder can 
be distinguished from Raynaud’s phenomenon because it is persistent 
and not episodic, the discoloration extends proximally from the digits, 
and blanching does not occur. Ischemia secondary to arterial occlusive 
disease can usually be excluded by the presence of normal pulses. Cen-
tral cyanosis and decreased arterial oxygen saturation are not present. 
Patients should be reassured and advised to dress warmly and avoid 
cold exposure. Pharmacologic intervention is not indicated.
Secondary acrocyanosis may result from hypoxemia, vasopressor 
medications, connective tissue diseases, atheroembolism, antiphospho-
lipid antibodies, cold agglutinins, or cryoglobulins and is associated 
with anorexia nervosa and postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome. 
Treatment should be directed at the underlying disorder.
■
■LIVEDO RETICULARIS
In this condition, localized areas of the extremities develop a mottled or 
rete (netlike) appearance of reddish to blue discoloration (Fig. 275-3C). 
The mottled appearance may be more prominent after cold exposure. 
There are primary and secondary forms of livedo reticularis. The pri-
mary, or idiopathic, form of this disorder may be benign or associated 
with ulcerations. The benign form occurs more frequently in women 
than in men, and the most common age of onset is the third decade. 
Patients with the benign form are usually asymptomatic and seek 
attention for cosmetic reasons. These patients should be reassured and 
advised to avoid cold environments. No drug treatment is indicated. 
Primary livedo reticularis with ulceration is also called atrophie blanche 
en plaque. The ulcers are painful and may take months to heal. Second-
ary livedo reticularis can occur with atheroembolism (see above), SLE 
and other vasculitides, antiphospholipid antibodies, hyperviscosity, 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1930 cryoglobulinemia, and Sneddon’s syndrome (ischemic stroke and 
livedo reticularis). Rarely, skin ulcerations develop.
■
■PERNIO (CHILBLAINS)
Pernio is a vasculitic disorder associated with exposure to cold; acute 
forms have been described. Raised erythematous lesions develop on 
the lower part of the legs and feet in cold weather (Fig. 275-3D). They 
are associated with pruritus and a burning sensation, and they may 
blister and ulcerate. Pathologic examination demonstrates angiitis 
characterized by intimal proliferation and perivascular infiltration of 
mononuclear and polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Giant cells may be 
present in the subcutaneous tissue. Patients should avoid exposure 
to cold, and ulcers should be kept clean and protected with sterile 
dressings. Sympatholytic drugs and dihydropyridine calcium channel 
antagonists may be effective in some patients.
■
■ERYTHROMELALGIA
This disorder is characterized by burning pain and erythema of the 
extremities (Fig. 275-3E). The feet are involved more frequently than 
the hands, and males are affected more frequently than females. Ery-
thromelalgia may occur at any age but is most common in middle age. 
It may be primary (also termed erythermalgia) or secondary. Mutations 
in the SCN9A gene, which encodes the Nav1.7 voltage-gated sodium 
channel expressed in sensory and sympathetic nerves, has been 
described in inherited forms of erythromelalgia. The most common 
causes of secondary erythromelalgia are myeloproliferative disorders 
such as polycythemia vera and essential thrombocytosis. Less common 
causes include drugs, such as calcium channel blockers, bromocriptine, 
and pergolide; neuropathies; connective tissue diseases such as SLE; 
and paraneoplastic syndromes. Patients complain of burning in the 
extremities that is precipitated by exposure to a warm environment 
and aggravated by a dependent position. The symptoms are relieved 
by exposing the affected area to cool air or water or by elevation. Ery-
thromelalgia can be distinguished from ischemia secondary to periph-
eral arterial disorders because the peripheral pulses are present. There 
is no specific treatment; aspirin may produce relief in patients with 
erythromelalgia secondary to myeloproliferative disease. Treatment 
of associated disorders in secondary erythromelalgia may be helpful.
■
■FROSTBITE
In this condition, tissue damage results from severe environmental 
cold exposure or from direct contact with a very cold object. Tissue 
injury results from both freezing and vasoconstriction. Frostbite usu-
ally affects the distal aspects of the extremities or exposed parts of 
the face, such as the ears, nose, chin, and cheeks. Superficial frostbite 
involves the skin and subcutaneous tissue. Patients experience pain or 
paresthesia, and the skin appears white and waxy. After rewarming, 
there is cyanosis and erythema, wheal-and-flare formation, edema, and 
superficial blisters. Deep frostbite involves muscle, nerves, and deeper 
blood vessels. It may result in edema of the hand or foot, vesicles and 
bullae, tissue necrosis, and gangrene (Fig. 275-3F).
Initial treatment is rewarming, performed in an environment 
where reexposure to freezing conditions will not occur. Rewarming 
is accomplished by immersion of the affected part in a water bath at 
temperatures of 40°–44°C (104°–111°F). Massage, application of ice 
water, and extreme heat are contraindicated. The injured area should 
be cleansed with soap or antiseptic, and sterile dressings should be 
applied. Analgesics are often required during rewarming. Antibiotics 
are used if there is evidence of infection. The efficacy of sympathetic 
blocking drugs is not established. After recovery, the affected extremity 
may exhibit increased sensitivity to cold.
■
■FURTHER READING
Bonaca MP, Creager MA: Pharmacological treatment and current 
management of peripheral artery disease. Circ Res 116:1579, 2015.
Creager MA et al: Acute limb ischemia. N Engl J Med 366:2198, 2012.
Gerhard-Herman MD et al: 2016 AHA/ACC guideline on the man-
agement of patients with lower extremity peripheral artery disease: 
A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 
135:e726, 2017.
Kullo IJ, Rooke TW: Peripheral artery disease. N Engl J Med 374:861, 
2016.
Olin JW et al: Fibromuscular dysplasia: State of the science and critical 
unanswered questions: A Scientific Statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation 129:1048, 2014.
Thukkani AK, Kinlay S: Endovascular intervention for peripheral 
artery disease. Circ Res 116:1599, 2015.
Vartanian SM, Conte MS: Surgical intervention for peripheral arte-
rial disease. Circ Res 116:1614, 2015.
Wigley FM, Flavahan NA: Raynaud’s Phenomenon. N Engl J Med 
375:556, 2016.
■
■CHRONIC VENOUS DISEASE
Chronic venous diseases range from telangiectasias and reticular 
veins, to varicose veins, to chronic venous insufficiency with edema, 
skin changes, and ulceration. This section of the chapter will focus 
on identification and treatment of varicose veins and chronic venous 
insufficiency, since these problems are encountered frequently by the 
internist. The estimated prevalence of varicose veins in the United 
States is ~15% in men and 30% in women. Chronic venous insufficiency 
with edema affects ~7.5% of men and 5% of women, and the prevalence 
increases with age ranging from 2% among those <50 years of age 
to 10% of those 70 years of age. Approximately 20% of patients with 
chronic venous insufficiency develop venous ulcers.
■
■VENOUS ANATOMY 
Veins in the extremities can be broadly classified as either superficial 
or deep. The superficial veins are located between the skin and deep 
fascia. In the legs, these include the great and small saphenous veins 
and their tributaries. The great saphenous vein is the longest vein in the 
body. It originates on the medial side of the foot and ascends anterior 
to the medial malleolus and then along the medial side of the calf and 
thigh, and drains into the common femoral vein. The small saphenous 
vein originates on the dorsolateral aspect of the foot, ascends posterior 
to the lateral malleolus and along the posterolateral aspect of the calf, 
and drains into the popliteal vein. The deep veins of the leg accom-
pany the major arteries. There are usually paired peroneal, anterior 
tibial, and posterior tibial veins in the calf, which converge to form the 
popliteal vein. Soleal tributary veins drain into the posterior tibial or 
peroneal veins, and gastrocnemius tributary veins drain into the pop-
liteal vein. The popliteal vein ascends in the thigh as the femoral vein. 
The confluence of the femoral vein and deep femoral vein form the 
common femoral vein, which ascends in the pelvis as the external iliac 
and then common iliac vein, which converges with the contralateral 
common iliac vein at the inferior vena cava. Perforating veins connect 
the superficial and deep systems in the legs at multiple locations, nor-
mally allowing blood to flow from the superficial to deep veins. In the 
arms, the superficial veins include the basilic, cephalic, and median 
cubital veins and their tributaries. The basilic and cephalic veins course 
along the medial and lateral aspects of the arm, respectively, and these 
are connected via the median cubital vein in the antecubital fossa. 
The deep veins of the arms accompany the major arteries and include 
the radial, ulnar, brachial, axillary, and subclavian veins. The subcla-
vian vein converges with the internal jugular vein to form the bra-
chiocephalic vein, which joins the contralateral brachiocephalic vein to 
form the superior vena cava. Bicuspid valves are present throughout 
the venous system to direct the flow of venous blood centrally.
Chronic Venous Disease  
and Lymphedema
Mark A. Creager, Joseph Loscalzo 
276
CHAPTER 276 Chronic Venous Disease and Lymphedema 
1931
develops near the medial malleolus. A phlebectasia corona is a fan-
shaped pattern of intradermal veins near the ankle or on the foot. Skin 
ulceration may occur near the medial and lateral malleoli. A venous 
ulcer is often shallow and characterized by an irregular border, a base 
of granulation tissue, and the presence of exudate (Fig. 276-1).
Bedside maneuvers can be used to distinguish primary vari-
cose veins from secondary varicose veins caused by deep-venous 
insufficiency. With the contemporary use of venous ultrasound (see 
below), however, these maneuvers are employed infrequently. The 
Brodie–Trendelenburg test is used to determine whether varicose veins 
are secondary to deep-venous insufficiency. As the patient is lying 
supine, the leg is elevated and the veins allowed to empty. Then, a 
tourniquet is placed on the proximal part of the thigh and the patient 
is asked to stand. Filling of the varicose veins within 30 s indicates 
that the varicose veins are caused by deep-venous insufficiency and 
incompetent perforating veins. Primary varicose veins with superfi-
cial venous insufficiency are the likely diagnosis if venous refilling 
occurs promptly after tourniquet removal. The Perthes test assesses the 
possibility of deep-venous obstruction. A tourniquet is placed on the 
midthigh after the patient has stood, and the varicose veins are filled. 
The patient is then instructed to walk for 5 min. A patent deep-venous 
system and competent perforating veins enable the superficial veins 
below the tourniquet to collapse. Deep-venous obstruction is likely to 
be present if the superficial veins distend further with walking.
Differential Diagnosis  The duration of leg edema helps to dis-
tinguish chronic venous insufficiency from acute deep-vein thrombo-
sis. Lymphedema, as discussed later in this chapter, is often confused 
with chronic venous insufficiency, and both may occur together. Other 
disorders that cause leg swelling should be considered and excluded 
when evaluating a patient with presumed venous insufficiency. Bilat-
eral leg swelling occurs in patients with congestive heart failure, 
hypoalbuminemia secondary to nephrotic syndrome or severe hepatic 
disease, myxedema caused by hypothyroidism or pretibial myxedema 
associated with Graves’ disease, and with drugs such as dihydro-
pyridine calcium channel blockers and thiazolidinediones. Unilateral 
causes of leg swelling also include ruptured leg muscles, hematomas 
secondary to trauma, and popliteal cysts. Cellulitis may cause eryth-
ema and swelling of the affected limb. Leg ulcers may be caused by 
severe peripheral artery disease and critical limb ischemia; neuropa-
thies, particularly those associated with diabetes; and less commonly, 
skin cancer, vasculitis, or rarely as a complication of hydroxyurea. 
Pathophysiology of Chronic Venous Disease  Varicose veins 
are dilated, bulging, tortuous superficial veins, measuring at least 
3 mm in diameter. The smaller and less tortuous reticular veins are 
dilated intradermal veins, which appear blue-green, measure 1–3 mm 
in diameter, and do not protrude from the skin surface. Telangiectasias, 
or spider veins, are small, dilated veins, <1 mm in diameter, located 
near the skin surface, and form blue, purple, or red linear, branching, 
or spider-web patterns.
Varicose veins can be categorized as primary or secondary. Primary 
varicose veins originate in the superficial system and result from 
defective structure and function of the valves of the saphenous veins, 
intrinsic weakness of the vein wall, and high intraluminal pressure. 
Approximately one-half of these patients have a family history of 
varicose veins. Other factors associated with primary varicose veins 
include aging, pregnancy, hormonal therapy, obesity, and prolonged 
standing. Secondary varicose veins result from venous hypertension, 
associated with deep-venous insufficiency or deep-venous obstruction, 
and incompetent perforating veins that cause enlargement of super-
ficial veins. Arteriovenous fistulas also cause varicose veins in the 
affected limb.
Chronic venous insufficiency is a consequence of incompetent veins 
in which there is venous hypertension and extravasation of fluid and 
blood elements into the tissue of the limb. It may occur in patients 
with varicose veins but usually is caused by disease in the deep veins. 
It also is categorized as primary or secondary. Primary deep-venous 
insufficiency is a consequence of an intrinsic structural or functional 
abnormality in the vein wall or venous valves leading to valvular 
reflux. Secondary deep-venous insufficiency is caused by obstruction 
and/or valvular incompetence from previous deep-vein thrombosis 
(Chap. 273). Deep-venous insufficiency occurs following deep-vein 
thrombosis, as the delicate valve leaflets become thickened and 
contracted and can no longer prevent retrograde flow of blood and 
the vein itself becomes rigid and thick walled. Although most veins 
recanalize after an episode of thrombosis, the large proximal veins may 
remain occluded. Secondary incompetence develops in distal valves 
because high pressures distend the vein and separate the leaflets. Other 
causes of secondary deep-venous insufficiency include May-Thurner 
syndrome, where the left iliac vein is occluded or stenosed by extrinsic 
compression from the overlapping right common iliac artery; arteri-
ovenous fistulas resulting in increased venous pressure; congenital 
deep-vein agenesis or hypoplasia; and venous malformations as may 
occur in Klippel-Trénaunay and Parkes-Weber syndromes.
Clinical Presentation  Patients with venous varicosities are often 
asymptomatic but still concerned about the cosmetic appearance of 
their legs. Superficial venous thrombosis may be a recurring problem, 
and, rarely, a varicosity ruptures and bleeds. Symptoms in patients 
with varicose veins or venous insufficiency, when they occur, include a 
dull ache, throbbing or heaviness, or pressure sensation in the legs typ-
ically after prolonged standing; these symptoms usually are relieved 
with leg elevation. Additional symptoms may include cramping, burn-
ing, pruritus, leg swelling, and skin ulceration.
The legs are examined in both the supine and standing positions. 
Visual inspection and palpation of the legs in the standing position 
confirm the presence of varicose veins. The location and extent of the 
varicose veins should be noted. Edema, stasis dermatitis, and skin 
ulceration near the ankle may be present if there is superficial venous 
insufficiency and venous hypertension. Findings of deep-venous 
insufficiency include increased leg circumference, venous varicosities, 
edema, and skin changes. The edema, which is usually pitting, may 
be confined to the ankles, extend above the ankles to the knees, or 
involve the thighs in severe cases. Over time, the edema may become 
less pitting and more indurated. Dermatologic findings associated with 
venous stasis include hyperpigmentation, erythema, eczema, lipoder-
matosclerosis, atrophie blanche, and a phlebectasia corona. Lipoderma-
tosclerosis is the combination of induration, hemosiderin deposition, 
and inflammation, and typically occurs in the lower part of the leg just 
above the ankle. Atrophie blanche is a white patch of scar tissue, often 
with focal telangiectasias and a hyperpigmented border; it usually 
FIGURE 276-1  Venous insufficiency with active venous ulcer near the medial 
malleolus. (Courtesy of Dr. Steven Dean, with permission.)
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1932
TABLE 276-1  CEAP (Clinical, Etiologic, Anatomic, Pathophysiologic) 
Classification
Clinical Classification
C0 No visible or palpable signs of venous disease
C1 Telangiectasias, reticular veins
C2 Varicose veins
C3 Edema without skin changes
C4 Skin changes, including pigmentation, eczema, lipodermatosclerosis, and 
atrophie blanche
C5 Healed venous ulcer
C6 Active venous ulcer
Etiologic Classification
Ec Congenital
Ep Primary
Es Secondary (postthrombotic)
En No venous etiology identified
Anatomic Classification
As Superficial veins
Ap Perforator veins
Ad Deep veins
An No venous location identified
Pathophysiologic Classification
Pr Reflux
Po Obstruction
Pr,o Reflux and obstruction
Pn No venous pathophysiology identifiable
Source: Data from B Eklöf et al: J Vasc Surg 40:1248, 2004.
The location and characteristics of venous ulcers help to differentiate 
these from other causes.
Classification of Chronic Venous Disease  The CEAP (clini-
cal, etiologic, anatomic, pathophysiologic) classification schema incor-
porates the range of symptoms and signs of chronic venous disease 
to characterize its severity. It also broadly categorizes the etiology 
as congenital, primary, or secondary; identifies the affected veins as 
superficial, deep, or perforating; and characterizes the pathophysiol-
ogy as reflux, obstruction, both, or neither (Table 276-1).
Diagnostic Testing  The principal diagnostic test to evaluate 
patients with chronic venous disease is venous duplex ultrasonogra-
phy. A venous duplex ultrasound examination uses a combination of 
B-mode imaging and spectral Doppler to detect the presence of venous 
obstruction and venous reflux in superficial and deep veins. Color- 
assisted Doppler ultrasound is useful to visualize venous flow patterns. 
Obstruction may be diagnosed by the absence of flow, the presence of 
an echogenic thrombus within the vein, or failure of the vein to collapse 
when a compression maneuver is applied by the sonographer, the last 
implicating the presence of an intraluminal thrombus. Venous reflux 
is detected by prolonged reversal of venous flow direction during 
a Valsalva maneuver, particularly for the common femoral vein or 
saphenofemoral junction, or after compression and release of a cuff 
placed on the limb distal to the area being interrogated.
Some vascular laboratories use air or strange gauge plethysmogra-
phy to assess the severity of venous reflux and complement findings 
from the venous ultrasound examination. Venous volume and venous 
refilling time are measured when the legs are placed in a dependent 
position and after calf exercise to quantify the severity of venous reflux 
and the efficiency of the calf muscle pump to affect venous return.
Magnetic resonance, computed tomographic, and conventional 
venography are rarely required to determine the cause and plan 
treatment for chronic venous insufficiency unless there is suspicion 
for pathology that might warrant intervention. These modalities are 
used to identify obstruction or stenosis of the inferior vena cava and 
iliofemoral veins, as may occur in patients with previous proximal 
deep-vein thrombosis; occlusion of inferior vena cava filters; extrinsic 
compression from tumors; and May-Thurner syndrome.
TREATMENT
Chronic Venous Disease
SUPPORTIVE MEASURES
Varicose veins usually are treated with conservative measures. 
Symptoms often decrease when the legs are elevated periodically, 
prolonged standing is avoided, and elastic support hose are worn. 
External compression with elastic stockings or stretch bandages 
provides a counterbalance to the hydrostatic pressure in the veins. 
Although compression garments may improve symptoms, they do 
not prevent progression of varicose veins. Graduated compression 
stockings with pressures of 20–30 mmHg are suitable for most 
patients with simple varicose veins, although pressures of 30–40 
mmHg may be required for patients with manifestations of venous 
insufficiency such as edema and ulcers.
Patients with chronic venous insufficiency also should be advised 
to avoid prolonged standing or sitting; frequent leg elevation is 
helpful. Graded compression therapy consisting of stockings or mul-
tilayered compression bandages is the standard of care for advanced 
chronic venous insufficiency characterized by edema, skin changes, 
or venous ulcers defined as CEAP clinical class C3–C6. Graduated 
compression stockings of 30–40 mmHg are more effective than lesser 
grades for healing venous ulcers. The length of stocking depends on 
the distribution of edema. Calf-length stockings are tolerated better 
by most patients, particularly elderly patients; for patients with var-
icose veins or edema extending to the thigh, thigh-length stockings 
or panty hose should be considered. Exercise training, including leg 
muscle strengthening, may improve calf muscle pump function and 
antegrade venous flow, and reduce the severity of chronic venous 
insufficiency. Overweight and obese patients should be advised to 
lose weight via caloric restriction and exercise.
In addition to a compression bandage or stocking, patients with 
venous ulcers also may be treated with low adherent absorbent 
dressings that take up exudates while maintaining a moist environ-
ment. Other types of dressings include hydrocolloid (an adhesive 
dressing composed of polymers such as carboxymethylcellulose that 
absorbs exudates by forming a gel), hydrogel (a nonabsorbent dress-
ing comprising >80% water or glycerin that moisturizes wounds), 
foam (an absorbent dressing made with polymers such as poly-
urethane), and alginate (an absorbent, biodegradable dressing that 
is derived from seaweed), but there is little evidence that these are 
more effective than low-adherent absorbent dressings. The choice 
of specific dressing depends on the amount of drainage, presence 
of infection, and integrity of the skin surrounding the ulcer. Ulcers 
should be debrided of necrotic tissue. Antibiotics are not indicated 
unless the ulcer is infected. The multilayered compression bandage 
or graduated compression garment is then put over the dressing.
MEDICAL THERAPIES
There are no drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion for the treatment of chronic venous insufficiency. Diuretics may 
reduce edema, but at the risk of volume depletion and compromise in 
renal function. Topical steroids may be used for a short period of time 
to treat inflammation associated with stasis dermatitis. Several herbal 
supplements, such as horse chestnut seed extract (aescin); flavonoids 
including diosmin, hesperidin, or the two combined as micronized 
purified flavonoid fraction; and French maritime pine bark extract, 
are touted to have venoconstrictive and anti-inflammatory properties. 
Although meta-analyses have suggested that aescin reduces edema, 
pruritus, and pain and that micronized purified flavonoid fraction 
in conjunction with compression therapy facilitates venous ulcer 
healing, there is insufficient evidence to recommend the general use 
of these substances in patients with chronic venous insufficiency.
INTERVENTIONAL AND SURGICAL THERAPIES
Ablative procedures, including endovenous thermal ablation, scle-
rotherapy, and surgery, are used to treat varicose veins in selected 
patients who have persistent symptoms, great saphenous vein 
incompetency, and complications of venous insufficiency including 
CHAPTER 276 Chronic Venous Disease and Lymphedema 
1933
dermatitis, edema, and ulcers. Ablative therapy may also be indi-
cated for cosmetic reasons.
Endovenous thermal ablation procedures of the saphenous veins 
include endovenous laser therapy and radiofrequency ablation. 
To ablate the great saphenous vein, a catheter is placed percuta-
neously and advanced from the level of the knee to just below the 
saphenofemoral junction via ultrasound guidance. Thermal energy 
is then delivered as the catheter is pulled back. The heat injures 
the endothelium and media and promotes thrombosis and fibrosis, 
resulting in venous occlusion. Average 1- and 5-year occlusion rates 
exceed 90% following endovenous laser therapy and are slightly less 
after radiofrequency ablation. Deep-vein thrombosis of the common 
femoral vein adjacent to the saphenofemoral junction is an uncom-
mon but potential complication of endovenous thermal ablation. 
Other adverse effects of thermal ablation procedures include pain, 
paresthesias, bruising, hematoma, and hyperpigmentation.
Sclerotherapy involves the injection of a chemical into a vein to 
cause fibrosis and obstruction. Sclerosing agents approved by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration include sodium tetradecyl sul-
fate, polidocanol, sodium morrhuate, and glycerin. The sclerosing 
agent is administered as a liquid or mixed with air or CO2/O2 to 
create a foam. It first is injected into the great saphenous vein or 
its affected tributaries, often with ultrasound guidance. Thereafter, 
smaller more distal veins and incompetent perforating veins are 
injected. Following completion of the procedure, elastic bandages 
are applied, or 30–40 mmHg compression stockings are worn for 
1–2 weeks. Average 1- and 5-year occlusion rates are 81 and 74%, 
respectively, following sclerotherapy. Complications are uncommon 
and include deep-vein thrombosis, hematomas, damage to adjacent 
saphenous or sural nerves, and infection. Anaphylaxis is a very rare 
but severe complication.
Surgical therapy usually involves ligation and stripping of the 
great and small saphenous veins. The procedure is performed under 
general anesthesia. Incisions are made at the groin and the upper 
calf. The great saphenous vein is ligated below the saphenofemoral 
junction, and a wire is inserted into the great saphenous vein and 
advanced distally. The proximal part of the great saphenous vein is 
secured to the wire and retrieved, i.e., stripped, via the calf incision. 
Stripping of the great saphenous vein below the knee and stripping 
of the small saphenous vein usually are not performed because of 
the respective risks of saphenous and sural nerve injury. Complica-
tions of great saphenous vein ligation and stripping include deep
-vein thrombosis, bleeding, hematoma, infection, and nerve injury. 
Recurrent varicose veins occur in up to 50% patients by 5 years, due 
to technical failures, deep-venous insufficiency, and incompetent 
perforating veins.
Stab phlebectomy is another surgical treatment for of varicose 
veins. A small incision is made alongside the varicose vein, and it 
is avulsed by means of a forceps or hook. This procedure may be 
performed in conjunction with saphenous vein ligation and stripping 
or thermal ablation. Subfascial endoscopic perforator surgery (SEPS) 
uses endoscopy to identify and occlude incompetent perforating 
veins. It also may be performed along with other ablative procedures.
Endovascular interventions, surgical bypass, and reconstruction 
of the valves of the deep veins are performed when feasible to treat 
patients with advanced chronic venous insufficiency who have not 
responded to other therapies. Catheter-based interventions, usually 
involving placement of endovenous stents, may be considered to 
treat some patients with chronic occlusions of the iliac veins. Techni-
cal success rates exceed 85% in most series, and long-term patency 
is achieved in ~75% of these patients. Iliocaval bypass, femoroiliac 
venous bypass, and femorofemoral crossover venous bypass are 
procedures used occasionally to treat iliofemoral vein occlusion; 
saphenopopliteal vein bypass can be used to treat chronic femo-
ropopliteal vein obstruction. Long-term patency rates for venous 
bypass procedures generally exceed 60% and are associated with 
improvement in symptoms. Surgical reconstruction of the valves of 
the deep veins and valve transfer procedures are used to treat val-
vular incompetence. Valvuloplasty involves tightening the valve by 
commissural apposition. With valve transfer procedures, a segment 
of vein with a competent valve, such as a brachial or axillary vein, 
or adjacent saphenous or deep femoral vein, is inserted as an inter-
position graft in the incompetent vein. Both valvuloplasty and vein 
transfer operations result in ulcer healing in the majority of patients, 
although success rates are somewhat better with valvuloplasty.
Lymphedema  Lymphedema is a chronic condition caused by 
impaired transport of lymph and characterized by swelling of one or 
more limbs and occasionally the trunk and genitalia. Fluid accumu-
lates in interstitial tissues when there is an imbalance between lymph 
production and lymph absorption, a process governed in large part 
by Starling forces. Deficiency, reflux, or obstruction of lymph vessels 
perturbs the ability of the lymphatic system to reabsorb proteins 
that had been filtered by blood vessels, and the tissue osmotic load 
promotes interstitial accumulation of water. Persistent lymphedema 
leads to inflammatory and immune responses characterized by infil-
tration of mononuclear cells, fibroblasts, and adipocytes, leading to 
adipose and collagen deposition in the skin and subcutaneous tissues.
Lymphatic Anatomy  Lymphatic capillaries are blind-ended tubes 
formed by a single layer of endothelial cells. The absent or widely fen-
estrated basement membrane of lymphatic capillaries allows access to 
interstitial proteins and particles. Lymphatic capillaries merge to form 
microlymphatic precollector vessels, which contain few smooth muscle 
cells. The precollector vessels drain into collecting lymphatic vessels, 
which comprise endothelial cells, a basement membrane, smooth mus-
cle, and bileaflet valves. The collecting lymphatic vessels in term merge 
to form larger lymphatic conduits. Analogous to venous anatomy, there 
are superficial and deep lymphatic vessels in the legs, which communi-
cate at the popliteal and inguinal lymph nodes. Pelvic lymphatic vessels 
drain into the thoracic duct, which ascends from the abdomen to the 
thorax and connects with the left brachiocephalic vein. Lymph is pro-
pelled centrally by the phasic contractile activity of lymphatic smooth 
muscle and facilitated by the contractions of contiguous skeletal muscle. 
The presence of lymphatic valves ensures unidirectional flow.
Etiology  Lymphedema may be categorized as primary or second-
ary (Table 276-2). The prevalence of primary lymphedema is ~1.15 per 
100,000 persons <20 years of age. Females are affected more frequently 
than males. Primary lymphedema may be caused by agenesis, hypopla-
sia, hyperplasia, or obstruction of the lymphatic vessels. There are three 
clinical subtypes: congenital lymphedema, which appears shortly after 
birth; lymphedema praecox, which has its onset at the time of puberty; 
and lymphedema tarda, which usually begins after age 35. Familial 
forms of congenital lymphedema (Milroy’s disease) and lymphedema 
praecox (Meige’s disease) may be inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner with variable penetrance; autosomal or sex-linked recessive 
forms are less common. At least 19 genes are associated with inher-
ited forms of lymphedema. Mutations in genes expressing vascular 
endothelial growth factor receptor 3 (VEGFR3), which is a determinant 
of lymphangiogenesis, cause Milroy’s disease; and a mutation of the 
gene encoding VEGF-C, a ligand for VEGFR3, may cause a Milroy’s 
disease-like phenotype. A mutation of the LSC1 gene is associated with 
the cholestasis-lymphedema syndrome. Mutations in the FOXC2 gene, 
which encodes a transcription factor that interacts with a signaling 
pathway involved in the development of lymphatic vessels, cause the 
lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome, in which lymphedema praecox 
occurs in patients who also have a double row of eyelashes. A mutation 
of SOX18, a transcription factor upstream of lymphatic endothelial 
cell differentiation, has been described in patients with lymphedema, 
alopecia, and telangiectasias (hypotrichosis, lymphedema, telangiec-
tasia syndrome). Mutations of the CCBE1 gene, which enhances the 
lymphangiogenic effects of VEGF-C, cause Hennekam lymphangiecta-
sia-lymphedema syndrome, and KIF11 gene mutations are associated 
with microcephaly-lymphedema syndrome. Mutations of the GATA2 
gene, which is involved in the development of lymphatic valves, cause 
lymphedema and a predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia. Patients 
PART 6
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
1934
TABLE 276-2  Causes of Lymphedema
Primary
Sporadic (no identified cause)
Genetic disorders
  Milroy’s disease (VEGFR3, VEGF-C)
  Meige’s disease (gene mutation not established)
  Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome (FOXC2)
  Cholestasis-lymphedema (LSC1)
  Hennekam’s lymphangiectasia-lymphedema syndrome (LCCBE1)
  Emberger’s syndrome-lymphedema and predisposition to AML (GATA2)
  Microcephaly-lymphedema syndrome (KIF11)
  Hypotrichosis-lymphedema-telangiectasia (SOX18)
Chromosomal aneuploidies
  Turner’s syndrome
  Klinefelter’s syndrome
  Trisomy 13, 18, or 21
Other disorders associated with primary lymphedema
  Noonan’s syndrome
  Klippel-Trénaunay syndrome
  Parkes-Weber syndrome 
  Yellow nail syndrome
  Intestinal lymphangiectasia syndrome
  Lymphangiomyomatosis
  Neurofibromatosis type 1
Secondary
Infection
  Bacterial lymphangitis (Streptococcus pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus)
  Lymphogranuloma venereum (Chlamydia trachomatis)
  Filariasis (Wucheria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, B. timori)
  Tuberculosis
Neoplastic infiltration of lymph nodes
  Lymphoma
  Prostate
  Others
Surgery or irradiation of axillary or inguinal lymph nodes for treatment of 
cancer
Iatrogenic
  Lymphatic division (during peripheral bypass surgery, varicose vein surgery, 
or harvesting of saphenous veins)
Miscellaneous
  Contact dermatitis
  Podoconiosis
  Rheumatoid arthritis
  Pregnancy
  Factitious
B
A
FIGURE 276-2  A. Lymphedema characterized by swelling of the leg, nonpitting 
edema, and squaring of the toes. (Courtesy of Dr. Marie Gerhard-Herman, with 
permission.) B. Advanced chronic stage of lymphedema illustrating the woody 
appearance of the leg with acanthosis and verrucous overgrowths. (Courtesy of 
Dr. Jeffrey Olin, with permission.)
with a chromosomal aneuploidy, such as Turner’s syndrome, Klinefel-
ter’s syndrome, or trisomy 18, 13, or 21, may develop lymphedema. 
Syndromic vascular anomalies associated with lymphedema also 
include Klippel-Trénaunay syndrome and Parkes-Weber syndrome. 
Other disorders associated with lymphedema include Noonan’s syn-
drome, yellow nail syndrome, intestinal lymphangiectasia syndrome, 
lymphangiomyomatosis, and neurofibromatosis type 1.
Secondary lymphedema is an acquired condition that results from 
damage to or obstruction of previously normal lymphatic channels. 
Recurrent episodes of bacterial lymphangitis, usually caused by 
streptococci, are a very common cause of lymphedema. The most 
common etiology of secondary lymphedema worldwide is lymphatic 
filariasis and affecting >120 million children and adults and causing 
lymphedema and elephantiasis in 14 million of these affected indi-
viduals (Chap. 228). Recurrent bacterial lymphangitis by Streptococcus 
may result in chronic lymphedema. Other infectious causes include 
lymphogranuloma venereum and tuberculosis. A common acquired 
cause of lymphedema in tropical countries is podoconiosis, which 
results from barefoot exposure and absorption of silicate particles in 
soil derived from volcanic rock. In developed countries, the most com-
mon secondary cause of lymphedema is surgical excision or irradiation 
of axillary and inguinal lymph nodes for treatment of cancers, such as 
breast, cervical, endometrial, and prostate cancer, sarcomas, and malig-
nant melanoma. Lymphedema of the arm occurs in 13% of breast can-
cer patients after axillary node dissection and in 22% after both surgery 
and radiotherapy. Lymphedema of the leg affects ~15% of patients with 
cancer after inguinal lymph node dissection. Tumors, such as prostate 
cancer and lymphoma, also can infiltrate and obstruct lymphatic 
vessels. Less common causes include contact dermatitis, rheumatoid 
arthritis, pregnancy, and self-induced or factitious lymphedema after 
application of tourniquets.
Clinical Presentation  Lymphedema is generally a painless con-
dition, but patients may experience a chronic dull, heavy sensation in 
the leg, and most often they are concerned about the appearance of the 
leg. Lymphedema of the lower extremity initially involves the foot and 
gradually progresses up the leg so that the entire limb becomes edema-
tous (Fig. 276-2). In the early stages, the edema is soft and pits easily 
with pressure. Over time, subcutaneous adipose tissue accumulates, the 
limb enlarges further and loses its normal contour, and the toes appear 
square. Thickening of the skin is detected by Stemmer’s sign, which 
is the inability to tent the skin at the base of the toes. Peau d’orange 
is a term used to describe dimpling of the skin, resembling that of an 
orange peel, caused by lymphedema. In the chronic stages, the edema 
no longer pits and the limb acquires a woody texture as the tissues 
become indurated and fibrotic. The International Society of Lymphol-
ogy describes four clinical stages of lymphedema (Table 276-3).
Differential Diagnosis  Lymphedema should be distinguished 
from other disorders that cause unilateral leg swelling, such as 
deep-vein thrombosis and chronic venous insufficiency. In the latter 
condition, the edema is softer, and there is often evidence of a stasis 
dermatitis, hyperpigmentation, and superficial venous varicosities, 
as described earlier. Other causes of leg swelling that resemble 
lymphedema are myxedema and lipedema. Lipedema usually occurs 
in women and is caused by accumulation of adipose tissue in the leg 
from the thigh to the ankle with sparing of the feet.
