Chapter 32  Diuretics and Kidney Diseases
	
427
U N I T  V
hydrostatic pressure, especially by using drugs such as 
angiotensin-­converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or Ang II 
receptor antagonists.
Table 32-­5 lists the most common causes of ESRD. In 
the early 1980s, glomerulonephritis in all its various forms 
was believed to be the most common initiating cause of 
ESRD. More recently, diabetes mellitus and hypertension 
have become recognized as the leading causes of ESRD, 
together accounting for more than 70% of all ESRD.
Excessive weight gain (obesity) appears to be the most 
important risk factor for the two main causes of ESRD—
diabetes and hypertension. As discussed in Chapter 79, 
type 2 diabetes, which is closely linked to obesity, accounts 
for more than 90% of all cases of diabetes mellitus. Excess 
weight gain is also a major cause of essential hyperten-
sion, accounting for 65% to 75% of the risk for developing 
hypertension in adults. In addition to causing renal injury 
through diabetes and hypertension, obesity may have 
additive or synergistic effects to worsen renal function in 
patients with pre-­existing kidney disease. 
INJURY TO RENAL BLOOD VESSELS AS A 
CAUSE OF CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
Many types of vascular lesions can lead to renal ischemia 
and death of kidney tissue. The most common of these 
lesions are the following: (1) atherosclerosis of the larger 
renal arteries, with progressive sclerotic constriction of 
the vessels; (2) fibromuscular hyperplasia of one or more 
of the large arteries, which also causes occlusion of the 
vessels; and (3) nephrosclerosis, caused by sclerotic lesions 
of the smaller arteries, arterioles, and glomeruli.
Atherosclerotic or hyperplastic lesions of the large 
arteries frequently affect one kidney more than the 
other and, therefore, cause unilaterally diminished kid-
ney function. As discussed in Chapter 19, hypertension 
often occurs when the artery of one kidney is constricted 
while the artery of the other kidney is still normal, a 
condition analogous to so-­called two-­kidney Goldblatt 
hypertension.
Benign nephrosclerosis, the most common form of kid-
ney disease, is seen to at least some extent in about 70% 
of postmortem examinations in people who die after the 
age of 60 years. This type of vascular lesion occurs in the 
smaller interlobular arteries and in the afferent arterioles 
of the kidney. It is believed to begin with leakage of plasma 
through the intimal membrane of these vessels. This leak-
age causes fibrinoid deposits to develop in the medial lay-
ers of these vessels, followed by progressive thickening of 
the vessel wall that eventually constricts the vessels and, 
in some cases, occludes them. Because there is essentially 
no collateral circulation among the smaller renal arteries, 
occlusion of one or more of them causes destruction of 
a comparable number of nephrons. Therefore, much of 
the kidney tissue becomes replaced by small amounts of 
fibrous tissue. When sclerosis occurs in the glomeruli, the 
injury is referred to as glomerulosclerosis.
Nephrosclerosis and glomerulosclerosis occur to some 
extent in most people after the fourth decade of life, caus-
ing about a 10% decrease in the number of functional 
nephrons for every 10 years after the age of 40 years (Fig-
ure 32-­3). This loss of glomeruli and overall nephron func-
tion is reflected by a progressive decrease in renal blood 
flow and GFR. Even in healthy people without underlying 
hypertension or diabetes, renal plasma flow and GFR may 
decrease by 40% to 50% by the age of 80 years.
The frequency and severity of nephrosclerosis and 
glomerulosclerosis are greatly increased by concurrent 
hypertension or diabetes mellitus. Thus, benign nephro-
sclerosis in association with severe hypertension can lead 
to a rapidly progressing malignant nephrosclerosis. The 
characteristic histological features of malignant nephro-
sclerosis include large amounts of fibrinoid deposits in 
the arterioles and progressive thickening of the vessels, 
with severe ischemia occurring in the affected nephrons. 
For unknown reasons, the incidence of malignant neph-
rosclerosis and severe glomerulosclerosis is significantly 
higher in blacks than in whites of similar ages who have 
similar degrees of severity of hypertension or diabetes. 
INJURY TO THE GLOMERULI AS 
A CAUSE OF CHRONIC KIDNEY 
DISEASE—GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
Chronic glomerulonephritis can be caused by several 
diseases that cause inflammation and damage to the glo-
merular capillary loops of the kidneys. In contrast to the 
acute form of this disease, chronic glomerulonephritis is a 
Table 32-­5    Most Common Causes of End-­Stage Renal 
Disease (ESRD)
Cause
Total No. of Patients  
With ESRD (%)
Diabetes mellitus
45
Hypertension
27
Glomerulonephritis
8
Polycystic kidney disease
2
Other, unknown
18
Glomeruli (×106)
0.5
0.0
1.0
2.0
2.5
1.5
0
20
40
60
80
Age (years)
Figure 32-­3.  Effect of aging on the number of functional glomeruli.
UNIT V  The Body Fluids and Kidneys
428
slowly progressive disease that often leads to irreversible 
renal failure. It may be a primary kidney disease, follow-
ing acute glomerulonephritis, or it may be secondary to 
a systemic disease, such as systemic lupus erythematosus.
In most cases, chronic glomerulonephritis begins with 
accumulation of precipitated antigen-­antibody com-
plexes in the glomerular membrane. In contrast to acute 
glomerulonephritis, streptococcal infections account 
for only a small percentage of patients with the chronic 
form of glomerulonephritis. Accumulation of antigen-­
antibody complex in the glomerular membranes causes 
inflammation, progressive thickening of the membranes, 
and eventual invasion of the glomeruli by fibrous tissue. 
In later stages of the disease, the glomerular capillary 
filtration coefficient becomes greatly reduced because 
of decreased numbers of filtering capillaries in the glo-
merular tufts and because of thickened glomerular mem-
branes. In the final stages of the disease, many glomeruli 
are replaced by fibrous tissue and are unable to filter fluid. 
INJURY TO THE RENAL INTERSTITIUM AS 
A CAUSE OF CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE—
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS
Primary or secondary disease of the renal interstitium is 
referred to as interstitial nephritis. In general, this condi-
tion can result from vascular, glomerular, or tubular dam-
age that destroys individual nephrons, or it can involve 
primary damage to the renal interstitium by poisons, 
drugs, and bacterial infections.
Renal interstitial injury caused by bacterial infection is 
called pyelonephritis. The infection can result from differ-
ent types of bacteria but especially from Escherichia coli, 
which originate from fecal contamination of the urinary 
tract. These bacteria reach the kidneys either by way of 
the blood stream or, more commonly, by ascension from 
the lower urinary tract via the ureters to the kidneys.
Although the normal bladder is able to clear bacteria 
readily, there are two general clinical conditions that may 
interfere with the normal flushing of bacteria from the 
bladder: (1) the inability of the bladder to empty completely, 
leaving residual urine in the bladder; and (2) obstruction of 
urine outflow. With impaired ability to flush bacteria from 
the bladder, the bacteria multiply, and the bladder becomes 
inflamed, a condition termed cystitis. Once cystitis occurs, 
it may remain localized without ascending to the kidney or, 
in some people, bacteria may reach the renal pelvis because 
of a pathological condition in which urine is propelled up 
one or both of the ureters during micturition. This condi-
tion is called vesicoureteral reflux and is due to failure of the 
bladder wall to occlude the ureter during micturition; as a 
result, some of the urine is propelled upward toward the 
kidney, carrying with it bacteria that can reach the renal 
pelvis and renal medulla, where they can initiate infection 
and inflammation associated with pyelonephritis.
Pyelonephritis begins in the renal medulla and there-
fore usually affects the function of the medulla more than 
it affects the cortex, at least in the initial stages. Because 
one of the primary functions of the medulla is to provide 
the countercurrent mechanism for concentrating urine, 
patients with pyelonephritis frequently have markedly 
impaired ability to concentrate the urine.
With long-­standing pyelonephritis, invasion of the 
kidneys by bacteria not only causes damage to the renal 
medulla interstitium but also progressive damage of renal 
tubules, glomeruli, and other structures throughout the 
kidney. Consequently, large parts of functional renal tis-
sue are lost, and CKD can develop. 
NEPHROTIC SYNDROME—EXCRETION OF 
PROTEIN IN THE URINE
Nephrotic syndrome, characterized by the loss of large 
quantities of plasma proteins into the urine, develops in 
many patients with kidney disease. In some cases, this 
syndrome occurs without evidence of other major abnor-
malities of kidney function, but it is usually associated 
with some degree of CKD.
The cause of the protein loss in the urine is usually 
increased permeability of the glomerular membrane. 
Therefore, any disease that increases the permeability of 
this membrane can cause the nephrotic syndrome. Such 
diseases include the following: (1) chronic glomerulonephri-
tis, which affects primarily the glomeruli and often causes 
greatly increased permeability of the glomerular mem-
brane; (2) amyloidosis, which results from deposition of 
an abnormal proteinoid substance in the walls of the blood 
vessels and seriously damages the basement membrane of 
the glomeruli; and (3) minimal-­change nephrotic syndrome, 
which is associated with no major abnormality in the glo-
merular capillary membrane that can be detected with 
light microscopy. As discussed in Chapter 27, minimal-­
change nephropathy has been associated with an abnormal 
immune response and increased T-­cell secretion of cyto-
kines that cause podocyte injury and increased permeabil-
ity to lower molecular weight proteins, such as albumin.
Minimal-­change nephropathy can occur in adults, but 
more frequently it occurs in children between the ages 
of 2 and 6 years. Increased permeability of the glomeru-
lar capillary membrane occasionally allows as much as 
40 grams of plasma protein loss into the urine each day, 
which is an extreme amount for a young child. There-
fore, the child’s plasma protein concentration often falls 
below 2 g/dl, and the colloid osmotic pressure falls from 
a normal value of 28 mm Hg to less than 10 mm Hg. As 
a consequence of this low colloid osmotic pressure in the 
plasma, large amounts of fluid leak from the capillaries 
all over the body into most of the tissues, causing severe 
edema, as discussed in Chapter 25. 
NEPHRON FUNCTION IN CHRONIC KIDNEY 
DISEASE
Loss of Functional Nephrons Requires Surviving 
Nephrons to Excrete More Water and Solutes. It would 
be reasonable to suspect that decreasing the number of 
Chapter 32  Diuretics and Kidney Diseases
	
429
U N I T  V
functional nephrons, which reduces the GFR, would also 
cause major decreases in renal excretion of water and sol-
utes. Yet, patients who have lost up to 75% to 80% of their 
nephrons are able to excrete normal amounts of water 
and electrolytes without serious accumulation of fluid or 
most electrolytes in the body fluids. Further reduction in 
the number of nephrons, however, leads to electrolyte and 
fluid retention, and death usually ensues when the num-
ber of nephrons falls below 5% to 10% of normal.
In contrast to the electrolytes, many of the waste prod-
ucts of metabolism, such as urea and creatinine, accumu-
late almost in proportion to the number of nephrons that 
have been destroyed. The reason for this is that substances 
such as creatinine and urea depend largely on glomerular 
filtration for their excretion, and they are not reabsorbed 
as avidly as the electrolytes. Creatinine, for example, is 
not reabsorbed at all, and the excretion rate is approxi-
mately equal to the rate at which it is filtered (neglecting 
the small amount that is secreted):
Creatinine ﬁltration rate
= GFR × Plasma creatinine concentration
= Creatinine excretion rate
Therefore, if GFR decreases, creatinine excretion rate 
also transiently decreases, causing accumulation of creati-
nine in the body fluids and raising plasma concentration 
until excretion rate of creatinine returns to normal—
the same rate at which creatinine is produced in the 
body (Figure 32-­4). Thus, under steady-­state conditions, 
creatinine excretion rate equals the rate of creatinine pro-
duction, despite reductions in GFR; however, this normal 
rate of creatinine excretion occurs at the expense of an 
elevated plasma creatinine concentration, as shown in 
curve A of Figure 32-­4.
Some solutes, such as phosphate, urate, and hydro-
gen ions, are often maintained near the normal range 
until GFR falls below 20% to 30% of normal. Thereafter, 
the plasma concentrations of these substances rise, but 
not in proportion to the fall in GFR, as shown in curve 
B of Figure 32-­5. Maintenance of relatively constant 
plasma concentrations of these solutes as GFR declines 
is accomplished by excreting progressively larger frac-
tions of the amounts of these solutes that are filtered at 
the glomerular capillaries; this occurs by decreasing the 
rate of tubular reabsorption or, in some cases, by increas-
ing tubular secretion rates.
In the case of sodium and chloride ions, their plasma 
concentrations are maintained virtually constant, even 
with severe decreases in GFR (see curve C of Fig-
ure 32-­5). This maintenance is accomplished by greatly 
decreasing tubular reabsorption of these electrolytes.
For example, with a 75% loss of functional nephrons, 
each surviving nephron must excrete four times as much 
sodium and four times as much volume as under normal 
conditions (Table 32-­6). Part of this adaptation occurs 
because of increased blood flow and increased GFR in 
each of the surviving nephrons due to hypertrophy of the 
Creatinine production and
renal excretion (g/day)
Days 
2
1
0
0
1
2
3
4
Positive balance
Production
Excretion    GFR × PCreatinine
Plasma creatinine
concentration (mg/dl)
2
1
0
GFR (ml/min)
100
50
0
Figure 32-­4.  Effect of reducing the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 
by 50% on the serum creatinine concentration and creatinine excre-
tion rate when the production rate of creatinine remains constant.
Plasma concentration
0
25
50
75
100
Glomerular filtration rate
(percentage of normal)
A 
B 
PO4
        H+
C  Na+, Cl–  
Creatinine
Urea
Figure 32-­5.  Representative patterns of adaptation for different 
types of solutes in chronic renal failure. Curve A shows the approxi-
mate changes in the plasma concentrations of solutes such as creati-
nine and urea that are filtered and poorly reabsorbed. Curve B shows 
the approximate concentrations for solutes such as phosphate, urate, 
and hydrogen ion. Curve C shows the approximate concentrations for 
solutes such as sodium and chloride.
UNIT V  The Body Fluids and Kidneys
430
blood vessels and glomeruli, as well as functional changes 
that cause the blood vessels to dilate. Even with large 
decreases in the total GFR, normal rates of renal excretion 
can still be maintained by decreasing the rate at which the 
tubules reabsorb water and solutes. 
Isosthenuria—Inability of the Kidney to Concen-
trate or Dilute the Urine. One important effect of the 
rapid rate of tubular flow that occurs in the remaining 
nephrons of diseased kidneys is that the renal tubules lose 
their ability to concentrate or dilute the urine fully. The con-
centrating ability of the kidney is impaired mainly because 
of the following: (1) the rapid flow of tubular fluid through 
the collecting ducts prevents adequate water reabsorption; 
and (2) the rapid flow through both the loop of Henle and 
collecting ducts prevents the countercurrent mechanism 
from operating effectively to concentrate the medullary 
interstitial fluid solutes. Therefore, as progressively more 
nephrons are destroyed, the maximum concentrating abil-
ity of the kidney declines, and urine osmolarity and specific 
gravity approach the osmolarity and specific gravity of the 
glomerular filtrate, as shown in Figure 32-­6.
The diluting mechanism in the kidney is also impaired 
when the number of nephrons decreases markedly because 
the rapid flushing of fluid through the loops of Henle and 
high load of solutes such as urea cause a relatively high 
solute concentration in the tubular fluid of this part of the 
nephron. As a consequence, the diluting capacity of the 
kidney is impaired, and the minimal urine osmolality and 
specific gravity approach those of the glomerular filtrate. 
Because the concentrating mechanism becomes impaired 
to a greater extent than the diluting mechanism in CKD, 
an important clinical test of renal function is to determine 
how well the kidneys can concentrate urine when a per-
son’s water intake is restricted for 12 or more hours.
Effects of Renal Failure on the Body Fluids—Uremia
The effect of CKD on the body fluids depends on the fol-
lowing: (1) water and food intake; and (2) the degree of 
impairment of renal function. Assuming that a person 
with complete renal failure continues to ingest the same 
amounts of water and food, the concentrations of differ-
ent substances in the extracellular fluid would change, 
as shown in Figure 32-­7. Important effects include:  
(1) generalized edema resulting from water and salt reten-
tion; (2) acidosis resulting from failure of the kidneys to rid 
the body of normal acidic products; (3) high concentration 
of the nonprotein nitrogens—especially urea, creatinine, and 
uric acid—resulting from failure of the body to excrete the 
metabolic end products of proteins; and (4) high concen-
trations of other substances excreted by the kidney, includ-
ing phenols, sulfates, phosphates, potassium, and guanidine 
bases. This total condition is called uremia because of the 
high concentration of urea in the body fluids.
Water Retention and Development of Edema in Chronic 
Kidney Disease. If water intake is restricted immediately af-
ter acute kidney injury begins, the total body fluid content 
may become only slightly increased. If fluid intake is not lim-
ited, and the patient drinks in response to the normal thirst 
mechanisms, the body fluids begin to increase rapidly.
As long as salt and fluid intake are not excessive, accu-
mulation of fluid in CKD may not be severe until kidney 
function falls to 25% of normal or lower. The reason for 
this, as discussed previously, is that the surviving nephrons 
excrete larger amounts of salt and water. Even the small 
fluid retention that does occur, along with increased secre-
tion of renin and Ang II formation that usually occurs in 
ischemic kidney disease, often causes severe hypertension. 
When kidney function so reduced that dialysis is required 
to preserve life, hypertension almost invariably develops. 
Specific gravity of urine
2,000,000 1,500,000 1,000,000
Isosthenuria
Glomerular filtrate specific gravity
Maximal
Minimal
500,000
0
1.000
1.010
1.020
1.030
1.040
1.050
Number of nephrons in both kidneys
Figure 32-­6.  Development of isosthenuria in a patient with de-
creased numbers of functional nephrons.
Decrease
Increase
3
0
6
Kidney shutdown
Normal
NPN
Water
Phenols
HPO4
=
HCO3
−
SO4
=
K+
H+
Na+
9
12
Days
Figure 32-­7.  Effect of kidney failure on extracellular fluid constitu-
ents. NPN, Nonprotein nitrogens.
Table 32-­6    Total Kidney Excretion and Excretion per 
Nephron in Kidney Disease
Normal
75% Loss of 
Nephrons
Number of nephrons
2,000,000
500,000
Total glomerular filtration 
rate (GFR; ml/min)
125
40
Single-­nephron GFR (nl/min)
62.5
80
Volume excreted for all 
nephrons (ml/min)
1.5
1.5
Volume excreted per nephron 
(nl/min)
0.75
3.0
Chapter 32  Diuretics and Kidney Diseases
	
431
U N I T  V
In many of these patients, severe reduction of salt intake or 
removal of extracellular fluid by dialysis can control the hy-
pertension. Some patients continue to have hypertension, 
even after excess sodium has been removed by dialysis. In 
this group, removal of the ischemic kidneys usually corrects 
the hypertension (as long as fluid retention is prevented by 
dialysis) because it removes the source of excessive renin 
secretion and subsequent increased Ang II formation.
Increase in Urea and Other Nonprotein Nitrogens 
(Azotemia). The nonprotein nitrogens include urea, uric 
acid, creatinine, and a few less important compounds. These 
nonprotein nitrogens, in general, are the end products of pro-
tein metabolism and must be removed from the body to en-
sure continued normal protein metabolism in the cells. The 
concentrations of these nonprotein nitrogens, particularly of 
urea, can rise to as high as 10 times normal during 1 to 2 
weeks of total renal failure. With CKD, the concentrations 
rise approximately in proportion to the degree of reduction 
of GFR. For this reason, measuring the concentrations of 
these substances, especially of urea and creatinine, provides 
an important means for assessing the severity of CKD.
Acidosis in CKD. Each day, the body normally produces 
about 50 to 80 millimoles more metabolic acid than meta-
bolic alkali. Therefore, when the kidneys fail to function, 
acid accumulates in the body fluids. The buffers of the body 
fluids normally can buffer 500 to 1000 millimoles of acid 
without lethal increases in extracellular fluid H+ concentra-
tion, and the phosphate compounds in the bones can buff-
er an additional few thousand millimoles of H+. However, 
when this buffering power is exhausted, the blood pH falls 
drastically, and the patient will become comatose and die if 
the pH falls below about 6.8.
Anemia in Chronic Kidney Disease Caused by De-
creased Erythropoietin Secretion. Anemia almost always 
develops in patients with severe CKD. The most important 
cause of this anemia is decreased renal secretion of eryth-
ropoietin, which stimulates the bone marrow to produce 
red blood cells. If the kidneys are seriously damaged, they 
are unable to form adequate quantities of erythropoietin, 
which leads to diminished red blood cell production and 
consequent anemia.
The availability since 1989 of recombinant erythropoi-
etin, however, has provided a means of treating anemia in 
patients with chronic renal failure.
Osteomalacia in Chronic Kidney Disease Caused by De-
creased Production of Active Vitamin D and by Phosphate 
Retention by the Kidneys. Prolonged CKD also causes 
osteomalacia, a condition in which the bones are partially 
absorbed and, therefore, become greatly weakened. An im-
portant cause of osteomalacia is that vitamin D must be 
converted by a two-­stage process, first in the liver and then 
in the kidneys, into 1,25-­dihydroxycholecalciferol before it 
is able to promote calcium absorption from the intestine. 
Therefore, serious damage to the kidney greatly reduces the 
blood concentration of active vitamin D, which in turn de-
creases intestinal absorption of calcium and availability of 
calcium to the bones.
Another important cause of demineralization of the 
skeleton in CKD is the rise in serum phosphate concen-
tration that occurs as a result of decreased GFR. This rise 
in serum phosphate level increases binding of ­phosphate 
with calcium in the plasma, thus decreasing plasma serum  
ionized calcium concentration, which, in turn, stimulates 
parathyroid hormone secretion. This secondary hyperpar-
athyroidism then stimulates the release of calcium from 
bones, causing further bone demineralization.
Hypertension and Kidney Disease
As discussed earlier in this chapter, hypertension can exacer-
bate injury to the glomeruli and blood vessels of the kidneys 
and is a major cause of ESRD. Abnormalities of kidney func-
tion can also cause hypertension, as discussed in Chapter 19. 
Thus, the relationship between hypertension and kidney dis-
ease can, in some cases, propagate a vicious cycle—primary 
kidney damage leads to increased blood pressure, which  
causes further damage to the kidneys and further increases 
in blood pressure, until ESRD develops.
Not all types of kidney disease cause hypertension be-
cause damage to certain portions of the kidney causes ure-
mia without hypertension. Nevertheless, some types of renal 
damage are particularly prone to cause hypertension. A clas-
sification of kidney disease relative to hypertensive or non-
hypertensive effects is provided in the following sections.
Renal Lesions That Reduce the Ability of the Kidneys to 
Excrete Sodium and Water Promote Hypertension. Renal 
lesions that decrease the ability of the kidneys to excrete 
sodium and water almost invariably cause hypertension. 
Therefore, lesions that decrease GFR or increase tubular 
reabsorption usually lead to hypertension of varying de-
grees. Some specific types of renal abnormalities that can 
cause hypertension are as follows:
	
1.	 Increased renal vascular resistance, which reduces 
renal blood flow and GFR. An example is hyperten-
sion caused by renal artery stenosis.
	
2.	 Decreased glomerular capillary filtration coefficient, 
which reduces GFR. An example is chronic glomer-
ulonephritis, which causes inflammation and thicken-
ing of the glomerular capillary membranes, thereby 
reducing the glomerular capillary filtration coefficient.
	
3.	 Excessive tubular sodium reabsorption. An example 
is hypertension caused by excessive aldosterone se-
cretion, which increases sodium reabsorption main-
ly in the cortical collecting tubules.
Once hypertension has developed, renal excretion of 
sodium and water returns to normal because the high arte-
rial pressure causes pressure natriuresis and pressure diu-
resis, so intake and output of sodium and water become 
balanced once again. Even when there are large increases 
in renal vascular resistance or decreases in the glomerular 
capillary coefficient, GFR may still return to nearly nor-
mal levels after the arterial blood pressure rises. Likewise,  
when tubular reabsorption is increased, as occurs with ex-
cessive aldosterone secretion, the urinary excretion rate is 
initially reduced but then returns to normal as arterial pres-
sure rises. Thus, after hypertension develops, there may be 
no obvious sign of impaired excretion of sodium and water 
other than the hypertension. As explained in Chapter 19, 
normal excretion of sodium and water at an elevated arte-
rial pressure means that pressure natriuresis and pressure 
diuresis have been reset to a higher arterial pressure.
Hypertension Caused by Patchy Renal Damage and 
Increased Renal Secretion of Renin. If one part of the kid-
ney is ischemic, and the remainder is not ischemic, such as 
when one renal artery is severely constricted, the ischemic 
UNIT V  The Body Fluids and Kidneys
432
renal tissue secretes large quantities of renin. This secretion 
leads to increased formation of Ang II, which can cause hy-
pertension. The most likely sequence of events in causing 
this hypertension, as discussed in Chapter 19, is as follows: 
(1) the ischemic kidney tissue excretes less than normal 
amounts of water and salt; (2) the renin secreted by the is-
chemic kidney, as well as the subsequent increased Ang II 
formation, affects the nonischemic kidney tissue, causing it 
also to retain salt and water; and (3) excess salt and water 
cause hypertension in the usual manner.
A similar type of hypertension can result when patchy 
areas of one or both kidneys become ischemic as a result of 
arteriosclerosis or vascular injury in specific portions of the 
kidneys. When this occurs, the ischemic nephrons excrete 
less salt and water but secrete greater amounts of renin, 
which causes increased Ang II formation. The high levels of 
Ang II then impair the ability of the surrounding, otherwise 
normal nephrons to excrete sodium and water. As a result, 
hypertension develops, which restores the overall excretion 
of sodium and water by the kidney, so balance between in-
take and output of salt and water is maintained, but at the 
expense of high blood pressure.
Kidney Diseases That Cause Loss of Entire Nephrons 
Lead to Chronic Kidney Disease but May Not Cause 
Hypertension
Loss of large numbers of whole nephrons, such as occurs 
with the loss of one kidney and part of another kidney, al-
most always leads to CKD if the loss of kidney tissue is great 
enough. If the remaining nephrons are normal, and salt in-
take is not excessive, this condition might not cause clini-
cally significant hypertension. This is because even a slight 
rise in blood pressure will raise GFR and decrease tubular 
sodium reabsorption in the surviving nephrons sufficiently 
to promote enough water and salt excretion in the urine, 
even with the few nephrons that remain intact. However, a 
patient with this type of abnormality may become severely 
hypertensive if additional stresses are imposed, such as eat-
ing a large amount of salt. In this case, the kidneys simply 
cannot clear adequate quantities of salt at a normal blood 
pressure with the small number of functioning nephrons 
that remain. Increased blood pressure restores excretion 
of salt and water to match intake of salt and water under 
steady-­state conditions.
Effective treatment of hypertension requires enhancing 
the kidneys’ capability to excrete salt and water by increas-
ing GFR or by decreasing tubular reabsorption, so that bal-
ance between intake and renal excretion of salt and water 
excretion can be maintained at a lower blood pressure. 
This effect can be achieved by drugs that block the effects 
of nervous and hormonal signals that cause the kidneys 
to retain salt and water (e.g., with β-­adrenergic blockers, 
Ang II receptor antagonists, or ACE inhibitors), with drugs 
that vasodilate the kidneys and increase GFR (e.g., calcium 
channel blockers), or with diuretic drugs that directly in-
hibit renal tubular reabsorption of salt and water.
Specific Tubular Disorders
In Chapter 28, we discussed several mechanisms responsi-
ble for transporting different individual substances across 
the tubular epithelial membranes. In Chapter 3, we also 
pointed out that each cellular enzyme and each carrier 
protein is formed in response to a respective gene in the 
nucleus. If any required gene happens to be absent or ab-
normal, the tubules may be deficient in one of the appropri-
ate carrier proteins or one of the enzymes needed for solute 
transport by the renal tubular epithelial cells. In other cas-
es, too much of the enzyme or carrier protein is produced. 
Thus, many hereditary tubular disorders occur because of 
abnormal transport of individual substances or groups of 
substances through the tubular membrane. In addition, 
damage to the tubular epithelial membrane by toxins or is-
chemia can cause important renal tubular disorders.
Renal Glycosuria—Failure of the Kidneys to Reabsorb 
Glucose. In renal glycosuria, the blood glucose concentra-
tion may be normal, but the transport mechanism for tu-
bular reabsorption of glucose is greatly limited or absent. 
Consequently, despite a normal blood glucose level, large 
amounts of glucose pass into the urine each day. Because 
diabetes mellitus is also associated with the presence of 
glucose in the urine, renal glycosuria, which is a relatively 
benign condition, must be ruled out before making the di-
agnosis of diabetes mellitus.
Aminoaciduria—Failure of the Kidneys to Reabsorb 
Amino Acids. Some amino acids share mutual transport sys-
tems for reabsorption, whereas other amino acids have their 
own distinct transport systems. Rarely, a condition called 
generalized aminoaciduria results from deficient reabsorp-
tion of all amino acids. More frequently, deficiencies of spe-
cific carrier systems may result in the following: (1) essential 
cystinuria, in which large amounts of cystine fail to be reab-
sorbed and often crystallize in the urine to form renal stones; 
(2) simple glycinuria, in which glycine fails to be reabsorbed; 
or (3) beta-­aminoisobutyricaciduria, which occurs in about 
5% of the population but apparently has no major clinical sig-
nificance.
Renal Hypophosphatemia—Failure of the Kidneys to 
Reabsorb Phosphate. In renal hypophosphatemia, the renal 
tubules fail to reabsorb large enough phosphate ions when 
the phosphate concentration of the body fluids falls very 
low. This condition usually does not cause serious immedi-
ate abnormalities because the phosphate concentration of 
the extracellular fluid can vary widely without causing ma-
jor cellular dysfunction. Over a long period, however, a low 
phosphate level causes diminished calcification of the bones, 
causing rickets to develop. This type of rickets is refractory 
to vitamin D therapy, in contrast to the rapid response of the 
usual type of rickets, as discussed in Chapter 80.
Renal Tubular Acidosis—Reduced Tubular Secretion of 
Hydrogen Ions. In renal tubular acidosis, the renal tubules 
are unable to secrete adequate amounts of hydrogen ions. As 
a result, large amounts of sodium bicarbonate are continually 
lost in the urine. This loss causes a continued state of meta-
bolic acidosis, as discussed in Chapter 31. This type of renal 
abnormality can be caused by hereditary disorders or can oc-
cur as a result of widespread injury to the renal tubules.
Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus—Failure of the Kid-
neys to Respond to Antidiuretic Hormone. Occasionally, 
the renal tubules do not respond to antidiuretic hormone, 
causing large quantities of dilute urine to be excreted. As 
long as the person is supplied with plenty of water, this 
condition seldom causes severe difficulty. However, when 
adequate quantities of water are not available, the person 
rapidly becomes dehydrated.
Chapter 32  Diuretics and Kidney Diseases
	
433
U N I T  V
Fanconi Syndrome—Generalized Reabsorptive Defect 
of the Renal Tubules. Fanconi syndrome is usually associ-
ated with increased urinary excretion of virtually all amino 
acids, glucose, and phosphate. In severe cases, other mani-
festations are also observed, such as (1) failure to reabsorb 
sodium bicarbonate, which results in metabolic acidosis; 
(2) increased excretion of potassium and sometimes cal-
cium; and (3) nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
There are multiple causes of Fanconi syndrome, which re-
sults from a generalized inability of the renal tubular cells to 
transport various substances. Some of these include the follow-
ing: (1) hereditary defects in cell transport mechanisms; (2) tox-
ins or drugs that injure the renal tubular epithelial cells; and (3) 
injury to the renal tubular cells as a result of ischemia. The prox-
imal tubular cells are especially affected in Fanconi syndrome 
caused by tubular injury because these cells reabsorb and se-
crete many of the drugs and toxins that can cause damage.
Bartter Syndrome—Decreased Sodium, Chloride, and 
Potassium Reabsorption in the Loops of Henle. Bartter 
syndrome is a rare group of kidney disorders caused by mu-
tations that impair function of the 1-­sodium, 2-­chloride, 
1-­potassium co-­transporter or by defects in potassium 
channels in the luminal membrane or chloride channels in 
the basolateral membrane of the thick ascending loop of 
Henle. At least five mutations, usually inherited in an auto-
somal recessive manner, have been found to cause Bartter 
syndrome. These disorders result in increased excretion of 
water, sodium, chloride, potassium, and calcium by the kid-
neys. The salt and water loss leads to mild volume depletion, 
resulting in activation of the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone 
system (RAAS). The increased aldosterone and high distal 
tubular flow, due to impaired loop of Henle reabsorption, 
stimulate potassium and hydrogen secretion in the collect-
ing tubules, leading to hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis.
Gitelman Syndrome—Decreased Sodium Chloride Re-
absorption in the Distal Tubules. Gitelman syndrome is an 
autosomal-­recessive disorder of the thiazide-­sensitive sodium-­
chloride co-­transporter in the distal tubules. Patients with 
Gitelman syndrome have some of the same characteristics as 
patients with Bartter syndrome—salt and water loss, mild wa-
ter volume depletion, and activation of the renin-­angiotensin-­
aldosterone system—although these abnormalities are usually 
less severe in persons with Gitelman syndrome.
Because the tubular defects in Bartter or Gitelman syn-
drome cannot currently be corrected, treatment is usually 
focused on replacing the losses of sodium chloride and 
potassium. Some studies have suggested that blockade of 
prostaglandin synthesis with nonsteroidal antiinflamma-
tory drugs (NSAIDs) and administration of aldosterone 
antagonists, such as spironolactone, may be useful in cor-
recting the hypokalemia.
Liddle Syndrome—Increased Sodium Reabsorption. 
Liddle syndrome is a rare autosomal-­dominant disorder re-
sulting from various mutations in the amiloride-­sensitive 
epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) in the distal and collect-
ing tubules. These mutations cause excessive activity of 
ENaC, resulting in increased reabsorption of sodium and 
water, hypertension, and metabolic alkalosis similar to the 
changes that occur with oversecretion of aldosterone (pri-
mary aldosteronism).
Patients with Liddle syndrome, however, have sodium 
retention and decreased renin secretion and Ang II levels, 
which, in turn, decrease adrenal secretion of aldosterone. 
Fortunately, Liddle syndrome can be treated with the diu-
retic amiloride, which blocks the excessive ENaC activity.
Treatment of Renal Failure by Transplantation or 
Dialysis With an Artificial Kidney
Severe loss of kidney function, acutely or chronically, is 
life-­threatening and requires removal of toxic waste prod-
ucts and restoration of body fluid volume and composi-
tion toward normal. This can be accomplished by kidney 
transplantation or by dialysis with an artificial kidney. Over 
700,000 patients in the United States are currently receiv-
ing some form of ESRD therapy.
Successful transplantation of a single donor kidney to 
a patient with ESRD can restore kidney function to a level 
sufficient to maintain essentially normal homeostasis of 
body fluids and electrolytes. Approximately 19,000 kidney 
transplantations are performed each year in the United 
States, but over 100,000 patients await kidney transplan-
tation. Patients who receive kidney transplants typically 
live longer and have fewer health problems than those who 
are maintained with dialysis. Maintenance of immunosup-
pressive therapy is required for almost all patients to help 
prevent acute rejection and loss of the transplanted kidney. 
The side effects of drugs that suppress the immune system 
include increased risk for infections and some cancers, 
although the amount of immunosuppressive therapy can 
usually be reduced over time to reduce these risks greatly.
Over 475,000 people in the United States who have ir-
reversible renal failure or total kidney removal are being 
maintained chronically by dialysis with artificial kidneys. 
Dialysis is also used in certain types of AKI to tide the 
patient over until the kidneys resume their function. If 
the loss of kidney function is irreversible, it is necessary 
to perform dialysis chronically to maintain life. Because 
dialysis cannot maintain completely normal body fluid 
composition and cannot replace all the multiple functions 
performed by the kidneys, the health of patients main-
tained with the use of artificial kidneys usually remains 
significantly impaired.
Basic Principles of Dialysis
The basic principle of the artificial kidney is to pass blood 
through minute blood channels bounded by a thin membrane. 
On the other side of the membrane is a dialyzing fluid into 
which unwanted substances in the blood pass by diffusion.
Figure 32-­8 shows the components of one type of arti-
ficial kidney in which blood flows continually between two 
thin membranes of cellophane; outside the membrane is a 
dialyzing fluid. The cellophane is porous enough to allow 
the constituents of the plasma, except the plasma proteins, 
to diffuse in both directions—from plasma into the dialyz-
ing fluid or from the dialyzing fluid back into the plasma. 
If the concentration of a substance is higher in the plasma 
than in the dialyzing fluid, there will be a net transfer of the 
substance from the plasma into the dialyzing fluid.
The rate of movement of solute across the dialyzing 
membrane depends on the following: (1) the concentration 
gradient of the solute between the two solutions; (2) the 
permeability of the membrane to the solute; (3) the surface 
area of the membrane; and (4) the length of time that the 
blood and fluid remain in contact with the membrane.
UNIT V  The Body Fluids and Kidneys
434
Thus, the maximum rate of solute transfer occurs ini-
tially when the concentration gradient is greatest (when 
dialysis is begun) and slows down as the concentration 
gradient is dissipated. In a flowing system, as is the case 
with hemodialysis, in which blood and dialysate fluid flow 
through the artificial kidney, the dissipation of the concen-
tration gradient can be reduced, and diffusion of solute 
across the membrane can be optimized, by increasing the 
flow rate of the blood, dialyzing fluid, or both.
In normal operation of the artificial kidney, blood flows 
continually or intermittently back into the vein. The total 
amount of blood in the artificial kidney at any one time is 
usually less than 500 milliliters, the rate of flow may be sev-
eral hundred milliliters per minute, and the total diffusion 
surface area is between 0.6 and 2.5 m2. To prevent coagula-
tion of the blood in the artificial kidney, a small amount of 
heparin is infused into the blood as it enters the artificial 
kidney. In addition to the diffusion of solutes, mass trans-
fer of solutes and water can be produced by applying a hy-
drostatic pressure to force the fluid and solutes across the 
membranes of the dialyzer; this type of filtration is called 
bulk flow or hemofiltration.
Dialyzing Fluid
Table 32-­7 compares the constituents in a typical dialyz-
ing fluid with those in normal plasma and uremic plasma. 
Note that the concentrations of ions and other substances 
in dialyzing fluid are not the same as the concentrations in 
normal plasma or in uremic plasma. Instead, they are ad-
justed to levels needed to cause the appropriate movement 
of water and solutes through the membrane during dialysis.
Note that there is no phosphate, urea, urate, sulfate, or 
creatinine in the dialyzing fluid; however, these substances 
are present in high concentrations in the uremic blood. 
Therefore, when a uremic patient undergoes dialysis, these 
substances are lost in large quantities into the dialyzing fluid.
The effectiveness of the artificial kidney can be ex-
pressed in terms of the amount of plasma that is cleared 
of different substances each minute, which, as discussed in 
Chapter 28, is the primary means for expressing the func-
tional effectiveness of the kidneys themselves to rid the 
body of unwanted substances. Most artificial kidneys can 
clear urea from the plasma at a rate of 100 to 225 ml/min, 
which shows that at least for the excretion of urea, the arti-
ficial kidney can function about twice as rapidly as two nor-
mal kidneys together, whose urea clearance is only 70 ml/
min. Yet, the artificial kidney is used only for 4 to 6 hours/
day, three times a week. Therefore, the overall plasma clear-
ance is still considerably limited when the artificial kidney 
replaces the normal kidneys. Also, it is important to keep 
in mind that the artificial kidney cannot replace some of the 
other functions of the kidneys, such as secretion of eryth-
ropoietin, which is necessary for red blood cell production.
Bibliography
Anders HJ, Huber TB, Isermann B, Schiffer M: CKD in diabetes: dia-
betic kidney disease versus nondiabetic kidney disease. Nat Rev 
Nephrol 14:361, 2018.
Cornec-­Le Gall E, Alam A, Perrone RD: Autosomal dominant polycys-
tic kidney disease. Lancet 393:919, 2019.
Docherty MH, O’Sullivan ED, Bonventre JV, Ferenbach DA: Cellular 
senescence in the kidney. J Am Soc Nephrol 30:726, 2019.
Table 32-­7    Comparison of Dialyzing Fluid With Normal 
and Uremic Plasma
Constituent
Normal 
Plasma
Dialyzing 
Fluid
Uremic 
Plasma
Electrolytes (mEq/L)
Na+
142
133
142
K+
5
1.0
7
Ca2+
3
3.0
2
Mg2+
1.5
1.5
1.5
Cl−
107
105
107
HCO3−
24
35.7
14
Lactate−
1.2
1.2
1.2
HPO42−
3
0
9
Urate−
0.3
0
2
Sulfate=
0.5
0
3
Nonelectrolytes
Glucose
100
125
100
Urea
26
0
200
Creatinine
1
0
6
Bubble
trap
Fresh dialyzing
solution
Used dialyzing
solution
Constant
temperature
bath
Semipermeable
membrane
Flowing
dialysate
Flowing
blood
Dialyzer
Blood in
Blood out
Dialysate
in
Dialysate
out
Waste
products
Water
Figure 32-­8.  Principles of dialysis with an artificial kidney.
Chapter 32  Diuretics and Kidney Diseases
	
435
U N I T  V
Ellison DH, Felker GM: Diuretic treatment in heart failure. N Engl J 
Med 377:1964, 2017.
Ernst ME, Moser M: Use of diuretics in patients with hypertension. N 
Engl J Med 361:2153, 2009.
Gonzalez-­Vicente A, Saez F, Monzon CM, Asirwatham J, Garvin JL: 
Thick ascending limb sodium transport in the pathogenesis of hy-
pertension. Physiol Rev 99:235, 2019.
Griffin KA: Hypertensive kidney injury and the progression of chronic 
kidney disease. Hypertension 70:687, 2017.
Hall JE, do Carmo JM, da Silva AA, Wang Z, Hall ME: Obesity, kidney 
dysfunction and hypertension: mechanistic links. Nature Reviews 
Nephrology 15:367, 2019.
Hall JE, Granger JP, do Carmo JM, da Silva AA, et al: Hypertension: 
physiology and pathophysiology. Compr Physiol 2:2393, 2012.
Hall ME, do Carmo JM, da Silva AA, et al: Obesity, hypertension, and 
chronic kidney disease. Int J Nephrol Renovasc Dis 7:75, 2014.
Hommos MS, Glassock RJ, Rule AD: structural and functional 
changes in human kidneys with healthy aging. J Am Soc Nephrol 
28:2838, 2017.
Hoste EAJ, Kellum JA, Selby NM, Zarbock A, et al: Global epidemiology 
and outcomes of acute kidney injury. Nat Rev Nephrol 14:607, 2018.
Jourde-­Chiche N, Fakhouri F, Dou L, Bellien J, et  al: Endothelium 
structure and function in kidney health and disease. Nat Rev Neph-
rol 15:87, 2019.
Kellum JA, Prowle JR: Paradigms of acute kidney injury in the inten-
sive care setting. Nat Rev Nephrol 14:217, 2018.
Kumar S: Cellular and molecular pathways of renal repair after acute 
kidney injury. Kidney Int 93:27, 2018.
Mattson DL: Immune mechanisms of salt-­sensitive hypertension and 
renal end-­organ damage. Nat Rev Nephrol 15:290, 2019.
Romagnani P, Remuzzi G, Glassock R, Levin A, et al: Chronic kidney 
disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2017 Nov 23;3:17088. doi: 10.1038/
nrdp.2017.88
Rossier BC, Baker ME, Studer RA: Epithelial sodium transport and its 
control by aldosterone: the story of our internal environment revis-
ited. Physiol Rev 95:297, 2015.
Sethi S, Fervenza FC: Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis—a 
new look at an old entity. N Engl J Med 366:1119, 2012.
Smith RJH, Appel GB, Blom AM, Cook HT, et al: C3 glomerulopathy -­ 
understanding a rare complement-­driven renal disease. Nat Rev 
Nephrol 15:129, 2019. 
Thomas MC, Cooper ME, Zimmet P: Changing epidemiology of type 
2 diabetes mellitus and associated chronic kidney disease. Nat Rev 
Nephrol 12:73, 2016.
Tolwani A: Continuous renal-­replacement therapy for acute kidney 
injury. N Engl J Med 367:2505, 2012. 
USRDS Coordinating Center. United States Renal Data System. 
http://www.usrds.org/.
Vivarelli M, Massella L, Ruggiero B, Emma F: Minimal change disease. 
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 12:332, 2017.
U N I T  V I
	
439
In this chapter, we begin discussing the blood cells and 
cells of the macrophage system and lymphatic system. 
We first present the functions of red blood cells (RBCs), 
which are the most abundant cells of the blood and are 
necessary for the delivery of oxygen to the tissues.
RED BLOOD CELLS (ERYTHROCYTES)
A major function of RBCs, also known as erythrocytes, is 
to transport hemoglobin, which, in turn, carries oxygen 
from the lungs to the tissues. In some animals, including 
many invertebrates, hemoglobin circulates as free pro-
tein in the circulatory fluids and is not enclosed in RBCs. 
When it is free in human plasma, about 3% of it leaks 
through the capillary membrane into the tissue spaces or 
through the glomerular membrane of the kidney into the 
glomerular filtrate each time the blood passes through 
the capillaries. Therefore, hemoglobin must remain inside 
RBCs to perform its functions in humans effectively.
The RBCs have other functions besides transport of 
hemoglobin. For example, they contain a large quantity of 
carbonic anhydrase, an enzyme that catalyzes the revers-
ible reaction between carbon dioxide (CO2) and water to 
form carbonic acid (H2CO3), increasing the rate of this 
reaction several thousandfold. The rapidity of this reaction 
makes it possible for the water of the blood to transport 
enormous quantities of CO2 in the form of bicarbonate 
ion (HCO3−) from the tissues to the lungs, where it is 
reconverted to CO2 and expelled into the atmosphere as 
a body waste product. The hemoglobin in the cells is an 
excellent acid-­base buffer (as is true of most proteins), so 
the RBCs are responsible for most of the acid-­base buffer-
ing power of whole blood.
Shape and Size of Red Blood Cells. Normal RBCs, 
shown in Figure 33-­3, are biconcave discs having a mean 
diameter of about 7.8 micrometers and a thickness of 2.5 
micrometers at the thickest point and 1 micrometer or 
less in the center. The average volume of the RBC is 90 to 
95 cubic micrometers.
The shapes of RBCs can change remarkably as the cells 
squeeze through capillaries. Actually, the RBC resem-
bles a bag that can be deformed into almost any shape. 
Furthermore, because the normal cell has a great excess of 
cell membrane for the quantity of material inside, defor-
mation does not stretch the membrane greatly and, con-
sequently, does not rupture the cell, as would be the case 
with many other cells. 
Concentration of Red Blood Cells in the Blood. In 
healthy men, the average number of RBCs per cubic mil-
limeter is 5,200,000 (±300,000); in healthy women, it is 
4,700,000 (±300,000). Persons living at high altitudes have 
greater numbers of RBCs, as discussed later. 
Quantity of Hemoglobin in the Cells. RBCs can con-
centrate hemoglobin in the cell fluid up to about 34 
g/100 ml of cells. The concentration does not rise above 
this value because this is the metabolic limit of the cell’s 
hemoglobin-­forming mechanism. Furthermore, in nor-
mal people, the percentage of hemoglobin is almost al-
ways near the maximum in each cell. However, when 
hemoglobin formation is deficient, the percentage of 
hemoglobin in the cells may fall considerably below this 
value, and the volume of the RBC may also decrease be-
cause of diminished hemoglobin to fill the cell.
When the hematocrit (the percentage of blood that is 
comprised of cells—normally, 40% to 45%) and the quan-
tity of hemoglobin in each respective cell are normal, the 
whole blood of men contains an average of 15 g hemo-
globin/100 ml; for women, it contains an average of 14 g 
hemoglobin/100 ml.
As discussed in connection with blood transport of 
oxygen in Chapter 41, each gram of hemoglobin can com-
bine with 1.34 ml of oxygen if the hemoglobin is 100% 
saturated. Therefore, in the average man, a maximum of 
about 20 milliliters of oxygen can be carried in combina-
tion with hemoglobin in each 100 milliliters of blood, and 
in woman 19 milliliters of oxygen can be carried. 
PRODUCTION OF RED BLOOD CELLS
Areas of the Body That Produce Red Blood Cells. In 
the early weeks of embryonic life, primitive nucleated 
RBCs are produced in the yolk sac. During the middle tri-
mester of gestation, the liver is the main organ for RBC 
production but reasonable numbers are also produced in 
Red Blood Cells, Anemia, and 
Polycythemia
C H A P T E R  3 3
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
440
the spleen and lymph nodes. Then, during the last month 
or so of gestation and after birth, RBCs are produced ex-
clusively in the bone marrow.
As illustrated in Figure 33-­1, the marrow of essentially 
all bones produces RBCs until a person is about 5 years 
old. The marrow of the long bones, except for the proxi-
mal portions of the humeri and tibiae, becomes fatty and 
produces no more RBCs after about the age of 20 years. 
Beyond this age, most RBCs continue to be produced in 
the marrow of the membranous bones, such as the ver-
tebrae, sternum, ribs, and ilia. Even in these bones, the 
marrow becomes less productive as age increases. 
Genesis of Blood Cells
Multipotential Hematopoietic Stem Cells, Growth In-
ducers, and Differentiation Inducers. The blood cells 
begin their lives in the bone marrow from a single type of 
cell called the multipotential hematopoietic stem cell, from 
which all the cells of the circulating blood are eventually 
derived. Figure 33-­2 shows the successive divisions of the 
multipotential cells to form the different circulating blood 
cells. As these cells reproduce, a small portion of them 
remains exactly like the original multipotential cells and 
is retained in the bone marrow to maintain their supply, 
although their numbers diminish with age. Most of the re-
produced cells, however, differentiate to form the other cell 
types, shown at the right in Figure 33-­2. The intermediate-­
stage cells are very much like the multipotential stem cells, 
even though they have already become committed to a par-
ticular line of cells; these are called committed stem cells.
The different committed stem cells, when grown in cul-
ture, will produce colonies of specific types of blood cells. 
A committed stem cell that produces erythrocytes is called 
a colony-­forming unit–erythrocyte, and the abbreviation 
CFU-­E is used to designate this type of stem cell. Likewise, 
colony-­forming units that form granulocytes and mono-
cytes have the designation CFU-­GM, and so forth.
Growth and reproduction of the different stem cells 
are controlled by multiple proteins called growth inducers. 
0
25
50
75
100
Cellularity (percent)
0
5 10 15 20
30
40
50
60
70
Age (years)
Rib
Tib
ia
 (sh
a
ft)
 
Femu
r
 
(
s
h
a
f
t)
 
Sternum 
Vertebra 
Figure 33-­1.  Relative rates of red blood cell production in the bone 
marrow of different bones at different ages.
Figure 33-­2.  Formation of the mul-
tiple different blood cells from the 
original multipotent hematopoietic 
stem cell in the bone marrow.
MHSC
(Multipotent
hematopoietic
stem cell)
MHSC 
CFU-S
(Colony-forming
unit–spleen)
CFU-B
(Colony-forming
unit–blast)
CFU-E
(Colony-forming
unit–erythrocytes)
CFU-GM
(Colony-forming unit–
granulocytes, monocytes)
CFU-M
(Colony-forming unit–
megakaryocytes)
LSC
(Lymphoid stem cell)
B lymphocytes
T lymphocytes
Megakaryocytes
Macrocytes
Granulocytes
Erythrocytes
Monocytes
(Neutrophils)
(Eosinophils)
(Basophils)
Platelets
Chapter 33  Red Blood Cells, Anemia, and Polycythemia
	
441
U N I T  V I
At least four major growth inducers have been described, 
each having different characteristics. One of these, 
interleukin-­3, promotes growth and reproduction of 
virtually all the different types of committed stem cells, 
whereas the others induce growth of only specific types 
of cells.
The growth inducers promote growth but not differen-
tiation of the cells, which is the function of another set of 
proteins called differentiation inducers. Each of these dif-
ferentiation inducers causes one type of committed stem 
cell to differentiate one or more steps toward a final 
adult blood cell.
Formation of the growth inducers and differentiation 
inducers is controlled by factors outside the bone marrow. 
For example, in the case of RBCs, exposure of the blood 
to a low oxygen level for a long time causes growth induc-
tion, differentiation, and production of greatly increased 
numbers of RBCs, as discussed later in this chapter. In the 
case of some of the white blood cells, infectious diseases 
cause growth, differentiation, and eventual formation of 
specific types of white blood cells that are needed to com-
bat each infection. 
Stages of Differentiation of Red Blood 
Cells
The first cell that can be identified as belonging to the RBC 
series is the proerythroblast, shown at the starting point in 
Figure 33-­3. Under appropriate stimulation, large num-
bers of these cells are formed from the CFU-­E stem cells.
Once the proerythroblast has been formed, it divides 
multiple times, eventually forming many mature RBCs. 
The first-­generation cells are called basophil erythroblasts 
because they stain with basic dyes. Hemoglobin first 
appears in polychromatophil erythroblasts. In the suc-
ceeding generations, as shown in Figure 33-­3, the cells 
become filled with hemoglobin to a concentration of 
about 34%, the nucleus condenses to a small size, and its 
final remnant is absorbed or extruded from the cell. At the 
same time, the endoplasmic reticulum is also reabsorbed. 
The cell at this stage is called a reticulocyte because it still 
contains a small amount of basophilic material, consisting 
of remnants of the Golgi apparatus, mitochondria, and a 
few other cytoplasmic organelles. During this reticulocyte 
stage, the cells pass from the bone marrow into the blood 
capillaries by diapedesis (squeezing through the pores of 
the capillary membrane).
The remaining basophilic material in the reticulocyte 
normally disappears within 1 to 2 days, and the cell is 
then a mature erythrocyte. Because of the short life of the 
reticulocytes, their concentration among all the RBCs is 
normally slightly less than 1%. 
Erythropoietin Regulates Red Blood Cell 
Production
The total mass of RBCs in the circulatory system is reg-
ulated within narrow limits, and thus (1) an adequate 
number of RBCs are always available to provide suffi-
cient transport of oxygen from the lungs to the tissues, 
yet (2) the cells do not become so numerous that they 
impede blood flow. This control mechanism is dia-
grammed in Figure 33-­4 and is described in the follow-
ing sections.
Proerythroblast
Basophil
erythroblast
Microcytic,
hypochromic anemia
Megaloblastic anemia
Erythroblastosis fetalis
Sickle cell anemia
Polychromatophil
erythroblast
Orthochromatic
erythroblast
Reticulocyte
Erythrocytes
Genesis of RBCs
Figure 33-­3.  Genesis of normal red blood cells (RBCs) and characteristics of RBCs in different types of anemias.
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
442
Tissue Oxygenation—Essential Regulator of Red 
Blood Cell Production. Conditions that decrease the 
quantity of oxygen transported to the tissues ordinarily 
increase the rate of RBC production. Thus, when a per-
son becomes extremely anemic as a result of hemorrhage 
or any other condition, the bone marrow begins to pro-
duce large quantities of RBCs. Also, destruction of major 
portions of the bone marrow, especially by x-­ray therapy, 
causes hyperplasia of the remaining bone marrow in an 
attempt to supply the body’s need for RBCs.
At very high altitudes, where the quantity of oxy-
gen in the air is greatly decreased, insufficient oxygen is 
transported to the tissues, and RBC production is greatly 
increased. In this case, it is not the concentration of 
RBCs in the blood that controls RBC production but the 
amount of oxygen transported to the tissues in relation to 
tissue demand for oxygen.
Various diseases of the circulation that decrease tissue 
blood flow, particularly those that cause failure of oxygen 
absorption by the blood as it passes through the lungs, 
can also increase the rate of RBC production. This result 
is especially apparent in prolonged cardiac failure and in 
many lung diseases because the tissue hypoxia resulting 
from these conditions increases RBC production, with a 
resultant increase in hematocrit and, usually, total blood 
volume. 
Hypoxia Increases Formation of Erythropoietin Which 
Stimulates Red Blood Cell Production. The principal 
stimulus for RBC production in a low oxygen state is a 
circulating hormone called erythropoietin, a glycoprotein 
with a molecular weight of about 34,000. In the absence 
of erythropoietin, hypoxia has little or no effect to stimu-
late RBC production. However, when the erythropoietin 
system is functional, hypoxia causes a marked increase 
in erythropoietin production and the erythropoietin, in 
turn, enhances RBC production until the hypoxia is re-
lieved. 
Erythropoietin Is Formed Mainly in the Kidneys. Nor-
mally, about 90% of all erythropoietin is formed in the kid-
neys, and the remainder is formed mainly in the liver. It is 
not known exactly where in the kidneys the erythropoietin is 
formed. Some studies have suggested that erythropoietin is 
secreted mainly by fibroblast-­like interstitial cells surround-
ing the tubules in the cortex and outer medulla, where much 
of the kidney’s oxygen consumption occurs. It is likely that 
other cells, including the renal epithelial cells, also secrete 
erythropoietin in response to hypoxia.
Renal tissue hypoxia leads to increased tissue lev-
els of hypoxia-­inducible factor-­1 (HIF-­1), which serves 
as a transcription factor for a large number of hypoxia-­
inducible genes, including the erythropoietin gene. HIF-­1 
binds to a hypoxia response element in the erythropoietin 
gene, inducing transcription of messenger RNA and, ulti-
mately, increased erythropoietin synthesis.
At times, hypoxia in other parts of the body, but not in 
the kidneys, stimulates kidney erythropoietin secretion, 
which suggests that there might be some nonrenal sensor 
that sends an additional signal to the kidneys to produce 
this hormone. In particular, norepinephrine and epineph-
rine and several of the prostaglandins stimulate erythro-
poietin production.
When both kidneys are removed from a person, or 
when the kidneys are destroyed by renal disease, the per-
son invariably becomes very anemic. This is because the 
10% of the normal erythropoietin formed in other tissues 
(mainly in the liver) is sufficient to cause only one third to 
half the RBC formation needed by the body. 
Erythropoietin Stimulates Production of Proeryth-
roblasts From Hematopoietic Stem Cells. When an 
animal or person is placed in an atmosphere of low oxy-
gen, erythropoietin begins to be formed within minutes 
to hours, and it reaches maximum production within 
24 hours. Yet, almost no new RBCs appear in the cir-
culating blood until about 5 days later. From this, as 
well as from other studies, it has been determined that 
the important effect of erythropoietin is to stimulate 
production of proerythroblasts from hematopoietic 
stem cells in the bone marrow. In addition, once the 
proerythroblasts are formed, the erythropoietin causes 
these cells to pass more rapidly through the different 
erythroblastic stages than they normally do, further 
speeding up the production of new RBCs. The rapid 
production of cells continues as long as the person re-
mains in a low oxygen state or until enough RBCs have 
been produced to carry adequate amounts of oxygen 
to the tissues despite the low level of oxygen; at this 
time, the rate of erythropoietin production decreases to 
a level that will maintain the required number of RBCs 
but not an excess.
Tissue oxygenation
Red blood cells
Proerythroblasts
Hematopoietic stem cells
Decreases
Kidney
Decreases
Factors that decrease
oxygenation
1. Low blood volume
2. Anemia
3. Low hemoglobin
4. Poor blood flow
5. Pulmonary disease
Erythropoietin
Figure 33-­4.  Function of the erythropoietin mechanism to increase 
production of red blood cells when tissue oxygenation decreases.
Chapter 33  Red Blood Cells, Anemia, and Polycythemia
	
443
U N I T  V I
In the absence of erythropoietin, few RBCs are formed 
by the bone marrow. At the other extreme, when large 
quantities of erythropoietin are formed, and if plenty of 
iron and other required nutrients are available, the rate 
of RBC production can rise to perhaps 10 or more times 
normal. Therefore, the erythropoietin mechanism for 
controlling RBC production is a powerful one. 
Maturation of Red Blood Cells Requires 
Vitamin B12 (Cyanocobalamin) and Folic 
Acid
Because of the continuing need to replenish RBCs, the 
erythropoietic cells of the bone marrow are among the 
most rapidly growing and reproducing cells in the entire 
body. Therefore, as would be expected, their maturation 
and rate of production are affected greatly by a person’s 
nutritional status.
Especially important for final maturation of the RBCs 
are two vitamins, vitamin B12 and folic acid. Both these 
vitamins are essential for synthesis of DNA because each, 
in a different way, is required for formation of thymi-
dine triphosphate, one of the essential building blocks of 
DNA. Therefore, lack of vitamin B12 or folic acid causes 
abnormal and diminished DNA and, consequently, fail-
ure of nuclear maturation and cell division. Furthermore, 
the erythroblastic cells of the bone marrow, in addition 
to failing to proliferate rapidly, produce mainly larger 
than normal RBCs called macrocytes, which have a flimsy 
membrane and are often irregular, large, and oval instead 
of the usual biconcave disc. These poorly formed cells, 
after entering the circulating blood, are capable of car-
rying oxygen normally, but their fragility causes them 
to have a short life, half to one-­third normal. Therefore, 
deficiency of vitamin B12 or folic acid causes maturation 
failure in the process of erythropoiesis.
Maturation Failure Anemia Caused by Poor Absorp-
tion of Vitamin B12 From the Gastrointestinal Tract—
Pernicious Anemia. A common cause of RBC matu-
ration failure is failure to absorb vitamin B12 from the 
gastrointestinal tract. This situation often occurs in the 
disease pernicious anemia, in which the basic abnormality 
is an atrophic gastric mucosa that fails to produce normal 
gastric secretions. The parietal cells of the gastric glands 
secrete a glycoprotein called intrinsic factor, which com-
bines with vitamin B12 in food and makes the B12 available 
for absorption by the gut in the following way:
	
1.	 Intrinsic factor binds tightly with the vitamin B12. 
In this bound state, vitamin B12 is protected from 
digestion by the gastrointestinal secretions.
	
2.	 Still in the bound state, intrinsic factor binds to spe-
cific receptor sites on the brush border membranes 
of the mucosal cells in the ileum.
	
3.	 Vitamin B12 is then transported into the blood dur-
ing the next few hours by the process of pinocytosis, 
carrying intrinsic factor and the vitamin together 
through the membrane.
Lack of intrinsic factor, therefore, decreases availabil-
ity of vitamin B12 because of faulty absorption of the 
vitamin.
Once vitamin B12 has been absorbed from the gastro-
intestinal tract, it is first stored in large quantities in the 
liver and then released slowly as needed by the bone mar-
row. The minimum amount of vitamin B12 required each 
day to maintain normal RBC maturation is only 1 to 3 
micrograms, and the normal storage in the liver and other 
body tissues is about 1000 times this amount. Therefore, 3 
to 4 years of defective vitamin B12 absorption are usually 
required to cause maturation failure anemia. 
Maturation Failure Anemia Caused by Folic Acid 
(Pteroylglutamic Acid) Deficiency. Folic acid is a normal 
constituent of green vegetables, some fruits, and meats 
(especially liver). However, it is easily destroyed during 
cooking. Also, people with gastrointestinal absorption 
abnormalities, such as the frequently occurring small in-
testinal disease called sprue, often have serious difficulty 
absorbing both folic acid and vitamin B12. Therefore, in 
many cases of maturation failure, the cause is deficiency 
of intestinal absorption of folic acid and vitamin B12. 
HEMOGLOBIN FORMATION
The synthesis of hemoglobin begins in polychromatophil 
erythroblasts and continues even into the reticulocyte 
stage of the RBCs. Therefore, when reticulocytes leave 
the bone marrow and pass into the blood stream, they 
continue to form minute quantities of hemoglobin for 
another day or so until they become mature erythrocytes.
Figure 33-­5 shows the basic chemical steps in the 
formation of hemoglobin. First, succinyl-­CoA, which 
is formed in the Krebs metabolic cycle (as explained in 
Chapter 68), binds with glycine to form a pyrrole mole-
cule. In turn, four pyrroles combine to form protoporphy-
rin IX, which then combines with iron to form the heme 
molecule. Finally, each heme molecule combines with 
a long polypeptide chain, a globin synthesized by ribo-
somes, forming a subunit of hemoglobin called a hemo-
globin chain (Figure 33-­6). Each chain has a molecular 
weight of about 16,000; four of these chains, in turn, bind 
together loosely to form the whole hemoglobin molecule.
There are several slight variations in the different sub-
unit hemoglobin chains, depending on the amino acid 
A
C
HC
P
C
N
H
(pyrrole)
CH
2 succinyl-CoA + 2 glycine
4 pyrrole
protoporphyrin IX
protoporphyrin IX + Fe++
heme
heme + polypeptide
hemoglobin chain (α or β)
2 α chains + 2 β chains
hemoglobin A
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
Figure 33-­5.  Formation of hemoglobin.
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
444
composition of the polypeptide portion. The different 
types of chains are designated as alpha (α) chains, beta (β) 
chains, (γ) gamma chains, and (δ) delta chains. The most 
common form of hemoglobin in adults, hemoglobin A, is 
a combination of two alpha chains and two beta chains. 
Hemoglobin A has a molecular weight of 64,458.
Because each hemoglobin chain has a heme prosthetic 
group containing an atom of iron, and because there are 
four hemoglobin chains in each hemoglobin molecule, 
one finds four iron atoms in each hemoglobin molecule. 
Each of these can bind loosely with one molecule of oxy-
gen, making a total of four molecules of oxygen (or eight 
oxygen atoms) that can be transported by each hemoglo-
bin molecule.
The types of hemoglobin chains in the hemoglobin 
molecule determine the binding affinity of the hemoglo-
bin for oxygen. Abnormalities of the chains can alter the 
physical characteristics of the hemoglobin molecule as 
well. For example, in sickle cell anemia, the amino acid 
valine is substituted for glutamic acid at one point in each 
of the two beta chains. When this type of hemoglobin is 
exposed to low oxygen, it forms elongated crystals inside 
the RBCs that are sometimes 15 micrometers in length. 
These crystals make it almost impossible for the cells to 
pass through many small capillaries, and the spiked ends 
of the crystals are likely to rupture the cell membranes, 
leading to sickle cell anemia.
Hemoglobin Combines Reversibly With Oxygen. The 
most important feature of the hemoglobin molecule is 
its ability to combine loosely and reversibly with oxygen. 
This ability is discussed in detail in Chapter 41 in rela-
tion to respiration because the primary function of hemo-
globin in the body is to combine with oxygen in the lungs 
and then to release this oxygen readily in the peripheral 
tissue capillaries, where the gaseous tension of oxygen is 
much lower than in the lungs.
Oxygen does not combine with the two positive bonds 
of the iron in the hemoglobin molecule. Instead, it binds 
loosely with one of the so-­called coordination bonds of 
the iron atom. This bond is extremely loose, so the com-
bination is easily reversible. Furthermore, the oxygen 
does not become ionic oxygen but is carried as molecular 
oxygen (composed of two oxygen atoms) to the tissues, 
where, because of the loose, readily reversible combina-
tion, it is released into the tissue fluids still in the form of 
molecular oxygen rather than ionic oxygen. 
IRON METABOLISM
Because iron is important for the formation not only 
of hemoglobin but also of other essential elements in 
the body (e.g., myoglobin, cytochromes, cytochrome 
oxidase, peroxidase, and catalase), it is important to 
understand the means whereby iron is used in the 
body. The total quantity of iron in the body averages 4 
to 5 grams, about 65% of which is in the form of hemo-
globin. About 4% is in the form of myoglobin, 1% is in 
the form of the various heme compounds that promote 
intracellular oxidation, 0.1% is combined with the pro-
tein transferrin in the blood plasma, and 15% to 30% is 
stored for later use, mainly in the reticuloendothelial 
system and liver parenchymal cells, principally in the 
form of ferritin.
Transport and Storage of Iron. Transport, storage, and 
metabolism of iron in the body are diagrammed in Figure 
33-­7 and can be explained as follows. When iron is ab-
sorbed from the small intestine, it immediately combines 
in the blood plasma with a beta globulin, apotransferrin, 
to form transferrin, which is then transported in the plas-
ma. The iron is loosely bound in the transferrin and, con-
sequently, can be released to any tissue cell at any point in 
the body. Excess iron in the blood is deposited especially 
in the liver hepatocytes and less in the reticuloendothelial 
cells of the bone marrow.
CH2
CH
CH
CH2
H3C
CH3
H
C
A
B
N
(–)N
O2
Fe
CH
CH3
H3C
C
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
COOH
COOH
C
H
D
HC
N(–)
N
Polypeptide
(hemoglobin chain α or β)
Figure 33-­6.  Basic structure of the heme moiety, showing one of the 
four heme chains that along with globin polypeptide, bind together 
to form the hemoglobin molecule.
Macrophages
Degrading hemoglobin
Free
iron
Tissues
Ferritin
Hemosiderin
Bilirubin (excreted)
Hemoglobin
Transferrin–Fe
Red Cells
Blood loss: 0.7 mg Fe
daily in menses
Fe++ absorbed
(small intestine)
Fe excreted: 0.6 mg
daily
Plasma
Free iron
Heme
Enzymes
Figure 33-­7.  Iron transport and metabolism.
Chapter 33  Red Blood Cells, Anemia, and Polycythemia
	
445
U N I T  V I
In the cell cytoplasm, iron combines mainly with a 
protein, apoferritin, to form ferritin. Apoferritin has a 
molecular weight of about 460,000, and varying quanti-
ties of iron can combine in clusters of iron radicals with 
this large molecule; therefore, ferritin may contain only a 
small or a large amount of iron. This iron stored as ferritin 
is called storage iron.
Smaller quantities of the iron in the storage pool are 
in an extremely insoluble form called hemosiderin. This 
is especially true when the total quantity of iron in the 
body is more than the apoferritin storage pool can accom-
modate. Hemosiderin collects in cells in the form of large 
clusters that can be observed microscopically as large par-
ticles. In contrast, ferritin particles are so small and dis-
persed that they usually can be seen in the cell cytoplasm 
only with an electron microscope.
When the quantity of iron in the plasma falls low, some 
of the iron in the ferritin storage pool is removed easily 
and transported in the form of transferrin in the plasma to 
the areas of the body where it is needed. A unique charac-
teristic of the transferrin molecule is that it binds strongly 
with receptors in the cell membranes of erythroblasts in 
the bone marrow. Then, along with its bound iron, it is 
ingested into the erythroblasts by endocytosis. There the 
transferrin delivers the iron directly to the mitochondria, 
where heme is synthesized. In people who do not have 
adequate quantities of transferrin in their blood, failure 
to transport iron to the erythroblasts in this manner can 
cause severe hypochromic anemia (i.e., RBCs that contain 
much less hemoglobin than normal).
When RBCs have lived their life span of about 120 days 
and are destroyed, the hemoglobin released from the cells 
is ingested by monocyte-­macrophage cells. There, iron is 
liberated and is stored mainly in the ferritin pool to be 
used as needed for the formation of new hemoglobin. 
Daily Loss of Iron. An average man excretes about 0.6 mg 
of iron each day, mainly into the feces. Additional quanti-
ties of iron are lost when bleeding occurs. For a woman, 
additional menstrual loss of blood brings long-­term iron 
loss to an average of about 1.3 mg/day. 
Absorption of Iron From the Intestinal 
Tract
Iron is absorbed from all parts of the small intestine, 
mostly by the following mechanism. The liver secretes 
moderate amounts of apotransferrin into the bile, which 
flows through the bile duct into the duodenum. Here, the 
apotransferrin binds with free iron and also with certain 
iron compounds, such as hemoglobin and myoglobin 
from meat, two of the most important sources of iron in 
the diet. This combination is called transferrin. In turn, it 
is attracted to and binds with receptors in the membranes 
of intestinal epithelial cells. Then, by pinocytosis, the 
transferrin molecule, carrying its iron store, is absorbed 
into the epithelial cells and later released into the blood 
capillaries beneath these cells in the form of plasma 
transferrin.
Iron absorption from the intestines is extremely slow, 
at a maximum rate of only a few milligrams per day. This 
slow rate of absorption means that even when tremen-
dous quantities of iron are present in the food, only small 
proportions can be absorbed.
Regulation of Total Body Iron by Controlling Absorp-
tion Rate. When the body becomes saturated with iron 
so that essentially all apoferritin in the iron storage areas 
is already combined with iron, the rate of additional iron 
absorption from the intestinal tract markedly decreases. 
Conversely, when the iron stores become depleted, the 
rate of absorption can probably accelerate five or more 
times normal. Thus, total body iron is regulated mainly by 
altering the rate of absorption. 
LIFE SPAN OF RED BLOOD CELLS IS 
ABOUT 120 DAYS
When RBCs are delivered from the bone marrow into 
the circulatory system, they normally circulate an average 
of 120 days before being destroyed. Even though mature 
RBCs do not have a nucleus, mitochondria, or endoplasmic 
reticulum, they do have cytoplasmic enzymes that are capa-
ble of metabolizing glucose and forming small amounts of 
adenosine triphosphate. These enzymes also do the follow-
ing: (1) maintain pliability of the cell membrane; (2) main-
tain membrane transport of ions; (3) keep the iron of the 
cells’ hemoglobin in the ferrous form rather than the ferric 
form; and (4) prevent oxidation of the proteins in the RBCs. 
Even so, the metabolic systems of old RBCs become pro-
gressively less active, and the cells become more and more 
fragile, presumably because their life processes wear out.
Once the RBC membrane becomes fragile, the cell 
ruptures during passage through some tight spot of the 
circulation. Many of the RBCs self-­destruct in the spleen, 
where they squeeze through the red pulp of the spleen. 
There, the spaces between the structural trabeculae of 
the red pulp, through which most of the cells must pass, 
are only 3 micrometers wide, in comparison with the 
8-­micrometer diameter of the RBC. When the spleen is 
removed, the number of old abnormal RBCs circulating 
in the blood increases considerably.
Destruction of Hemoglobin by Macrophages. When 
RBCs burst and release their hemoglobin, the hemoglobin 
is phagocytized almost immediately by macrophages in 
many parts of the body, but especially by the Kupffer cells of 
the liver and macrophages of the spleen and bone marrow. 
During the next few hours to days, the macrophages release 
iron from the hemoglobin and pass it back into the blood 
to be carried by transferrin either to the bone marrow for 
production of new RBCs or to the liver and other tissues 
for storage in the form of ferritin. The porphyrin portion of 
the hemoglobin molecule is converted by the macrophages, 
through a series of stages, into the bile pigment bilirubin, 
which is released into the blood and later removed from the 
body by secretion through the liver into the bile. This process 
is discussed in relation to liver function in Chapter 71. 
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
446
ANEMIAS
Anemia means deficiency of hemoglobin in the blood, 
which can be caused by too few RBCs or too little hemo-
globin in the cells. Some types of anemia and their physi-
ological causes are described in the following sections.
Blood Loss Anemia. After rapid hemorrhage, the body 
replaces the fluid portion of the plasma in 1 to 3 days, but 
this response results in a low concentration of RBCs. If a 
second hemorrhage does not occur, the RBC concentra-
tion usually returns to normal within 3 to 6 weeks.
When chronic blood loss occurs, a person frequently 
cannot absorb enough iron from the intestines to form 
hemoglobin as rapidly as it is lost. RBCs that are much 
smaller than normal and have too little hemoglobin inside 
them are then produced, giving rise to microcytic hypo-
chromic anemia, which is shown in Figure 33-­3. 
Aplastic Anemia Due to Bone Marrow Dysfunction. 
Bone marrow aplasia means lack of functioning bone 
marrow. For example, exposure to high-­dose radiation or 
chemotherapy for cancer treatment can damage stem cells 
of the bone marrow, followed in a few weeks by anemia. 
Likewise, high doses of certain toxic chemicals, such as 
insecticides or benzene in gasoline, may cause the same 
effect. In autoimmune disorders, such as lupus erythema-
tosus, the immune system begins attacking healthy cells 
such as bone marrow stem cells, which may lead to aplas-
tic anemia. In about half of aplastic anemia cases the cause 
is unknown, a condition called idiopathic aplastic anemia.
People with severe aplastic anemia usually die unless 
they are treated with blood transfusions—which can tem-
porarily increase the numbers of RBCs—or by bone mar-
row transplantation. 
Megaloblastic Anemia. Based on the earlier discussions 
of vitamin B12, folic acid, and intrinsic factor from the 
stomach mucosa, one can readily understand that loss of 
any one of these can lead to slow reproduction of eryth-
roblasts in the bone marrow. As a result, the RBCs grow 
too large, with odd shapes, and are called megaloblasts. 
Thus, atrophy of the stomach mucosa, as occurs in perni-
cious anemia, or loss of the entire stomach after surgical 
total gastrectomy can lead to megaloblastic anemia. Also, 
megaloblastic anemia often develops in patients who have 
intestinal sprue, in which folic acid, vitamin B12, and other 
vitamin B compounds are poorly absorbed. Because the 
erythroblasts in these states cannot proliferate rapidly 
enough to form normal numbers of RBCs, the RBCs that 
are formed are mostly oversized, have bizarre shapes, and 
have fragile membranes. These cells rupture easily, leaving 
the person in dire need of an adequate number of RBCs. 
Hemolytic Anemia. Different abnormalities of the RBCs, 
many of which are acquired through hereditary, make 
the cells fragile, so they rupture easily as they go through 
the capillaries, especially through the spleen. Even though 
the number of RBCs formed may be normal, or even much 
greater than normal in some hemolytic diseases, the life 
span of the fragile RBC is so short that the cells are destroyed 
faster than they can be formed, and serious anemia results.
In hereditary spherocytosis, the RBCs are very small 
and spherical rather than being biconcave discs. These 
cells cannot withstand compression forces because they 
do not have the normal loose, baglike cell membrane 
structure of the biconcave discs. On passing through the 
splenic pulp and some other tight vascular beds, they are 
easily ruptured by even slight compression.
In sickle cell anemia, which is present in 0.3% to 1.0% of 
West African and American blacks, the cells have an abnor-
mal type of hemoglobin called hemoglobin S, containing 
faulty beta chains in the hemoglobin molecule, as explained 
earlier in this chapter. When this hemoglobin is exposed to 
low concentrations of oxygen, it precipitates into long crys-
tals inside the RBC. These crystals elongate the cell and give 
it the appearance of a sickle rather than a biconcave disc. The 
precipitated hemoglobin also damages the cell membrane, 
so the cells become highly fragile, leading to serious anemia. 
Such patients frequently experience a vicious circle of events 
called a sickle cell disease crisis, in which low oxygen tension 
in the tissues causes sickling, which leads to ruptured RBCs, 
which causes a further decrease in oxygen tension and still 
more sickling and RBC destruction. Once the process starts, 
it progresses rapidly, eventuating in a serious decrease in 
RBCs within a few hours and, in some cases, death.
In erythroblastosis fetalis, Rh-­positive RBCs in the 
fetus are attacked by antibodies from an Rh-­negative 
mother. These antibodies make the Rh-­positive cells frag-
ile, leading to rapid rupture and causing the child to be 
born with a serious case of anemia. This condition is dis-
cussed in Chapter 36 in relation to the Rh factor of blood. 
The extremely rapid formation of new RBCs to make up 
for the destroyed cells in erythroblastosis fetalis causes a 
large number of early blast forms of RBCs to be released 
from the bone marrow into the blood. 
EFFECTS OF ANEMIA ON CIRCULATORY 
SYSTEM FUNCTION
The viscosity of the blood, which was discussed in Chap-
ter 14, depends largely on the blood concentration of 
RBCs. In persons with severe anemia, the blood viscosity 
may fall to as low as 1.5 times that of water rather than the 
normal value of about 3. This change decreases the resis-
tance to blood flow in the peripheral blood vessels, so far 
greater than normal quantities of blood flow through the 
tissues and return to the heart, thereby greatly increas-
ing cardiac output. Moreover, hypoxia resulting from 
diminished transport of oxygen by the blood causes the 
peripheral tissue blood vessels to dilate, allowing a further 
increase in the return of blood to the heart and increas-
ing the cardiac output to a still higher level—sometimes 
three to four times normal. Thus, one of the major effects 
of anemia is greatly increased cardiac output, as well as 
increased pumping workload on the heart.
Chapter 33  Red Blood Cells, Anemia, and Polycythemia
	
447
U N I T  V I
The increased cardiac output in persons with anemia 
partially offsets the reduced oxygen-­carrying effect of the 
anemia because, even though each unit quantity of blood 
carries only small quantities of oxygen, the rate of blood 
flow may be increased enough that almost normal quanti-
ties of oxygen are actually delivered to the tissues. However, 
when a person with anemia begins to exercise, the heart is 
not capable of pumping much greater quantities of blood 
than it is already pumping. Consequently, during exercise, 
which greatly increases tissue demand for oxygen, extreme 
tissue hypoxia results and acute cardiac failure may ensue. 
POLYCYTHEMIA
Secondary Polycythemia. Whenever the tissues be-
come hypoxic because of too little oxygen in the breathed 
air, such as at high altitudes, or because of failure of oxy-
gen delivery to the tissues, such as in cardiac failure, the 
blood-­forming organs automatically produce large quan-
tities of extra RBCs. This condition is called secondary 
polycythemia, and the RBC count commonly rises to 6 to 
7 million/mm3, about 30% above normal.
A common type of secondary polycythemia, called phys-
iological polycythemia, occurs in those who live at altitudes 
of 14,000 to 17,000 feet, where the atmospheric oxygen is 
very low. The blood count is generally 6 to 7 million/mm3, 
which allows these people to perform reasonably high lev-
els of continuous work, even in a rarefied atmosphere. 
Polycythemia Vera (Erythremia). In addition to physi-
ological polycythemia, a pathological condition known as 
polycythemia vera exists, in which the RBC count may be 
7 to 8 million/mm3 and the hematocrit may be 60% to 
70% instead of the normal 40% to 45%. Polycythemia vera 
is caused by a genetic aberration in the hemocytoblastic 
cells that produce the blood cells. The blast cells no longer 
stop producing RBCs when too many cells are already 
present. This causes excess production of RBCs in the 
same manner that a breast tumor causes excess produc-
tion of a specific type of breast cell. It usually causes ex-
cess production of white blood cells and platelets as well.
In polycythemia vera, not only does the hemato-
crit increase, but the total blood volume also increases, 
sometimes to almost twice normal. As a result, the entire 
vascular system becomes intensely engorged. Also, many 
blood capillaries become plugged by the viscous blood; 
the viscosity of the blood in polycythemia vera sometimes 
increases from the normal of 3 times the viscosity of water 
to 10 times that of water. 
EFFECT OF POLYCYTHEMIA ON FUNCTION 
OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Because of the greatly increased viscosity of blood in poly-
cythemia, blood flow through the peripheral blood ves-
sels is often very sluggish. In accordance with the factors 
that regulate return of blood to the heart, as discussed in 
Chapter 20, increasing blood viscosity decreases the rate 
of venous return to the heart. Conversely, the blood vol-
ume is greatly increased in polycythemia, which tends to 
increase venous return. Actually, the cardiac output in 
polycythemia is not far from normal because these two 
factors more or less neutralize each other.
The arterial pressure is also normal in most people 
with polycythemia, although in about one-third of them, 
the arterial pressure is elevated. This means that the blood 
pressure–regulating mechanisms can usually offset the 
tendency for increased blood viscosity to increase periph-
eral resistance and, thereby, increase arterial pressure. 
Beyond certain limits, however, these regulations fail, and 
hypertension develops.
The color of the skin depends to a great extent on the 
quantity of blood in the skin subpapillary venous plexus. 
In polycythemia vera, the quantity of blood in this plexus 
is greatly increased. Furthermore, because blood passes 
sluggishly through the skin capillaries before entering the 
venous plexus, a larger than normal quantity of hemoglo-
bin is deoxygenated. The blue color of all this deoxygen-
ated hemoglobin masks the red color of the oxygenated 
hemoglobin. Therefore, a person with polycythemia vera 
ordinarily has a ruddy complexion, with a bluish (cya-
notic) tint to the skin.
Bibliography
Bizzaro N, Antico A: Diagnosis and classification of pernicious ane-
mia. Autoimmun Rev 13:565, 2014.
Franke K, Gassmann M, Wielockx B: Erythrocytosis: the HIF pathway 
in control. Blood 122:1122, 2013.
Green R: Vitamin B12 deficiency from the perspective of a practicing 
hematologist. Blood 129:2603, 2017.
Kato GJ, Piel FB, Reid CD, Gaston MH et al: Sickle cell disease. Nat Rev 
Dis Primers 2018 Mar 15;4:18010. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2018.10
Kato GJ, Steinberg MH, Gladwin MT: Intravascular hemolysis and the 
pathophysiology of sickle cell disease. J Clin Invest 127:750, 2017
Koury MJ, Haase VH: Anaemia in kidney disease: harnessing hypoxia 
responses for therapy. Nat Rev Nephrol 11:394, 2015.
Muckenthaler MU, Rivella S, Hentze MW, Galy B: A red carpet for 
iron metabolism. Cell 168:344, 2017.
Nolan KA, Wenger RH: Source and microenvironmental regulation of 
erythropoietin in the kidney. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 27:277, 
2018.
Piel FB, Steinberg MH, Rees DC: Sickle cell disease. N Engl J Med 
376:1561, 2017.
Renassia C, Peyssonnaux C: New insights into the links between hy-
poxia and iron homeostasis. Curr Opin Hematol. 26:125, 2019.
Stabler SP: Clinical practice. Vitamin B12 deficiency. N Engl J Med 
368:149, 2013.
Telen MJ, Malik P, Vercellotti GM: Therapeutic strategies for sickle 
cell disease: towards a multi-­agent approach. Nat Rev Drug Discov 
18:139, 2019.
Wang CY, Babitt JL: Liver iron sensing and body iron homeostasis. 
Blood 133:18, 2019.
Weiss G, Ganz T, Goodnough LT: Anemia of inflammation. Blood 
133:40, 2019.
	
449
U N I T  V I
Our bodies are exposed continually to bacteria, viruses, 
fungi, and parasites, all of which occur normally and to 
varying degrees in the skin, mouth, respiratory passage-
ways, intestinal tract, lining membranes of the eyes, and 
even the urinary tract. Many of these infectious agents 
are capable of causing serious abnormal physiological 
function or even death if they invade deeper tissues. We 
are also exposed intermittently to other highly infectious 
bacteria and viruses besides those that are normally pres-
ent, and these agents can cause acute lethal diseases such 
as pneumonia, streptococcal infection, and typhoid fever.
Our bodies have a special system for combating the dif-
ferent infectious and toxic agents. This system is composed 
of blood leukocytes (white blood cells [WBCs]) and tissue 
cells derived from leukocytes. These cells work together 
in two ways to prevent disease: (1) by actually destroying 
invading bacteria or viruses by phagocytosis; and (2) by 
forming antibodies and sensitized lymphocytes that may 
destroy or inactivate the invader. This chapter discusses the 
first of these methods, and Chapter 35 discusses the second.
LEUKOCYTES (WHITE BLOOD CELLS)
The leukocytes, also called white blood cells, are the mobile 
units of the body’s protective system. They are formed 
partially in the bone marrow (granulocytes and monocytes 
and a few lymphocytes) and partially in the lymph tissue 
(lymphocytes and plasma cells). After formation, they are 
transported in the blood to different parts of the body 
where they are needed.
The real value of WBCs is that most of them are specif-
ically transported to areas of serious infection and inflam-
mation, thereby providing a rapid and potent defense 
against infectious agents. As we see later, the granulo-
cytes and monocytes have a special ability to “seek out 
and destroy” a foreign invader.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF 
LEUKOCYTES
Types of White Blood Cells. Six types of WBCs are nor-
mally present in the blood: neutrophils (polymorphonuclear), 
eosinophils (polymorphonuclear), basophils (polymorpho-
nuclear), monocytes, lymphocytes and, occasionally, plasma 
cells. In addition, there are large numbers of platelets, which 
are fragments of another type of cell similar to the WBCs 
found in the bone marrow, the megakaryocyte. The first three 
types of cells, the polymorphonuclear cells, all have a granu-
lar appearance, as shown in cell numbers 7, 10, and 12 in 
Figure 34-­1, and for this reason they are called granulocytes.
The granulocytes and monocytes protect the body 
against invading organisms by ingesting them (by phago-
cytosis) or by releasing antimicrobial or inflammatory 
substances that have multiple effects that aid in destroy-
ing the offending organism. The lymphocytes and plasma 
cells function mainly in connection with the immune 
system, as discussed in Chapter 35. Finally, the function 
of platelets is specifically to activate the blood-­clotting 
mechanism, discussed in Chapter 37.
Concentrations of Different White Blood Cells in 
Blood. An adult human has about 7000 WBCs per mi-
croliter of blood (in comparison with 5 million red blood 
cells [RBCs] per microliter). Of the total WBCs, the nor-
mal percentages of the different types are approximately 
the following:
 
• Neutrophils: 
62.0%
 
• Eosinophils: 
2.3%
 
• Basophils: 
0.4%
 
• Monocytes: 
5.3%
 
• Lymphocytes: 
30.0%
The number of platelets, which are only cell fragments, 
in each microliter of blood is normally between 150,000 
and 450,000, averaging about 300,000. 
GENESIS OF WHITE BLOOD CELLS
Early differentiation of the multipotential hematopoi-
etic stem cell into the different types of committed stem 
cells was shown in Figure 33-­2 in the previous chapter. 
Aside from the cells committed to form RBCs, two major 
lineages of WBCs are formed, the myelocytic and lym-
phocytic lineages. The left side of Figure 34-­1 shows the 
Resistance of the Body to Infection: I. Leukocytes, 
Granulocytes, the Monocyte-­Macrophage System, 
and Inflammation
C H A P T E R  3 4
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
450
myelocytic lineage, beginning with the myeloblast; the 
right side shows the lymphocytic lineage, beginning with 
the lymphoblast.
The granulocytes and monocytes are formed only 
in the bone marrow. Lymphocytes and plasma cells are 
produced mainly in the various lymphogenous tissues—
especially the lymph glands, spleen, thymus, tonsils, and 
various pockets of lymphoid tissue elsewhere in the body, 
such as in the bone marrow and in Peyer’s patches under-
neath the epithelium in the gut wall.
The WBCs formed in the bone marrow are stored in 
the marrow until they are needed in the circulatory sys-
tem. Then, when the need arises, various factors cause 
them to be released (these factors are discussed later). 
Normally, about three times as many WBCs are stored in 
the marrow as circulate in the entire blood. This quantity 
represents about a 6-­day supply of these cells.
The lymphocytes are mostly stored in the various lym-
phoid tissues, except for a small number that are tempo-
rarily being transported in the blood.
As shown in Figure 34-­1, megakaryocytes (cell 3) are 
also formed in the bone marrow. These megakaryocytes 
fragment in the bone marrow and the small fragments, 
known as platelets (or thrombocytes), then pass into the 
blood. They are very important in the initiation of blood 
clotting. 
LIFE SPAN OF WHITE BLOOD CELLS
The life of the granulocytes after being released from the 
bone marrow is normally 4 to 8 hours circulating in the 
blood and another 4 to 5 days in tissues where they are 
needed. In times of serious tissue infection, this total life 
span is often shortened to only a few hours because the 
granulocytes proceed even more rapidly to the infected 
area, perform their functions, and in the process, are 
themselves destroyed.
The monocytes also have a short transit time, 10 to 20 
hours in the blood, before wandering through the cap-
illary membranes into the tissues. Once in the tissues, 
they swell to much larger sizes to become tissue macro-
phages and, in this form, they can live for months unless 
destroyed while performing phagocytic functions. These 
tissue macrophages are the basis of the tissue macrophage 
system (discussed in greater detail later), which provides 
continuing defense against infection.
Lymphocytes enter the circulatory system continually, 
along with drainage of lymph from the lymph nodes and 
other lymphoid tissue. After a few hours, they pass out 
of the blood back into the tissues by diapedesis/extrava-
sation. Then, they re-­enter the lymph and return to the 
blood again and again; thus, there is continual circulation 
of lymphocytes through the body. Lymphocytes have life 
spans of weeks or months, depending on the body’s need 
for these cells.
The platelets in the blood are replaced about once 
every 10 days. In other words, about 30,000 platelets are 
formed each day for each microliter of blood. 
NEUTROPHILS AND MACROPHAGES 
DEFEND AGAINST INFECTIONS
It is mainly the neutrophils and tissue macrophages that 
attack and destroy invading bacteria, viruses, and other 
Figure  34-1.  Genesis of white blood 
cells. The different cells of the myelo-
cyte series are shown: 1, myeloblast; 
2, promyelocyte; 3, megakaryocyte; 4, 
neutrophil myelocyte; 5, young neutro-
phil metamyelocyte; 6, band neutrophil 
metamyelocyte; 7, neutrophil; 8, eo-
sinophil myelocyte; 9, eosinophil meta-
myelocyte; 10, eosinophil; 11, basophil 
myelocyte; 12, basophil; 13–16, stages 
of monocyte formation.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
10
12
16
9
8
11
13
14
15
Genesis of Myelocytes
Genesis of Lymphocytes
Chapter 34  Resistance of the Body to Infection
	
451
U N I T  V I
harmful agents. The neutrophils are mature cells that 
can attack and destroy bacteria, even in the circulating 
blood. Conversely, the tissue macrophages begin life as 
blood monocytes, which are immature cells while still in 
the blood and have little ability to fight infectious agents 
at that time. However, once they enter the tissues, they 
begin to swell—sometimes increasing their diameters as 
much as fivefold—to as great as 60 to 80 micrometers, 
a size that can barely be seen with the naked eye. These 
cells are now called macrophages, and they are extremely 
capable of combating disease agents in the tissues.
White Blood Cells Enter the Tissue Spaces by Diape-
desis. Neutrophils and monocytes can squeeze through 
gaps between endothelial cells of the blood capillaries and 
postcapillary venules by diapedesis. Although the inter-
cellular gaps are much smaller than a cell, a small portion 
of the cell slides through the gap at a time; the portion 
sliding through is momentarily constricted to the size of 
the gap, as shown in Figure 34-­2 (also see Figure 34-­6). 
White Blood Cells Move Through Tissue Spaces by 
Ameboid Motion. Both neutrophils and macrophages can 
move through the tissues by ameboid motion, described in 
Chapter 2. Some cells move at velocities as great as 40 μm/
min, a distance as great as their own length each minute. 
White Blood Cells Are Attracted to Inflamed Tissue 
Areas by Chemotaxis. Many different chemical sub-
stances in the tissues cause both neutrophils and mac-
rophages to move toward the source of the chemical. This 
phenomenon, shown in Figure 34-­2, is known as chemo-
taxis. When a tissue becomes inflamed, at least a dozen 
different products that can cause chemotaxis toward the 
inflamed area are formed (Video 34-­1). They include the 
following: (1) some of the bacterial or viral toxins; (2) de-
generative products of the inflamed tissues; (3) several 
reaction products of the complement complex (discussed 
in Chapter 35) activated in inflamed tissues; and (4) sev-
eral reaction products caused by plasma clotting in the 
inflamed area, as well as other substances.
As shown in Figure 34-­2, chemotaxis depends on the 
concentration gradient of the chemotactic substance. The 
concentration is greatest near the source, which directs 
the unidirectional movement of the WBCs. Chemotaxis 
is effective up to 100 micrometers away from an inflamed 
tissue. Therefore, because almost no tissue area is more 
than 50 micrometers away from a capillary, the chemo-
tactic signal can easily move hordes of WBCs from the 
capillaries into the inflamed area. 
PHAGOCYTOSIS
A major function of the neutrophils and macrophages 
is phagocytosis, which means cellular ingestion of the 
offending agent. Phagocytes must be selective of the 
material that is phagocytized; otherwise, normal cells and 
structures of the body might be ingested. Whether phago-
cytosis will occur especially depends on three selective 
procedures (Figure 34-­3).
First, most natural structures in the tissues have 
smooth surfaces, which resist phagocytosis. However, 
if the surface is rough, the likelihood of phagocytosis is 
increased.
Second, most natural substances of the body have pro-
tective protein coats that repel the phagocytes. Conversely, 
most dead tissues and foreign particles have no protective 
coats, which makes them subject to phagocytosis.
Third, the immune system of the body (described in 
Chapter 35) develops antibodies against infectious agents 
such as bacteria. The antibodies then adhere to the bacterial 
membranes and thereby make the bacteria especially sus-
ceptible to phagocytosis. To do this, the antibody molecule 
also combines with the C3 product of the complement cas-
cade, which is an additional part of the immune system dis-
cussed in the next chapter. The C3 molecules, in turn, attach 
to receptors on the phagocyte membrane, thus initiating 
phagocytosis. This process whereby a pathogen is selected 
for phagocytosis and destruction is called opsonization.
Phagocytosis by Neutrophils. The neutrophils enter-
ing the tissues are already mature cells that can imme-
diately begin phagocytosis. On approaching a particle to 
be phagocytized, the neutrophil first attaches itself to the 
particle and then projects pseudopodia in all directions 
around the particle. The pseudopodia meet one another 
on the opposite side and fuse. This action creates an en-
closed chamber that contains the phagocytized particle. 
Then, the chamber invaginates to the inside of the cyto-
plasmic cavity and breaks away from the outer cell mem-
brane to form a free-­floating phagocytic vesicle (also called 
Chemotaxis
source
Chemotactic substance
Increased
permeability
Margination
Diapedesis
Figure  34-2.  Movement of neutrophils by diapedesis or extravasa-
tion through capillary pores and by chemotaxis toward an area of 
tissue damage.
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
452
a phagosome) inside the cytoplasm. A single neutrophil 
can usually phagocytize 3 to 20 bacteria before the neu-
trophil becomes inactivated and dies. 
Phagocytosis by Macrophages. Macrophages are the 
end-­stage product of monocytes that enter the tissues 
from the blood. When activated by the immune system, 
as described in Chapter 35, they are much more powerful 
phagocytes than neutrophils, often capable of phagocyt-
izing as many as 100 bacteria. They also have the abil-
ity to engulf much larger particles, even whole RBCs or, 
occasionally, malarial parasites, whereas neutrophils are 
not capable of phagocytizing particles much larger than 
bacteria. Also, after digesting particles, macrophages can 
extrude the residual products and often survive and func-
tion for many more months. 
Once Phagocytized, Most Particles Are Digested by 
Intracellular Enzymes. Once a foreign particle has been 
phagocytized, lysosomes and other cytoplasmic granules 
in the neutrophil or macrophage immediately come into 
contact with the phagocytic vesicle, and their membranes 
fuse, thereby dumping many digestive enzymes and bac-
tericidal agents into the vesicle. Thus, the phagocytic vesi-
cle now becomes a digestive vesicle, and digestion of the 
phagocytized particle begins immediately.
Both neutrophils and macrophages contain an abun-
dance of lysosomes filled with proteolytic enzymes espe-
cially geared for digesting bacteria and other foreign 
protein matter. The lysosomes of macrophages (but not of 
neutrophils) also contain large amounts of lipases, which 
digest the thick lipid membranes possessed by some bac-
teria, such as the tuberculosis bacillus. 
Neutrophils and Macrophages Can Kill Bacteria. 
In addition to the digestion of ingested bacteria in phago-
somes, neutrophils and macrophages contain bactericidal 
agents that kill most bacteria, even when the lysosomal 
enzymes fail to digest them. This characteristic is espe-
cially important because some bacteria have protective 
coats or other factors that prevent their destruction by 
digestive enzymes. Much of the killing effect results from 
several powerful oxidizing agents formed by enzymes in 
the membrane of the phagosome or by a special organelle 
called the peroxisome. These oxidizing agents include 
large quantities of superoxide (O2−), hydrogen peroxide 
(H2O2), and hydroxyl ions (OH−), which are lethal to most 
bacteria, even in small quantities. Also, one of the lyso-
somal enzymes, myeloperoxidase, catalyzes the reaction 
between H2O2 and chloride ions to form hypochlorite, 
which is exceedingly bactericidal.
Some bacteria, notably the tuberculosis bacillus, 
have coats that are resistant to lysosomal digestion and 
also secrete substances that partially resist the killing 
effects of the neutrophils and macrophages. These bac-
teria are responsible for many chronic diseases, such as 
tuberculosis. 
MONOCYTE-­MACROPHAGE CELL 
SYSTEM (RETICULOENDOTHELIAL 
SYSTEM)
In the preceding paragraphs, we described the mac-
rophages mainly as mobile cells capable of wandering 
through the tissues. However, after entering the tissues 
and becoming macrophages, another large portion of 
monocytes becomes attached to the tissues and remains 
attached for months or even years until they are called 
on to perform specific local protective functions. They 
have the same capabilities as the mobile macrophages to 
phagocytize large quantities of bacteria, viruses, necrotic 
tissue, or other foreign particles in the tissue. In addition, 
when appropriately stimulated, they can break away from 
their attachments and, once again, become mobile mac-
rophages that respond to chemotaxis and all the other 
stimuli related to the inflammatory process. Thus, the 
body has a widespread monocyte-­macrophage system in 
virtually all tissue areas.
The total combination of monocytes, mobile macro-
phages, fixed tissue macrophages, and a few specialized 
endothelial cells in the bone marrow, spleen, and lymph 
nodes is called the reticuloendothelial system. However, 
all or almost all these cells originate from monocytic stem 
Microbe
Antibodies
Receptors
Phagosome
Phagolysosome
Digestion
of microbe
Microbial
debris
Lysosome
Pseudopod
PHAGOCYTOSIS
EXOCYTOSIS
Figure  34-3.  Phagocytosis of pathogens, such as bacteria, by a 
phagocytic cell, such as a macrophage. Antibodies coat the bacteria, 
making them more susceptible to phagocytosis by the macrophage 
that engulfs the bacterium, bringing it into the cell and forming a 
phagosome. Lysosomes then attach to the phagosome to form a 
phagolysosome, which digests the invading pathogen. The phago-
cytic cell then releases the digested products by exocytosis.
Chapter 34  Resistance of the Body to Infection
	
453
U N I T  V I
cells; therefore, the reticuloendothelial system is almost 
synonymous with the monocyte-­macrophage system. 
Because the term reticuloendothelial system is much bet-
ter known in medical literature than the term monocyte-­
macrophage system, it should be remembered as a 
generalized phagocytic system located in all tissues, espe-
cially in the tissue areas where large quantities of particles, 
toxins, and other unwanted substances must be destroyed.
Tissue Macrophages in Skin and Subcutaneous Tissues 
(Histiocytes). The skin is mainly impregnable to infectious 
agents, except when it is broken. When infection begins in a 
subcutaneous tissue and local inflammation ensues, local tis-
sue macrophages can divide in situ and form still more mac-
rophages. Then, they perform the usual functions of attack-
ing and destroying the infectious agents, as described earlier. 
Macrophages in Lymph Nodes. Essentially no particu-
late matter that enters the tissues, such as bacteria, can be 
absorbed directly through the capillary membranes into 
the blood. Instead, if the particles are not destroyed locally 
in the tissues, they enter the lymph and flow to the lymph 
nodes located intermittently along the course of the lymph 
flow. The foreign particles are then trapped in these nodes 
in a meshwork of sinuses lined by tissue macrophages.
Figure 34-­4 illustrates the general organization of 
the lymph node, showing lymph entering through the 
lymph node capsule via afferent lymphatics, then flowing 
through the nodal medullary sinuses, and finally pass-
ing out the hilus into efferent lymphatics that eventually 
empty into the venous blood.
Large numbers of macrophages line the lymph sinuses 
and if any particles enter the sinuses by way of the lymph 
the macrophages phagocytize them and prevent general 
dissemination throughout the body. 
Alveolar Macrophages in Lungs. Another route where-
by invading organisms frequently enter the body is through 
the lungs. Large numbers of tissue macrophages are pre-
sent as integral components of the alveolar walls. They 
can phagocytize particles that become entrapped in the 
alveoli. If the particles are digestible, the macrophages can 
also digest them and release the digestive products into 
the lymph. If the particle is not digestible, the macrophag-
es often form a giant cell capsule around the particle until 
such time—if ever—that it can be slowly dissolved. Such 
capsules are frequently formed around tuberculosis bacilli, 
silica dust particles, and even carbon particles. 
Macrophages (Kupffer Cells) in Liver Sinusoids. An-
other route whereby bacteria invade the body is through 
the gastrointestinal tract. Large numbers of bacteria from 
ingested food constantly pass through the gastrointestinal 
mucosa into the portal blood. Before this blood enters the 
general circulation, it passes through the liver sinusoids, 
which are lined with tissue macrophages called Kupffer 
cells, shown in Figure 34-­5. These cells form such an ef-
fective particulate filtration system that almost none of 
the bacteria from the gastrointestinal tract pass from the 
portal blood into the general systemic circulation. Indeed, 
videos of phagocytosis by Kupffer cells have demonstrat-
ed phagocytosis of a single bacterium in less than 0.01 
second. 
Macrophages of Spleen and Bone Marrow. If an invad-
ing organism succeeds in entering the general circulation, 
there are other lines of defense by the tissue macrophage 
system, especially by macrophages of the spleen and bone 
marrow. In both these tissues, macrophages become en-
trapped by the reticular meshwork of the two organs, and 
when foreign particles come into contact with these mac-
rophages, they are phagocytized.
Afferent lymphatics
Capsule
Subcapsular
sinus
Germinal
center
Medullary cord
Hilus
Lymph in
medullary
sinuses
Valve
Primary
nodule
Efferent lymphatics
Figure  34-4.  Functional diagram of a lymph node.
Kupffer cells
Hepatocytes
Endothelial cells
Space of Disse
Figure  34-5.  Kupffer cells lining the liver sinusoids, showing phago-
cytosis of India ink particles into the cytoplasm of the Kupffer cells.
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
454
The spleen is similar to the lymph nodes, except that 
blood, instead of lymph, flows through the tissue spaces of 
the spleen. Figure 34-­6 shows a small peripheral segment 
of spleen tissue. Note that a small artery penetrates from 
the splenic capsule into the splenic pulp and terminates in 
small capillaries. The capillaries are highly porous, allow-
ing whole blood to pass out of the capillaries into cords 
of red pulp. The blood then gradually squeezes through 
the trabecular meshwork of these cords and eventually 
returns to the circulation through the endothelial walls 
of the venous sinuses. The trabeculae of the red pulp and 
venous sinuses are lined with vast numbers of macro-
phages. This peculiar passage of blood through the cords 
of the red pulp provides an exceptional means of phago-
cytizing unwanted debris in the blood, including espe-
cially old and abnormal RBCs. 
INFLAMMATION: ROLE OF NEUTRO-
PHILS AND MACROPHAGES
INFLAMMATION
When tissue injury occurs, whether caused by bacteria, 
trauma, chemicals, heat, or any other phenomenon, mul-
tiple substances are released by the injured tissues and 
cause dramatic secondary changes in the surrounding 
uninjured tissues. This entire complex of tissue changes is 
called inflammation.
Inflammation is characterized by the following: (1) 
vasodilation of the local blood vessels, with consequent 
increased local blood flow; (2) increased permeability of 
the capillaries, allowing leakage of large quantities of fluid 
into the interstitial spaces; (3) often, clotting of the fluid 
in the interstitial spaces because of increased amounts of 
fibrinogen and other proteins leaking from the capillar-
ies; (4) migration of large numbers of granulocytes and 
monocytes into the tissue; and (5) swelling of the tissue 
cells. Some of the many tissue products that cause these 
reactions are histamine, bradykinin, serotonin, prostaglan-
dins, several different reaction products of the complement 
system (described in Chapter 35), reaction products of the 
blood clotting system, and multiple substances called lym-
phokines that are released by sensitized T cells (part of the 
immune system; also discussed in Chapter 35). Several of 
these substances strongly activate the macrophage system, 
and within a few hours, the macrophages begin to devour 
the destroyed tissues. At times, however, the macrophages 
may also further injure the still-­living tissue cells.
Walling-­Off Effect of Inflammation. One of the first re-
sults of inflammation is to wall off the area of injury from 
the remaining tissues. The tissue spaces and the lymphat-
ics in the inflamed area are blocked by fibrinogen clots so 
that after a while, fluid barely flows through the spaces. 
This walling-­off process delays the spread of bacteria or 
toxic products.
The intensity of the inflammatory process is usually 
proportional to the degree of tissue injury. For example, 
when staphylococci invade tissues, they release extremely 
lethal cellular toxins. As a result, inflammation develops 
rapidly—indeed, much more rapidly than the staphylo-
cocci can multiply and spread. Therefore, local staphy-
lococcal infection is characteristically walled off rapidly 
and prevented from spreading through the body. Strep-
tococci, in contrast, do not cause such intense local tissue 
destruction. Therefore, the walling-­off process develops 
slowly over many hours, while many streptococci repro-
duce and migrate. As a result, streptococci often have a 
far greater tendency to spread through the body and cause 
death than staphylococci, even though staphylococci are 
far more destructive to the tissues. 
MACROPHAGE AND NEUTROPHIL 
RESPONSES DURING INFLAMMATION
Tissue Macrophages Provide First Line of Defense 
Against Infection. Within minutes after inflammation 
begins, the macrophages already present in the tissues, 
whether histiocytes in the subcutaneous tissues, alveolar 
macrophages in the lungs, microglia in the brain, or oth-
ers, immediately begin their phagocytic actions. When 
activated by the products of infection and inflammation, 
the first effect is rapid enlargement of each of these cells. 
Next, many of the previously sessile macrophages break 
loose from their attachments and become mobile, form-
ing the first line of defense against infection during the 
first hour or so. The numbers of these early mobilized 
macrophages often are not great, but they are lifesaving. 
Neutrophil Invasion of the Inflamed Area Is a Sec-
ond Line of Defense. Within the first hour or so after 
inflammation begins, large numbers of neutrophils begin 
to invade the inflamed area from the blood. This invasion 
is caused by inflammatory cytokines (e.g., tumor necrosis 
factor and interleukin-­1) and other biochemical products 
produced by the inflamed tissues that initiate the following 
reactions:
Pulp
Vein
Artery
Capillaries
Venous sinuses
Figure  34-6.  Functional structures of the spleen.
Chapter 34  Resistance of the Body to Infection
	
455
U N I T  V I
	
1.	 They cause increased expression of adhesion mol-
ecules, such as selectins and intercellular adhesion 
molecule-­1 (ICAM-­1) on the surface of endothelial 
cells in the capillaries and venules. These adhesion 
molecules, reacting with complementary integrin 
molecules on the neutrophils, cause the neutro-
phils to stick to the capillary and venule walls in 
the inflamed area. This effect is called margination 
and is shown in Figure 34-­2 and in more detail in 
Figure 34-­7.
	
2.	 They also cause the intercellular attachments be-
tween the endothelial cells of the capillaries and 
small venules to loosen, allowing openings large 
enough for neutrophils to crawl through the capil-
laries by diapedesis into the tissue spaces.
	
3.	 They then cause chemotaxis of the neutrophils to-
ward the injured tissues, as explained earlier. The 
entire process of neutrophil (or other substances 
and cells such as monocytes) translocation through 
the capillaries into the tissues surrounding them is 
called extravasation; the specific passage of blood 
cells through the intact walls of the capillaries is 
called diapedesis, although this term is often used 
interchangeably with extravasation when discussing 
blood cell movement through the capillaries into 
tissues.
Thus, within several hours after tissue damage begins, 
the area becomes well supplied with neutrophils. Because 
the blood neutrophils are already mature cells, they are 
ready to begin their scavenger functions of killing bacteria 
and removing foreign matter immediately. 
Acute Increase in the Number of Neutrophils in 
Blood—Neutrophilia. Also, within a few hours after 
the onset of acute severe inflammation, the number of 
neutrophils in the blood sometimes increases fourfold 
to fivefold—from a normal of 4,000 to 5,000 to 15,000 to 
25,000 neutrophils/μl. This is called neutrophilia, which 
means an increase in the number of neutrophils in the 
blood. Neutrophilia is caused by products of inflamma-
tion that enter the blood stream, are transported to the 
bone marrow, and act there on the stored neutrophils of 
the marrow to mobilize these into the circulating blood. 
This makes even more neutrophils available to the in-
flamed tissue area. 
Second Macrophage Invasion Into the Inflamed 
Tissue Is a Third Line of Defense. Along with the in-
vasion of neutrophils, monocytes from the blood enter 
the inflamed tissue and enlarge to become macrophages. 
However, the number of monocytes in the circulating 
blood is low. Also, the storage pool of monocytes in the 
bone marrow is much less than that of neutrophils. There-
fore, the buildup of macrophages in the inflamed tissue 
area is much slower than that of neutrophils, requiring 
several days to become effective. Furthermore, even after 
invading the inflamed tissue, monocytes are still immature 
cells, requiring 8 hours or more to swell to much larger siz-
es and develop tremendous quantities of lysosomes. Only 
then do they acquire the full capacity of tissue macrophages 
for phagocytosis. After several days to several weeks, the 
macrophages finally come to dominate the phagocytic 
cells of the inflamed area because of greatly increased bone 
marrow production of new monocytes, as explained later.
As already noted, macrophages can phagocytize far 
more bacteria (about five times as many) and far larger 
particles, including even neutrophils and large quantities 
of necrotic tissue, than can neutrophils. Also, the macro-
phages play an important role in initiating development of 
antibodies, as discussed in Chapter 35. 
Receptors
Neutrophil
Rolling adhesion
Tight binding
Diapedesis
Migration
Selectin
ICAM-1
Endothelial cell
Inflamed tissue
Cytokines
Figure  34-7.  Migration of neutrophils from the blood into inflamed tissue. Cytokines and other biochemical products of the inflamed tissue 
cause increased expression of selectins and intercellular adhesion molecule-­1 (ICAM-­1) on the surface of endothelial cells. These adhesion mol-
ecules bind to complementary molecules or receptors on the neutrophil, causing it to adhere to the wall of the capillary or venule. The neutrophil 
then migrates through the vessel wall by diapedesis or extravasation toward the site of tissue injury.
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
456
Increased Production of Granulocytes and Mono-
cytes by Bone Marrow Is a Fourth Line of Defense. 
The fourth line of defense is greatly increased production 
of granulocytes and monocytes by the bone marrow. This 
action results from stimulation of the granulocytic and 
monocytic progenitor cells of the marrow. However, it 
takes 3 to 4 days before newly formed granulocytes and 
monocytes reach the stage of leaving the bone marrow. If 
the stimulus from the inflamed tissue continues, the bone 
marrow can continue to produce these cells in large quan-
tities for months and even years, sometimes at a rate 20 to 
50 times normal. 
Feedback Control of Macrophage and 
Neutrophil Responses
Although more than two dozen factors have been impli-
cated in control of the macrophage response to inflam-
mation, five of these are believed to play dominant roles. 
They are shown in Figure 34-­8 and consist of the fol-
lowing: (1) tumor necrosis factor (TNF); (2) interleukin-­1 
(IL-­1), (3) granulocyte-­monocyte colony-­stimulating fac-
tor (GM-­CSF); (4) granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor 
(G-­CSF); and (5) monocyte colony-­stimulating factor (M-­
CSF). These factors are formed by activated macrophage 
cells in the inflamed tissues and in smaller quantities by 
other inflamed tissue cells.
The cause of increased production of granulocytes 
and monocytes by the bone marrow is mainly the three 
colony-­stimulating factors; one of these, GM-­CSF, stim-
ulates both granulocyte and monocyte production; the 
other two, G-­CSF and M-­CSF, stimulate granulocyte and 
monocyte production, respectively. This combination 
of TNF, IL-­1, and colony-­stimulating factors provides a 
powerful feedback mechanism that begins with tissue 
inflammation and proceeds to formation of large num-
bers of defensive WBCs that help remove the cause of the 
inflammation. 
Formation of Pus
When neutrophils and macrophages engulf large num-
bers of bacteria and necrotic tissue, essentially all the 
neutrophils and many, if not most, of the macrophages 
eventually die. After several days, a cavity is often exca-
vated in the inflamed tissues. This cavity contains varying 
portions of necrotic tissue, dead neutrophils, dead macro-
phages, and tissue fluid. This mixture is commonly known 
as pus. After the infection has been suppressed, the dead 
cells and necrotic tissue in the pus gradually autolyze 
over a period of days, and the end products are eventually 
absorbed into the surrounding tissues and lymph until 
most of the evidence of tissue damage is gone. 
EOSINOPHILS
The eosinophils normally constitute about 2% of all the 
blood leukocytes. Eosinophils are weak phagocytes, and 
they exhibit chemotaxis, but in comparison with neutro-
phils, it is doubtful that eosinophils are significant in pro-
tecting against the usual types of infection.
Eosinophils, however, are often produced in large 
numbers in people with parasitic infections, and they 
migrate into tissues diseased by parasites. Although most 
parasites are too large to be phagocytized by eosinophils 
or any other phagocytic cells, eosinophils attach them-
selves to the parasites by way of special surface molecules 
and release substances that kill many of the parasites. For 
example, one of the most widespread infections is schis-
tosomiasis, a parasitic infection found in as many as one - 
third of the population of some developing countries in 
Africa, Asia, and South America. An estimated 85% to 
90% of the world’s cases of schistosomiasis are in Africa.
The schistosome parasitic worms can invade any part 
of the body. Eosinophils attach themselves to the juvenile 
forms of the parasite and kill many of them. They do so 
in several ways: (1) by releasing hydrolytic enzymes from 
their granules, which are modified lysosomes; (2) prob-
ably also by releasing highly reactive forms of oxygen that 
are especially lethal to parasites; and (3) by releasing from 
the granules a highly larvicidal polypeptide called major 
basic protein.
In a few areas of the world, another parasitic disease 
that causes eosinophilia is trichinosis. This disease results 
from invasion of the body’s muscles by the Trichinella 
parasite (pork worm) after a person eats undercooked 
infested pork.
Activated
macrophage
INFLAMMATION
TNF
IL-1
GM-CSF
G-CSF
M-CSF
GM-CSF
G-CSF
M-CSF
Granulocytes
Monocytes/macrophages
Bone marrow
TNF
IL-1
Endothelial cells,
fibroblasts,
lymphocytes
Figure  34-8.  Control of bone marrow production of granulocytes 
and monocyte-­macrophages in response to multiple growth fac-
tors released from activated macrophages in an inflamed tissue. G-­
CSF, Granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor; GM-­CSF, granulocyte-­
monocyte colony-­stimulating factor; IL-­1, interleukin-­1; M-­CSF, 
monocyte colony-­stimulating factor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Chapter 34  Resistance of the Body to Infection
	
457
U N I T  V I
Eosinophils also have a special propensity to collect in 
tissues in which allergic reactions occur, such as in the 
peribronchial tissues of the lungs in people with asthma 
and in the skin after an allergic skin reaction. This action 
is caused at least partly by the fact that many mast cells 
and basophils participate in allergic reactions, as dis-
cussed in the next paragraph. The mast cells and baso-
phils release an eosinophil chemotactic factor that causes 
eosinophils to migrate toward the inflamed allergic tis-
sue. The eosinophils are believed to detoxify some of the 
inflammation-­inducing substances released by the mast 
cells and basophils and probably also phagocytize and 
destroy allergen-­antibody complexes, thus preventing 
excess spread of the local inflammatory process. 
BASOPHILS
The basophils in the circulating blood are similar to the 
large tissue mast cells located immediately outside many 
of the capillaries in the body. Both mast cells and baso-
phils liberate heparin into the blood. Heparin is a sub-
stance that can prevent blood coagulation.
The mast cells and basophils also release histamine, as 
well as smaller quantities of bradykinin and serotonin. It is 
mainly the mast cells in inflamed tissues that release these 
substances during inflammation.
The mast cells and basophils play an important role 
in some types of allergic reactions because the type of 
antibody that causes allergic reactions, immunoglobulin 
E (IgE), has a special propensity to become attached to 
mast cells and basophils. Then, when the specific anti-
gen for the specific IgE antibody subsequently reacts 
with the antibody, the resulting attachment of antigen 
to antibody causes the mast cell or basophil to release 
increased quantities of histamine, bradykinin, sero-
tonin, heparin, slow-­reacting substance of anaphylaxis 
(a mixture of three leukotrienes), and several lysosomal 
enzymes. These substances cause local vascular and 
tissue reactions that mediate many, if not most, of the 
allergic manifestations. These reactions are discussed in 
greater detail in Chapter 35. 
LEUKOPENIA
A clinical condition known as leukopenia, in which 
the bone marrow produces very few WBCs, occasion-
ally occurs. This condition leaves the body unprotected 
against many bacteria and other agents that might invade 
the tissues.
Normally, the human body lives in symbiosis with 
many bacteria because the mucous membranes of the 
body are constantly exposed to large numbers of bac-
teria. The mouth almost always contains various spiro-
chetal, pneumococcal, and streptococcal bacteria, and 
these same bacteria are present to a lesser extent in the 
entire respiratory tract. The distal gastrointestinal tract is 
especially loaded with colon bacilli. Furthermore, one can 
always find bacteria on the surfaces of the eyes, urethra, 
and vagina. Any decrease in the number of WBCs imme-
diately allows invasion of adjacent tissues by bacteria that 
are already present.
Within 2 days after the bone marrow stops producing 
WBCs, ulcers may appear in the mouth and colon, or some 
form of severe respiratory infection might develop. Bacte-
ria from the ulcers rapidly invade surrounding tissues and 
the blood. Without treatment, death often ensues in less 
than 1 week after acute total leukopenia begins.
Irradiation of the body by x-­rays or gamma rays, or 
exposure to drugs and chemicals that contain benzene or 
anthracene nuclei, is likely to cause aplasia of the bone 
marrow. Some common drugs such as chloramphenicol 
(an antibiotic), thiouracil (used to treat thyrotoxicosis), 
and even various barbiturate hypnotics on rare occasions 
cause leukopenia, thus setting off the entire infectious 
sequence of this disorder.
After moderate irradiation injury to the bone marrow, 
some stem cells, myeloblasts, and hemocytoblasts may 
remain undestroyed in the marrow and are capable of 
regenerating the bone marrow, provided sufficient time 
is available. A patient properly treated with transfusions, 
plus antibiotics and other drugs to ward off infection, usu-
ally develops enough new bone marrow within weeks to 
months for blood cell concentrations to return to normal. 
LEUKEMIAS
Uncontrolled production of WBCs can be caused by can-
cerous mutation of a myelogenous or lymphogenous cell. 
This process causes leukemia, which is usually character-
ized by greatly increased numbers of abnormal WBCs in 
the circulating blood.
There are two general types of leukemia, lymphocytic 
and myelogenous. The lymphocytic leukemias are caused 
by cancerous production of lymphoid cells, usually begin-
ning in a lymph node or other lymphocytic tissue and 
spreading to other areas of the body. The second type of 
leukemia, myelogenous leukemia, begins by cancerous 
production of young myelogenous cells in the bone mar-
row and then spreads throughout the body so that WBCs 
are produced in many extramedullary tissues—especially 
in the lymph nodes, spleen, and liver.
In myelogenous leukemia, the cancerous process occa-
sionally produces partially differentiated cells, resulting in 
what might be called neutrophilic leukemia, eosinophilic 
leukemia, basophilic leukemia, or monocytic leukemia. 
More frequently, however, the leukemia cells are bizarre 
and undifferentiated and not identical to any of the nor-
mal WBCs. Usually, the more undifferentiated the cell, the 
more acute is the leukemia, often leading to death within a 
few months if untreated. With some of the more differen-
tiated cells, the process can be chronic, sometimes devel-
oping slowly over 10 to 20 years. Leukemic cells, especially 
the very undifferentiated cells, are usually nonfunctional 
for providing normal protection against infection.
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
458
Effects of Leukemia on the Body
The first effect of leukemia is metastatic growth of leuke-
mic cells in abnormal areas of the body. Leukemic cells 
from the bone marrow may reproduce so much that they 
invade the surrounding bone, causing pain and, eventu-
ally, a tendency for bones to fracture easily.
Almost all leukemias eventually spread to the spleen, 
lymph nodes, liver, and other vascular regions, regardless 
of whether the leukemia originated in the bone marrow or 
lymph nodes. Common effects in leukemia are the develop-
ment of infection, severe anemia, and a bleeding tendency 
caused by thrombocytopenia (lack of platelets). These effects 
result mainly from displacement of the normal bone mar-
row and lymphoid cells by the nonfunctional leukemic cells.
Finally, an important effect of leukemia on the body 
is excessive use of metabolic substrates by the growing 
cancerous cells. The leukemic tissues reproduce new 
cells so rapidly that tremendous demands are made on 
the body reserves for foodstuffs, specific amino acids, 
and vitamins. Consequently, the energy of the patient is 
greatly depleted, and excessive utilization of amino acids 
by leukemic cells causes especially rapid deterioration of 
the normal protein tissues of the body. Thus, while the 
leukemic tissues grow, other tissues become debilitated. 
After metabolic starvation has continued long enough, 
this factor alone is sufficient to cause death.
Bibliography
David BA, Kubes P: Exploring the complex role of chemokines and 
chemoattractants in  vivo on leukocyte dynamics. Immunol Rev 
289:9, 2019.
DeNardo DG, Ruffell B: Macrophages as regulators of tumour immu-
nity and immunotherapy. Nat Rev Immunol 19:369, 2019.
Hallek M, Shanafelt TD, Eichhorst B: Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. 
Lancet 391:1524, 2018.
Honda M, Kubes P: Neutrophils and neutrophil extracellular traps in 
the liver and gastrointestinal system. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepa-
tol 15:206, 2018.
Lemke G: How macrophages deal with death. Nat Rev Immunol 19: 
539, 2019. 
Liew PX, Kubes P: The neutrophil’s role during health and disease. 
Physiol Rev 99:1223, 2019.
Medzhitov R: Origin and physiological roles of inflammation. Nature 
454:428, 2008.
Ng LG, Ostuni R, Hidalgo A: Heterogeneity of neutrophils. Nat Rev 
Immunol 19:255, 2019.
Papayannopoulos V: Neutrophil extracellular traps in immunity and 
disease. Nat Rev Immunol 18:134, 2018.
Phillipson M, Kubes P: The healing power of neutrophils. Trends 
Immunol 2019 May 31. pii: S1471-­4906(19)30103-­30106.
Pinho S, Frenette PS: Haematopoietic stem cell activity and interac-
tions with the niche. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 20:303, 2019.
Russell DG, Huang L, VanderVen BC: Immunometabolism at the 
interface between macrophages and pathogens. Nat Rev Immunol 
19:291, 2019.
Short NJ, Rytting ME, Cortes JE: Acute myeloid leukaemia. Lancet 
392:593, 2018.
Spivak JL: Myeloproliferative neoplasms. N Engl J Med 376:2168, 
2017.
Watanabe S, Alexander M, Misharin AV, Budinger GRS: The role of 
macrophages in the resolution of inflammation. J Clin Invest 129: 
2619, 2019.
Werner S, Grose R: Regulation of wound healing by growth factors 
and cytokines. Physiol Rev 83:835, 2003.
U N I T  V I
	
459
The human body has the ability to resist almost all types 
of organisms or toxins that tend to damage the tissues 
and organs. This capability is called immunity. Much of 
the immunity is acquired immunity that does not develop 
until after the body is first attacked by a bacterium, virus, 
or toxin; often, weeks or months are required for the 
immunity to develop. An additional element of immu-
nity that results from general processes, rather than from 
processes directed at specific disease organisms, is called 
innate immunity, which includes the following aspects:
	
1.	 Phagocytosis of bacteria and other invaders by 
white blood cells and cells of the tissue macrophage 
system, as described in Chapter 34
	
2.	 Destruction of swallowed organisms by the acid se-
cretions of the stomach and the digestive enzymes
	
3.	 Resistance of the skin to invasion by organisms
	
4.	 Presence in the blood of certain chemicals and 
cells that attach to foreign organisms or toxins and 
destroy them. Some of these are: (1) lysozyme, a 
mucolytic polysaccharide that attacks bacteria and 
causes them to dissolute; (2) basic polypeptides, 
which react with and inactivate certain types of 
gram-­positive bacteria; (3) the complement com-
plex, described later, a system of about 20 proteins 
that can be activated in various ways to destroy 
bacteria; and (4) natural killer lymphocytes that can 
recognize and destroy foreign cells, tumor cells, and 
even some infected cells.
This innate immunity makes the human body resistant 
to diseases such as some paralytic viral infections of ani-
mals, hog cholera, cattle plague, and distemper—a viral 
disease that kills a large percentage of dogs that become 
afflicted with it. Likewise, many animals are resistant or 
even immune to many human diseases, such as polio-
myelitis, mumps, human cholera, measles, and syphilis, 
which are very damaging or even lethal to humans.
ACQUIRED (ADAPTIVE) IMMUNITY
In addition to its generalized innate immunity, the human 
body has the ability to develop extremely powerful spe-
cific immunity against individual invading agents such 
as lethal bacteria, viruses, toxins, and even foreign tis-
sues from other animals. This ability is called acquired 
or adaptive immunity. Acquired immunity is caused by 
a special immune system that forms antibodies and/or 
activated lymphocytes that attack and destroy the specific 
invading organism or toxin.
Acquired immunity can often bestow an extreme 
degree of protection. For example, certain toxins, such 
as the paralytic botulinum toxin or the tetanizing toxin 
of tetanus, can be protected against in doses as high as 
100,000 times the amount that would be lethal without 
immunity. It is for this reason that the treatment process 
known as immunization is so important in protecting 
people against disease and against toxins, as explained 
later in this chapter.
BASIC TYPES OF ACQUIRED IMMUNITY—
HUMORAL AND CELL-­MEDIATED
Two basic but closely allied types of acquired immunity 
occur in the body. In one of these, the body develops 
circulating antibodies, which are globulin molecules 
in the blood plasma capable of attacking the invading 
agent. This type of immunity is called humoral immu-
nity or B-­cell immunity because B lymphocytes produce 
the antibodies. The second type of acquired immunity 
is achieved through formation of large numbers of 
activated T lymphocytes, which are specifically crafted 
in the lymph nodes to destroy the foreign agent. This 
type of immunity is called cell-­mediated immunity or 
T-­cell immunity because the activated lymphocytes 
are T lymphocytes. Both the antibodies and activated 
lymphocytes are formed in the lymphoid tissues of the 
body. 
BOTH TYPES OF ACQUIRED IMMUNITY 
ARE INITIATED BY ANTIGENS
Because acquired immunity does not develop until after 
invasion by a foreign organism or toxin, it is clear that 
the body must have some mechanism for recognizing this 
invasion. Each toxin or organism almost always contains 
one or more specific chemical compounds in its makeup 
that is (are) different from all other compounds. In gen-
eral, these are proteins or large polysaccharides that ini-
tiate the acquired immunity; these substances are called 
antigens (antibody generators).
Resistance of the Body to Infection: 
II. Immunity and Allergy
C H A P T E R  3 5
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
460
For a substance to be antigenic, it usually must have 
a high molecular weight of 8000 or more. Furthermore, 
the process of antigenicity usually depends on regularly 
recurring molecular groups, called epitopes, on the sur-
face of the large molecule. This factor also explains why 
proteins and large polysaccharides are almost always 
antigenic because both these substances have this stereo-
chemical characteristic. 
LYMPHOCYTES ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR 
ACQUIRED IMMUNITY
Acquired immunity is the product of the body’s lympho-
cytes. In people who have a genetic lack of lymphocytes 
or whose lymphocytes have been destroyed by radiation 
or chemicals, no acquired immunity can develop. Within 
days after birth, such a person dies of fulminating bacte-
rial infection unless he or she is treated by heroic mea-
sures. Therefore, it is clear that lymphocytes are essential 
to the survival of humans.
Lymphocytes are located most extensively in the lymph 
nodes, but are also found in special lymphoid tissues such 
as the spleen, submucosal areas of the gastrointestinal 
tract, thymus, and bone marrow. The lymphoid tissue is 
distributed advantageously in the body to intercept invad-
ing organisms or toxins before they can spread too widely.
In most cases, the invading agent first enters the tissue 
fluids and then is carried by lymph vessels to the lymph 
node or other lymphoid tissue. For example, the lymphoid 
tissue of the gastrointestinal walls is exposed immediately 
to antigens invading from the gut. The lymphoid tissue 
of the throat and pharynx (including the tonsils and ade-
noids) is well located to intercept antigens that enter by 
way of the upper respiratory tract. The lymphoid tissue 
in the lymph nodes is exposed to antigens that invade the 
peripheral tissues of the body, and the lymphoid tissue of 
the spleen, thymus, and bone marrow plays the specific 
role of intercepting antigenic agents that have succeeded 
in reaching the circulating blood.
T and B Lymphocytes Promote Cell-­Mediated and 
­Humoral Immunity. Although most lymphocytes in nor-
mal lymphoid tissue look alike when studied under a mi-
croscope, these cells are distinctly divided into two major 
populations. One of the populations, the T lymphocytes, 
is responsible for forming the activated lymphocytes that 
provide cell-­mediated immunity, and the other popula-
tion, the B lymphocytes, is responsible for forming anti-
bodies that provide humoral immunity.
Both types of lymphocytes are derived originally in the 
embryo from multipotent hematopoietic stem cells that 
form common lymphoid progenitor cells as one of their 
most important offspring as they differentiate. Almost all 
the lymphocytes that are formed eventually end up in the 
lymphoid tissue, but before doing so, they are further dif-
ferentiated or preprocessed in the following ways.
The lymphoid progenitor cells that are eventually des-
tined to form activated T lymphocytes first migrate to 
and are preprocessed in the thymus gland; thus, they are 
called T lymphocytes to designate the role of the thymus. 
They are responsible for cell-­mediated immunity.
The other population of lymphocytes—the B lympho-
cytes that are destined to form antibodies—are prepro-
cessed in the liver during mid–fetal life and in the bone 
marrow in late fetal life and after birth. This population 
of cells was first discovered in birds, which have a special 
preprocessing organ called the bursa of Fabricius. For this 
reason, these lymphocytes are called B lymphocytes to 
designate the role of the bursa, and they are responsible 
for humoral immunity. Figure 35-­1 shows the two lym-
phocyte systems for formation, respectively, of (1) acti-
vated T lymphocytes and (2) antibodies.
Thymus
Cell-Mediated Immunity
Humoral Immunity
B lymphocyte
T lymphocyte
Antigen
Peripheral lymphoid tissue
Plasma cell
Antibodies
Activated T 
lymphocytes
Hematopoietic
stem cells
Common lymphoid
progenitor cell
Common lymphoid
progenitor cell
Developing B cell
Figure 35-­1.  Formation of antibodies and sensitized lymphocytes by a lymph node in response to antigens. This figure also shows the origin of 
thymic (T) and bursal (B) lymphocytes that, respectively, are responsible for the cell-­mediated and humoral immune processes.
Chapter 35  Resistance of the Body to Infection: II. Immunity and Allergy
	
461
U N I T  V I
PREPROCESSING OF T AND B 
LYMPHOCYTES
Although all lymphocytes in the body originate from 
lymphocyte-­committed stem cells of the embryo, these stem 
cells are incapable of forming activated T lymphocytes or 
antibodies directly. Before they can do so, they must be fur-
ther differentiated in appropriate processing areas, as follows. 
Thymus Gland Preprocesses T Lymphocytes. The T 
lymphocytes, after origination in the bone marrow, first mi-
grate to the thymus gland. Here they divide rapidly and, at 
the same time, develop extreme diversity for reacting against 
different specific antigens. That is, one thymic lymphocyte 
develops specific reactivity against one antigen, and then 
the next lymphocyte develops specificity against another 
antigen. This process continues until there are thousands 
of different types of thymic lymphocytes with specific reac-
tivities against many thousands of different antigens. These 
different types of preprocessed T lymphocytes now leave 
the thymus and spread via the blood throughout the body 
to lodge in lymphoid tissue everywhere.
The thymus also makes certain that any T lymphocytes 
leaving the thymus will not react against proteins or other 
antigens that are present in the body’s own tissues; otherwise, 
the T lymphocytes would be lethal to the person’s own body 
in only a few days. The thymus selects which T lymphocytes 
will be released by first mixing them with virtually all the spe-
cific self-­antigens from the body’s own tissues. If a T lympho-
cyte reacts, it is destroyed and phagocytized instead of being 
released, which happens in to up to 90% of the cells. Thus, the 
only cells that are finally released are those that are nonreac-
tive against the body’s own antigens—they react only against 
antigens from an outside source, such as from a bacterium, 
toxin, or even transplanted tissue from another person.
Most of the preprocessing of T lymphocytes in the 
thymus occurs shortly before the birth of a baby and for 
a few months after birth. Beyond this period, removal of 
the thymus gland diminishes (but does not eliminate) the 
T-­lymphocytic immune system. However, removal of the 
thymus several months before birth can prevent develop-
ment of all cell-­mediated immunity, including rejection of 
transplanted organs. 
Liver and Bone Marrow Preprocess B Lymphocytes. 
In humans, B lymphocytes are preprocessed in the liver 
during midfetal life and in the bone marrow during late 
fetal life and after birth. B lymphocytes are different from 
T lymphocytes in two ways:
	
1.	 Instead of the whole cell developing reactivity 
against the antigen, as occurs for the T lympho-
cytes, the B lymphocytes actively secrete antibodies 
that are the reactive agents. These agents are large 
proteins that are capable of combining with and 
destroying the antigenic substance, explained else-
where in this chapter and in Chapter 34.
	
2.	 The B lymphocytes have even greater diversity than 
the T lymphocytes, thus forming many millions of 
types of B-­lymphocyte antibodies with different spe-
cific reactivities. After preprocessing, the B lympho-
cytes, like the T lymphocytes, migrate to lymphoid 
tissue throughout the body, where they lodge near 
but slightly removed from the T-­lymphocyte areas. 
T LYMPHOCYTES AND B-­LYMPHOCYTE 
ANTIBODIES REACT AGAINST SPECIFIC 
ANTIGENS—ROLE OF LYMPHOCYTE 
CLONES
When specific antigens come into contact with T and B 
lymphocytes in the lymphoid tissue, some of the T lym-
phocytes become activated to form activated T cells, and 
some of the B lymphocytes become activated to form 
antibodies. The activated T cells and antibodies, in turn, 
react highly specifically against the particular types of 
antigens that initiated their development. The mechanism 
of this specificity is described next. 
Millions of Specific Types of Lymphocytes Are Stored 
in Lymphoid Tissue. Millions of different types of pre-
formed B lymphocytes and preformed T lymphocytes 
capable of forming highly specific types of antibodies or 
T cells are stored in the lymph tissue, as explained ear-
lier. Each of these preformed lymphocytes is capable of 
forming only one type of antibody or one type of T cell 
with a single type of specificity, and only the specific type 
of antigen can activate it. Once the specific lymphocyte 
is activated by its antigen, it reproduces wildly, forming 
tremendous numbers of duplicate lymphocytes (Figure 
35-­2). If it is a B lymphocyte, its progeny will eventually 
secrete the specific type of antibody that then circulates 
throughout the body. If it is a T lymphocyte, its progeny 
are specific sensitized T cells that are released into the 
lymph, carried to the blood, and then circulated through 
all the tissue fluids and back into the lymph, sometimes 
circulating around and around in this circuit for months 
or years.
All the different lymphocytes that are capable of form-
ing one specific antibody or T cell are called a clone of 
lymphocytes. That is, the lymphocytes in each clone are 
alike, derived originally from one or a few early lympho-
cytes of its specific type.
ORIGIN OF THE MANY CLONES OF 
LYMPHOCYTES
Only several hundred to a few thousand genes code for 
the millions of different types of antibodies and T lym-
phocytes. At first, it was a mystery how it was possible for 
so few genes to code for the millions of different speci-
ficities of antibodies or T cells produced by the lymphoid 
tissue. This mystery has now been solved.
The whole gene for forming each type of T cell or B 
cell is never present in the original stem cells from which 
the functional immune cells are formed. Instead, there 
are only gene segments—actually, hundreds of such seg-
ments—but not whole genes. During preprocessing of 
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
462
the respective T-­ and B-­cell lymphocytes, these gene seg-
ments become mixed with one another in random com-
binations, finally forming whole genes.
Because there are several hundred types of gene seg-
ments, as well as millions of different combinations in 
which the segments can be arranged in single cells, one 
can understand the millions of different cell gene types 
that can occur. For each functional T or B lymphocyte 
that is finally formed, the gene structure codes for only a 
single antigen specificity. These mature cells then become 
the highly specific T and B cells that spread to and popu-
late the lymphoid tissue. 
MECHANISM FOR ACTIVATING 
LYMPHOCYTE CLONES
Each clone of lymphocytes is responsive to only a single 
type of antigen (or to several similar antigens that have 
almost exactly the same stereochemical characteristics). 
The reason for this is the following. In the case of the B 
lymphocytes, each of these has on its cell surface mem-
brane about 100,000 antibody molecules that will react 
highly specifically with only one type of antigen. There-
fore, when the appropriate antigen comes along, it imme-
diately attaches to the antibody in the cell membrane; this 
leads to the activation process, described in more detail 
subsequently. In the case of the T lymphocytes, molecules 
similar to antibodies, called surface receptor proteins (or 
T-­cell receptors), are on the surface of the T-­cell mem-
brane, and these are also highly specific for one specified 
activating antigen. An antigen therefore stimulates only 
those cells that have complementary receptors for the 
antigen and are already committed to respond to it.
Role of Macrophages in the Activation Process. Aside 
from the lymphocytes in lymphoid tissue, literally mil-
lions of macrophages are also present in the same tissue. 
These macrophages line the sinusoids of the lymph nodes, 
spleen, and other lymphoid tissue, and they lie in apposi-
tion to many of the lymph node lymphocytes. Most invad-
ing organisms are first phagocytized and partially digest-
ed by the macrophages, and the antigenic products are 
liberated into the macrophage cytosol. The macrophages 
then pass these antigens by cell to cell contact directly to 
the lymphocytes, thus leading to activation of the speci-
fied lymphocytic clones. The macrophages, in addition, 
secrete a special activating substance, interleukin-­1, that 
promotes still further growth and reproduction of the 
specific lymphocytes. 
Role of T Cells in Activation of B Lymphocytes. Most 
antigens activate both T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes 
at the same time. Some of the T cells that are formed, 
called T-­helper cells, secrete specific substances (collec-
tively called lymphokines) that activate the specific B lym-
phocytes. Indeed, without the aid of these T-­helper cells, 
the quantity of antibodies formed by the B lymphocytes 
is usually small. We discuss this cooperative relationship 
between helper T cells and B cells after describing the 
mechanisms of the T-­cell system of immunity. 
SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTES OF THE 
B-­LYMPHOCYTE SYSTEM—HUMORAL 
IMMUNITY AND ANTIBODIES
Antibody Formation by Plasma Cells. Before exposure 
to a specific antigen, the clones of B lymphocytes remain 
dormant in the lymphoid tissue. On entry of a foreign an-
tigen, macrophages in lymphoid tissue phagocytize the 
antigen and then present it to adjacent B lymphocytes. In 
addition, the antigen is presented to T cells at the same 
time, and activated T-­helper cells are formed. These help-
er cells also contribute to extreme activation of the B lym-
phocytes, as discussed later.
The B lymphocytes specific for the antigen immedi-
ately enlarge and take on the appearance of lymphoblasts. 
Different B Cells
(clones)
Antigen binding to
specific B2 cell
Proliferation and
differentiation of
B2 lymphocytes
Antibodies
 secreted
Antigens
B1
B2
B2
B3
Developing B Cell
(bone marrow)
B2
B2
B2
B2
Figure 35-­2.  An antigen activates only the lymphocytes that have 
cell surface receptors that are complementary and recognize a spe-
cific antigen. Millions of different clones of lymphocytes exist (shown 
as B1, B2, and B3). When the lymphocyte clone (B2 in this example) 
is activated by its antigen, it reproduces to form large numbers of 
duplicate lymphocytes, which then secrete antibodies.
Chapter 35  Resistance of the Body to Infection: II. Immunity and Allergy
	
463
U N I T  V I
Some of the lymphoblasts further differentiate to form 
plasmablasts, which are precursors of plasma cells. In 
the plasmablasts, the cytoplasm expands, and the rough 
endoplasmic reticulum proliferates vastly. The plasma-
blasts then begin to divide at a rate of about once every 10 
hours for about nine divisions, giving a total population of 
about 500 cells for each original plasmablast in 4 days. The 
mature plasma cell then produces gamma globulin anti-
bodies at an extremely rapid rate—about 2000 molecules 
per second for each plasma cell. In turn, the antibodies 
are secreted into the lymph and carried to the circulating 
blood. This process continues for several days or weeks 
until, finally, exhaustion and death of the plasma cells 
occur. 
Formation of Memory Cells Enhances Antibody 
Response to Subsequent Antigen Exposure. A few 
of the lymphoblasts formed by activation of a clone of 
B lymphocytes do not go on to form plasma cells but, 
instead, form moderate numbers of new B lymphocytes 
similar to those of the original clone. In other words, 
the B-­cell population of the specifically activated clone 
becomes greatly enhanced, and the new B lymphocytes 
are added to the original lymphocytes of the same clone. 
They also circulate throughout the body to populate all 
the lymphoid tissue; immunologically, however, they re-
main dormant until activated once again by a new quan-
tity of the same antigen. These lymphocytes are called 
memory cells. Subsequent exposure to the same antigen 
will cause a much more rapid and potent antibody re-
sponse this second time around because there are many 
more memory cells than there were original B lympho-
cytes of the specific clone.
Figure 35-­3 shows the differences between the primary 
response for forming antibodies that occurs on first expo-
sure to a specific antigen and the secondary response that 
occurs after second exposure to the same antigen. Note the 
1-­week delay in the appearance of the primary response, its 
weak potency, and its short life. The secondary response, 
by contrast, begins rapidly after exposure to the antigen 
(often within hours), is far more potent, and forms anti-
bodies for many months rather than for only a few weeks. 
The increased potency and duration of the secondary 
response explain why immunization is usually accom-
plished by injecting antigen in multiple doses, with periods 
of several weeks or several months between injections. 
Generation of Lifelong Immunity by Plasma Cells. 
When naïve B lymphocytes encounter their associated 
antigens, become activated, and undergo clonal expan-
sion, they differentiate into short-­lived or long-­lived 
plasma cells that produce large amounts of antibodies. 
The short-­lived plasma cells provide rapid protection but 
undergo apoptosis after a few days of intense antibody 
secretion. However, the long-­lived plasma cells reside 
in tissues such as the bone marrow and gut-­associated 
lymphoid tissue and can continue producing antibod-
ies for many years, providing lifelong immunity against 
infectious diseases such as measles and smallpox. High 
titers of smallpox-­specific antibodies, for example, have 
been detected in the blood of subjects vaccinated in 
childhood, 70 years previously. Also, older survivors of 
the 1918 H1N1 influenza virus pandemic were shown to 
possess highly functional, virus-­neutralizing antibodies 
to this virulent virus 90 years after they were infected. 
Thus, plasma cells that produce virus-­neutralizing anti-
bodies can be sustained for many decades after exposure, 
even into the tenth decade of life in humans. 
Nature of Antibodies
Antibodies are gamma globulins called immunoglobulins 
(Igs) that have molecular weights between 160,000 and 
970,000 and constitute about 20% of all the plasma pro-
teins. All the immunoglobulins are composed of combi-
nations of light and heavy polypeptide chains. Most are a 
combination of two light and two heavy chains, as shown 
in Figure 35-­4. However, some immunoglobulins have 
0
20
10
60
30
80
90
100
70
Time (days)
Blood Antibody Concentration
(arbitrary units)
100
10
1
First 
Antigen 
Injection
Second
Antigen
Injection
Primary 
Response
Secondary 
Response
Figure 35-­3.  Time course of the antibody response in the circulating 
blood to a primary injection of antigen and to a secondary injection 
several weeks later.
S-S
S-S
S-S
S-S
Antigen-binding
sites
Antigen
Light
chain
Heavy chain
Hinge region
Constant portion
Variable portion
Figure 35-­4.  Structure of the typical IgG antibody, showing it to be 
composed of two heavy polypeptide chains and two light polypeptide 
chains. The antigen binds at two different sites on the variable por-
tions of the chains.
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
464
combinations of as many as 10 heavy and 10 light chains, 
which give rise to high-­molecular-­weight immunoglobu-
lins. Yet, in all immunoglobulins, each heavy chain is par-
alleled by a light chain at one of its ends, thus forming a 
heavy-­light pair; there are always at least two and as many 
as 10 such pairs in each immunoglobulin molecule.
Figure 35-­4 shows a designated end of each light and 
heavy chain, called the variable portion; the remainder 
of each chain is called the constant portion. The variable 
portion is different for each specific antibody, and it is this 
portion that attaches specifically to a particular type of 
antigen. The constant portion determines other proper-
ties of the antibody, establishing such factors as antibody 
diffusivity in the tissues, adherence to specific structures 
in the tissues, attachment to the complement complex, 
ease with which the antibodies pass through membranes, 
and other biological properties of the antibody. A com-
bination of noncovalent and covalent bonds (disulfide) 
holds the light and heavy chains together.
Specificity of Antibodies. Each antibody is specific for 
a particular antigen; this characteristic is a result of the 
unique structural organization of amino acids in the vari-
able portions of the light and heavy chains. The amino 
acid organization has a different steric shape for each an-
tigen specificity, so when an antigen comes into contact 
with it, multiple prosthetic groups of the antigen fit as a 
mirror image with those of the antibody, thus allowing 
for rapid and tight bonding between the antibody and 
antigen. When the antibody is highly specific, there are 
so many bonding sites that the antibody-­antigen coupling 
is exceedingly strong, held together by (1) hydrophobic 
bonding; (2) hydrogen bonding; (3) ionic attractions; and 
(4) van der Waals forces. It also obeys the thermodynamic 
mass action law:
ka = Concentration of bound antibody‐antigen
Concentration of antibody
× Concentration of antigen
Ka is called the affinity constant and is a measure of how 
tightly the antibody binds with the antigen.
Note especially in Figure 35-­4 that there are two vari-
able sites on the illustrated antibody for attachment of 
antigens, making this type of antibody bivalent. A small 
proportion of the antibodies, which consist of combina-
tions of up to 10 light and 10 heavy chains, has as many as 
10 binding sites. 
Five General Classes of Antibodies. There are five gen-
eral classes of antibodies, respectively named IgM, IgG, 
IgA, IgD, and IgE. “Ig” stands for immunoglobulin, and the 
other five letters designate the respective classes.
For the purpose of our limited discussion, two of these 
classes of antibodies are of particular importance—IgG, 
which is a bivalent antibody and constitutes about 75% 
of the antibodies of the normal person, and IgE, which 
constitutes only a small percentage of the antibodies but 
is especially involved in allergies. The IgM class is also 
interesting because a large share of the antibodies formed 
during the primary response are of this type. These anti-
bodies have 10 binding sites that make them exceedingly 
effective in protecting the body against invaders, even 
though there are not many IgM antibodies. 
Mechanisms of Action of Antibodies
Antibodies act mainly in two ways to protect the body 
against invading agents: (1) by direct attack on the 
invader; and (2) by activation of the complement system 
that then has multiple means of its own for destroying 
the invader.
Direct Action of Antibodies on Invading Agents. 
Figure 35-­5 shows antibodies (designated by the red Y-­
shaped bars) reacting with antigens (designated by the 
shaded objects). Because of the bivalent nature of the an-
tibodies and the multiple antigen sites on most invading 
agents, the antibodies can inactivate the invading agent in 
one of several ways, as follows:
	
1.	 Agglutination, in which multiple large particles 
with antigens on their surfaces (e.g., bacteria or red 
cells) are bound together into a clump
	
2.	 Precipitation, in which the molecular complex of 
soluble antigen (e.g., tetanus toxin) and antibody 
becomes so large that it is rendered insoluble and 
precipitates
	
3.	 Neutralization, in which the antibodies cover the 
toxic sites of the antigenic agent
	
4.	 Lysis, in which some potent antibodies are occa-
sionally capable of directly attacking membranes of 
cellular agents and thereby cause rupture of the agent
These direct actions of antibodies often are not strong 
enough to play a major role in protecting the body against 
the invader. Most of the protection occurs through the 
amplifying effects of the complement system, described 
next.
Antigen
Antibodies
Figure 35-­5.  Binding of antigen molecules to one another by biva-
lent antibodies.
Chapter 35  Resistance of the Body to Infection: II. Immunity and Allergy
	
465
U N I T  V I
COMPLEMENT SYSTEM FOR ANTIBODY 
ACTION
The main function of the complement system is to 
enhance (complement) the actions of antibodies and 
phagocytic cells in neutralizing and destroying patho-
gens, removing damaged cells from the body, and pro-
moting inflammation. Complement is a collective term 
that describes a system of about 20 proteins, many of 
which are enzyme precursors. The principal actors in this 
system are 11 proteins designated C1 through C9, B, and 
D, shown in Figure 35-­6. All these are present normally 
among the plasma proteins in the blood, as well as among 
the proteins that leak out of the capillaries into the tissue 
spaces. The enzyme precursors are normally inactive but 
can be activated by the so-­called classical pathway.
Classical Pathway. The classical pathway is initiated by 
an antigen-­antibody reaction. That is, when an antibody 
binds with an antigen, a specific reactive site on the con-
stant portion of the antibody becomes uncovered, or ac-
tivated, and this in turn binds directly with the C1 mol-
ecule of the complement system. This sets into motion 
a cascade of sequential reactions, shown in Figure 35-­6, 
beginning with activation of the proenzyme C1. The C1 
enzymes that are formed then activate successively in-
creasing quantities of enzymes in the later stages of the 
system so that from a small beginning, an extremely large, 
amplified reaction occurs. Multiple end products are 
formed, as shown at the right in the figure, and several of 
these have important effects that help prevent damage to 
the body’s tissues caused by the invading organism or tox-
in. Among the more important effects are the following:
	
1.	 Opsonization and phagocytosis. One of the products 
of the complement cascade, C3b, strongly activates 
phagocytosis by neutrophils and macrophages, 
causing these cells to engulf the bacteria to which 
the antigen-­antibody complexes are attached. This 
process is called opsonization. It often enhances the 
number of bacteria that can be destroyed by many 
hundredfold.
	
2.	 Lysis. One of the most important of all the products 
of the complement cascade is the membrane attack 
complex (also called the cytolytic complex), which is 
a combination of multiple complement factors des-
ignated as C5b6789. This membrane attack complex 
inserts itself into the lipid bilayer of the cell mem-
brane, creating pores that are permeable to ions and 
causing osmotic rupture of the cell membranes of 
bacteria or other invading organisms.
	
3.	 Agglutination. The complement products also 
change the surfaces of the invading organisms, 
causing them to adhere to one another, thus pro-
moting agglutination.
	
4.	 Neutralization of viruses. The complement enzymes 
and other complement products can attack the 
structures of some viruses and thereby render them 
nonvirulent.
	
5.	 Chemotaxis. Fragment C5a initiates chemotaxis of 
neutrophils and macrophages, thus causing large 
numbers of these phagocytes to migrate into the 
tissue area adjacent to the antigenic agent.
	
6.	 Activation of mast cells and basophils. Fragments 
C3a, C4a, and C5a activate mast cells and basophils, 
causing them to release histamine, heparin, and 
several other substances into the local fluids. These 
substances, in turn, cause increased local blood flow, 
increased leakage of fluid and plasma protein into 
the tissue, and other local tissue reactions that help 
inactivate or immobilize the antigenic agent. These 
same factors play a major role in inflammation (dis-
cussed in Chapter 34) and allergy, discussed later.
Antigen-antibody complex
Microorganism +
B and D
Opsonization of bacteria
Activate mast
cells and basophils
Chemotaxis of
white blood cells
C1
C3
C5
C4 + C2
C42 + C4a
C1
C3b + C3a
C8 + C9
C5b + C5a
C6 + C7
C5b67
C5b6789
Lysis of cells
Figure 35-­6.  Cascade of reactions during activation of the classical pathway of complement.
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
466
	
7.	 Inflammatory effects. In addition to inflammatory 
effects caused by activation of the mast cells and 
basophils, several other complement products con-
tribute to local inflammation. These products cause 
(1) the already increased blood flow to increase still 
further; (2) the capillary leakage of proteins to be 
increased; and (3) the interstitial fluid proteins 
to coagulate in the tissue spaces, thus preventing 
movement of the invading organism through the 
tissues. 
SPECIAL ATTRIBUTES OF T-­LYMPHOCYTE 
SYSTEM—ACTIVATED T CELLS AND CELL-­
MEDIATED IMMUNITY
Release of Activated T Cells From Lymphoid Tissue 
and Formation of Memory Cells. On exposure to the 
proper antigen, as presented by adjacent macrophages, the 
T lymphocytes of a specific lymphocyte clone proliferate 
and release large numbers of activated, specifically reacting 
T cells in ways that parallel antibody release by activated B 
cells. The principal difference is that instead of releasing 
antibodies, whole activated T cells are formed and released 
into the lymph. These T cells then pass into the circulation, 
are distributed throughout the body, pass through the cap-
illary walls into the tissue spaces, back into the lymph and 
blood again, and circulate again and again throughout the 
body, sometimes lasting for months or even years.
Also, T-­lymphocyte memory cells are formed in the 
same way that B memory cells are formed in the anti-
body system. That is, when a clone of T lymphocytes is 
activated by an antigen, many of the newly formed lym-
phocytes are preserved in the lymphoid tissue to become 
additional T lymphocytes of that specific clone; in fact, 
these memory cells even spread throughout the lymphoid 
tissue of the entire body. Therefore, on subsequent expo-
sure to the same antigen anywhere in the body, release of 
activated T cells occurs far more rapidly and much more 
powerfully than during first exposure. 
Antigen-­Presenting Cells, Major Histocompatibil-
ity Complex Proteins, and Antigen Receptors on T 
Lymphocytes. T-­cell responses are extremely antigen-­
specific, like the antibody responses of B cells, and are at 
least as important as antibodies in defending against infec-
tion. In fact, acquired immune responses usually require 
assistance from T cells to begin the process, and T cells 
play a major role in helping eliminate invading pathogens.
Although B lymphocytes recognize intact antigens, 
T lymphocytes respond to antigens only when they are 
bound to specific molecules called MHC proteins on 
the surface of antigen-­presenting cells in the lymphoid 
tissues (Figure 35-­7). The three major types of antigen-­
presenting cells are macrophages, B lymphocytes, and den-
dritic cells. The dendritic cells (also known as accessory 
cells), the most potent of the antigen-­presenting cells, are 
located throughout the body, and their main function is 
to present antigens to T cells. The interaction of cell adhe-
sion proteins is critical in permitting the T cells to bind to 
antigen-­presenting cells long enough to become activated.
The MHC proteins are encoded by a large group of genes 
called the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). The 
MHC proteins bind peptide fragments of antigen proteins 
that are degraded inside antigen-­presenting cells and then 
transport them to the cell surface. There are two types of 
MHC proteins: (1) MHC I proteins, which present anti-
gens to cytotoxic T cells; and (2) MHC II proteins, which 
present antigens to T-­helper cells. The specific functions 
of cytotoxic and T-­helper cells are discussed later.
The antigens on the surface of antigen-­presenting cells 
bind with receptor molecules on the surfaces of T cells in 
the same way that they bind with plasma protein antibod-
ies. These receptor molecules are composed of a variable 
unit similar to the variable portion of the humoral anti-
body, but its stem section is firmly bound to the cell mem-
brane of the T lymphocyte. There are as many as 100,000 
receptor sites on a single T cell.
DIFFERENT TYPES OF T CELLS AND THEIR 
FUNCTIONS
It has become clear that there are multiple types of T cells, 
classified into three major groups: (1) T-­helper cells; (2) 
cytotoxic T cells; and (3) regulatory T cells (also called sup-
pressor T cells). The functions of each of these T cells are 
distinct.
T-­Helper Cells Are the Most Numerous 
T Cells
The T-­helper cells are the most numerous of the T cells, 
usually constituting more than 75% of all of them. As their 
name implies, they help in the functions of the immune 
system in many ways. They serve as the major regulator of 
Cell-cell
adhesion
proteins
T-cell receptor
Foreign protein
MHC protein
T cell
Antigen-
presenting
cell
Figure 35-­7.  Activation of T cells requires interaction of T-­cell recep-
tors with an antigen (foreign protein) that is transported to the sur-
face of the antigen-­presenting cell by a major histocompatibility com-
plex (MHC) protein. Cell-to-cell adhesion proteins enable the T cell to 
bind to the antigen-­presenting cell long enough to become activated.
Chapter 35  Resistance of the Body to Infection: II. Immunity and Allergy
	
467
U N I T  V I
virtually all immune functions, as shown in Figure 35-­8. 
They do this by forming a series of protein mediators, called 
lymphokines, that act on other cells of the immune system, 
as well as on bone marrow cells.
When stimulated, naïve CD4+ T-­helper cells can differ-
entiate into subsets that produce different lymphokines and 
perform different functions. Table 35-­1 summarizes the 
main subsets of T-­helper cells, the lymphokines that induce 
each subset, the lymphokines produced by the subsets, and 
the immunological reactions that each subset triggers.
Specific Regulatory Functions of Lymphokines. In the 
absence of the lymphokines from the T-­helper cells, the 
remainder of the immune system is almost paralyzed. 
In fact, it is the T-­helper cells that are inactivated or de-
stroyed by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 
which leaves the body almost totally unprotected against 
infectious disease, therefore leading to the now well-­
known debilitating and lethal effects of acquired immu-
nodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Some of the specific regu-
latory functions are described in the following sections. 
Stimulation of Growth and Proliferation of Cyto-
toxic T Cells and Regulatory T Cells. In the absence of 
T-­helper cells, the clones for producing cytotoxic T cells 
and regulatory T cells are activated only slightly by most 
antigens. The lymphokine interleukin-­2 has an especially 
strong stimulatory effect in causing growth and prolifera-
tion of cytotoxic and regulatory T cells. In addition, sev-
eral of the other lymphokines have less potent effects. 
Stimulation of B-­Cell Growth and Differentiation to 
Form Plasma Cells and Antibodies. The direct actions 
of antigens to cause B-­cell growth, proliferation, forma-
tion of plasma cells, and secretion of antibodies are also 
slight without the help of the T-­helper cells. Almost all 
the interleukins participate in the B-­cell response, but es-
pecially interleukins 4, 5, and 6. These three interleukins 
have such potent effects on the B cells that they have been 
called B-­cell stimulating factors or B-­cell growth factors. 
Activation of the Macrophage System. The lymphokines 
also affect the macrophages. First, they slow or stop the mi-
gration of the macrophages after they have been chemotac-
tically attracted into the inflamed tissue area, thus causing 
much accumulation of macrophages. Second, they activate 
the macrophages to cause more efficient phagocytosis, al-
lowing them to attack and destroy increasing numbers of 
invading bacteria or other tissue-­destroying agents. 
Feedback Stimulatory Effect on T-­Helper Cells. Some 
of the lymphokines, especially interleukin-­2, have a di-
rect positive feedback effect in stimulating activation of 
T-­helper cells. This acts as an amplifier by further enhanc-
ing the helper cell response, as well as the entire immune 
response to an invading antigen. 
Cytotoxic T Cells Are Killer Cells
The cytotoxic T cell is a direct attack cell that is capable 
of killing microorganisms and, at times, even some of the 
Lymphokines
Antigen
Antigen
Processed
antigen
MHC
B cell
Suppressor
T cells
Plasma
cells
Cytotoxic
T cells
T-helper
cells
Antigen-specific receptor
Differentiation
Proliferation
IgM
IgG
IgA
IgE
Preprocessor
areas
Interleukin-1
Figure 35-­8.  Regulation of the immune system, emphasizing a pivot-
al role of the T-­helper cells. MHC, Major histocompatibility complex.
Table 35-­1    Subsets of T-­helper Cells
TH1
TH2
TH17
Lymphokines that  
induce subset
IFN-­γ, IL-­12
Il-­4
TGF-­β, Il-­1, Il-­6, IL-­23
Major lymphokines/ 
factors produced
IFN-­γ, Il-­2
TNF-­α,
GM-­CSF
IL-­4, IL-­5, Il-­6,
IL-­10, Il-­13
Il-­17, IL-­22
Major immune  
reactions
Macrophage activation,
Stimulate IgG antibody 
production
Stimulate IgE production,
Activation of mast cells and 
eosinophils
Recruitment of neutrophils 
and monocytes
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
468
body’s own cells. For this reason, these cells are called killer 
cells. The receptor proteins on the surfaces of the CD8+ 
cytotoxic cells cause them to bind tightly to the organ-
isms or cells that contain the appropriate binding-­specific 
antigen. They then kill the attacked cell in the manner 
shown in Figure 35-­9. After binding, the cytotoxic T cell 
secretes hole-­forming proteins, called perforins, that liter-
ally punch round holes in the membrane of the attacked 
cell. Fluid then flows rapidly into the cell from the inter-
stitial space. In addition, the cytotoxic T cell releases cyto-
toxic substances directly into the attacked cell. Almost 
immediately, the attacked cell becomes greatly swollen, 
and it usually dissolves shortly thereafter.
Of special importance is that these cytotoxic killer 
cells can pull away from the victim cells after they have 
punched holes and delivered cytotoxic substances and 
then move on to kill more cells. Some of these cells persist 
for months in the tissues.
Some of the cytotoxic T cells are especially lethal to tis-
sue cells that have been invaded by viruses because many 
virus particles become entrapped in the membranes of 
the tissue cells and attract T cells in response to the viral 
antigenicity. The cytotoxic cells also play an important 
role in destroying cancer cells, heart transplant cells, or 
other types of cells that are foreign to the person’s own 
body. 
Regulatory T Cells
Much less is known about the regulatory T cells than 
about the others, but they are capable of suppressing 
the functions of both cytotoxic and T-­helper cells. These 
suppressor functions of the CD4+ regulatory T cells 
are believed to prevent the cytotoxic cells from causing 
excessive immune reactions that might damage the body’s 
own tissues. It is probable that the suppressor T-­cell sys-
tem plays an important role in limiting the ability of the 
immune system to attack a person’s own body tissues, 
called immune tolerance, as discussed in the next section. 
TOLERANCE OF ACQUIRED IMMUNITY 
SYSTEM TO THE BODY’S OWN TISSUES 
—ROLE OF PREPROCESSING IN THYMUS 
AND BONE MARROW
The process of acquired immunity would destroy the indi-
vidual’s own body if that person became immune to his or 
her own tissues. The immune mechanism normally rec-
ognizes a person’s own tissues as being distinctive from 
bacteria or viruses, and the person’s immunity system 
forms few antibodies or activated T cells against his or 
her own antigens.
Most Tolerance Results From Clone Selection During 
Preprocessing. Most tolerance is believed to develop 
during the preprocessing of T lymphocytes in the thy-
mus and of B lymphocytes in the bone marrow. This is 
because injecting a strong antigen into a fetus while the 
lymphocytes are being preprocessed in these two areas 
prevents development of clones of lymphocytes in the 
lymphoid tissue that are specific for the injected antigen. 
Experiments have shown that specific immature lympho-
cytes in the thymus, when exposed to a strong antigen, 
become lymphoblastic, proliferate considerably, and then 
combine with the stimulating antigen—an effect that is 
believed to cause the cells to be destroyed by the thymic 
epithelial cells before they can migrate to and colonize the 
total body lymphoid tissue.
During the preprocessing of lymphocytes in the thy-
mus and bone marrow, all or most of the clones of lym-
phocytes that are specific to damage the body’s own 
tissues appear to be self-­destroyed because of their con-
tinual exposure to the body’s antigens. 
Failure of the Tolerance Mechanism Causes Auto-
immune Diseases. Sometimes, people lose immune 
tolerance of their own tissues. This phenomenon oc-
curs to a greater extent the older a person becomes. It 
usually occurs after destruction of some of the body’s 
own tissues, which releases considerable quantities of 
self-­antigens that circulate in the body and presumably 
cause acquired immunity in the form of activated T cells 
or antibodies.
Over 100 diseases that result from autoimmunity 
have been described and include: (1) rheumatic fever, 
in which the body becomes immunized against tissues 
in the joints and heart, especially the heart valves, after 
exposure to a specific type of streptococcal toxin that 
has an epitope in its molecular structure similar to the 
structure of some of the body’s own self-­antigens; (2) 
one type of glomerulonephritis, in which the person 
becomes immunized against the basement membranes 
of glomeruli; (3) myasthenia gravis, in which immunity 
develops against the acetylcholine receptor proteins of 
the neuromuscular junction, causing paralysis; (4) mul-
tiple sclerosis (MS), in which the immune system attacks 
the myelin that covers nerve fibers, disrupting nervous 
Cytotoxic
and
digestive
enzymes
Cytotoxic
T cells
(killer cells)
Antigen
receptors
Antigen
Attacked
cell
Specific
binding
Figure 35-­9.  Direct destruction of an invading cell by sensitized lym-
phocytes (cytotoxic T cells).
Chapter 35  Resistance of the Body to Infection: II. Immunity and Allergy
	
469
U N I T  V I
system communication; and (5) systemic lupus erythe-
matosus (SLE), in which the person becomes immunized 
against many different body tissues at the same time, a 
disease that causes extensive damage and even death 
when SLE is severe. 
IMMUNIZATION BY INJECTION OF 
ANTIGENS
Immunization has been used for many years to produce 
acquired immunity against specific diseases. A person can 
be immunized by injecting dead organisms that are no 
longer capable of causing disease but that still have some 
of their chemical antigens. This type of immunization is 
used to protect against typhoid fever, whooping cough, 
diphtheria, and many other types of bacterial diseases.
Immunity can be achieved against toxins that have 
been treated with chemicals so that their toxic nature has 
been destroyed, even though their antigens for causing 
immunity are still intact. This procedure is used in immu-
nizing against tetanus, botulism, and other similar toxic 
diseases.
And, finally, a person can be immunized by being 
infected with live organisms that have been attenuated. 
That is, these organisms have been grown in special cul-
ture media or have been passed through a series of ani-
mals until they have mutated enough that they will not 
cause disease but do still carry specific antigens required 
for immunization. This procedure is used to protect 
against smallpox, yellow fever, poliomyelitis, measles, and 
many other viral diseases. 
PASSIVE IMMUNITY
Thus far, all the acquired immunity we have discussed 
has been active immunity—that is, the person’s own 
body develops antibodies or activated T cells in response 
to invasion of the body by a foreign antigen. However, 
temporary immunity can be achieved in a person with-
out injecting any antigen. This temporary immunity is 
achieved by infusing antibodies, activated T cells, or both 
obtained from the blood of someone else or from some 
other animal that has been actively immunized against 
the antigen.
Antibodies last in the body of the recipient for 2 to 
3 weeks and, during that time, the person is protected 
against the invading disease. Activated T cells last for a 
few weeks if transfused from another person but only for 
a few hours to a few days if transfused from an animal. 
Such transfusion of antibodies or T lymphocytes to con-
fer immunity is called passive immunity. 
ALLERGY AND HYPERSENSITIVITY
An important undesirable side effect of immunity is the 
development, under some conditions, of an allergy or 
other type of immune hypersensitivity. There are several 
types of allergy and other hypersensitivities, some of 
which occur only in people who have a specific allergic 
tendency.
ALLERGY CAUSED BY ACTIVATED T CELLS: 
DELAYED-­REACTION ALLERGY
Delayed-­reaction allergy is caused by activated T cells and 
not by antibodies. In the case of poison ivy, the toxin of 
poison ivy in itself does not cause much harm to the tis-
sues. However, on repeated exposure, it does cause the 
formation of activated helper and cytotoxic T cells. Then, 
after subsequent exposure to the poison ivy toxin, within 
a day or so, the activated T cells diffuse from the circulat-
ing blood in large numbers into the skin to respond to 
the poison ivy toxin. At the same time, these T cells elicit 
a cell-­mediated type of immune reaction. Remembering 
that this type of immunity can cause release of many toxic 
substances from the activated T cells, as well as extensive 
invasion of the tissues by macrophages, along with their 
subsequent effects, one can understand that the eventual 
result of some delayed-­reaction allergies can be serious 
tissue damage. The damage normally occurs in the tissue 
area where the instigating antigen is present, such as in 
the skin in the case of poison ivy or in the lungs to cause 
lung edema or asthmatic attacks in the case of some air-
borne antigens. 
ATOPIC ALLERGIES ASSOCIATED WITH 
EXCESS IGE ANTIBODIES
Some people have an allergic tendency. Their allergies 
are called atopic allergies because they are caused by a 
nonordinary response of the immune system. The aller-
gic tendency is genetically passed from parent to child 
and is characterized by the presence of large quanti-
ties of IgE antibodies in the blood. These antibodies are 
called reagins or sensitizing antibodies to distinguish them 
from the more common IgG antibodies. When an aller-
gen (defined as an antigen that reacts specifically with a 
specific type of IgE reagin antibody) enters the body, an 
allergen-­reagin reaction takes place, and a subsequent 
allergic reaction occurs.
A special characteristic of the IgE antibodies (the 
reagins) is a strong propensity to attach to mast cells 
and basophils. Indeed, a single mast cell or basophil can 
bind as many as a half-­million molecules of IgE antibod-
ies. Then, when an antigen (an allergen) that has multiple 
binding sites binds with several IgE antibodies that are 
already attached to a mast cell or basophil, there is an 
immediate change in the membrane of the mast cell or 
basophil, perhaps resulting from a physical effect of the 
antibody molecules to contort the cell membrane. At any 
rate, many of the mast cells and basophils rupture; others 
release special agents immediately or shortly thereafter, 
including histamine, protease, slow-­reacting substance of 
anaphylaxis (a mixture of toxic leukotrienes), eosinophil 
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
470
chemotactic substance, neutrophil chemotactic substance, 
heparin, and platelet-­activating factors. These substances 
cause effects such as dilation of the local blood vessels, 
attraction of eosinophils and neutrophils to the reactive 
site, increased permeability of the capillaries with loss 
of fluid into the tissues, and contraction of local smooth 
muscle cells. Therefore, several different tissue responses 
can occur, depending on the type of tissue in which the 
allergen-­reagin reaction occurs. Some of the differ-
ent types of allergic reactions caused in this manner are 
described next.
Anaphylaxis—Widespread Allergic Reaction. When a 
specific allergen is injected directly into the circulation, 
the allergen can react with basophils of the blood and 
mast cells in the tissues located immediately outside the 
small blood vessels if the basophils and mast cells have 
been sensitized by the attachment of IgE reagins. There-
fore, a widespread allergic reaction occurs throughout the 
vascular system and closely associated tissues. This reac-
tion is called anaphylaxis. Histamine is released into the 
circulation and causes body-­wide vasodilation, as well as 
increased permeability of the capillaries, with a resultant 
marked loss of plasma from the circulation. Occasionally, 
a person who experiences this reaction dies of circulatory 
shock within a few minutes unless treated with epineph-
rine to counteract the effects of the histamine.
Also released from the activated basophils and mast 
cells is a mixture of leukotrienes called slow-­reacting 
substance of anaphylaxis. These leukotrienes can cause 
spasm of the smooth muscle of the bronchioles, eliciting 
an asthma-­like attack and sometimes causing death by 
suffocation. 
Urticaria—Localized Anaphylactoid Reactions. ­Urticaria 
results from antigen entering specific skin areas and causing 
localized anaphylactoid reactions. Histamine released lo-
cally causes: (1) vasodilation that induces an immediate red 
flare; and (2) increased local permeability of the capillaries 
that leads to local circumscribed areas of swelling of the skin 
within another few minutes. The swellings are commonly 
called hives. Administration of antihistamine drugs to a per-
son before exposure will prevent the hives. 
Hay Fever. In hay fever, the allergen-­reagin reaction oc-
curs in the nose. Histamine released in response to the 
reaction causes local intranasal vascular dilation, with 
resultant increased capillary pressure and increased cap-
illary permeability. Both these effects cause rapid fluid 
leakage into the nasal cavities and into associated deeper 
tissues of the nose, and the nasal linings become swol-
len and secretory. Here again, the use of antihistamine 
drugs can prevent this swelling reaction. However, other 
­products of the allergen-­reagin reaction can still cause 
irritation of the nose, eliciting the typical sneezing syn-
drome. 
Asthma. Asthma often occurs in the hypersensitive al-
lergic person. In these individuals, the allergen-­reagin 
reaction occurs in the bronchioles of the lungs. Here, an 
important product released from the mast cells is believed 
to be the slow-­reacting substance of anaphylaxis (a mix-
ture of three leukotrienes), which causes spasm of the 
bronchiolar smooth muscle. Consequently, the person 
has difficulty breathing until the reactive products of the 
allergic reaction have been removed. The administration 
of antihistamine medication has less effect on the course 
of asthma because histamine does not appear to be the 
major factor eliciting the asthmatic reaction.
Bibliography
Biglarnia AR, Huber-­Lang M, Mohlin C, Ekdahl KN, Nilsson B: The 
multifaceted role of complement in kidney transplantation. Nat Rev 
Nephrol 14:767, 2018.
Brynjolfsson SF, Persson Berg L, Olsen Ekerhult T, et al: Long-­lived 
plasma cells in mice and men. Front Immunol 2018 Nov 16;9:2673. 
https://www.org.doi.10.3389/fimmu.2018.02673.
Chiossone L, Dumas PY, Vienne M, Vivier E: Natural killer cells and 
other innate lymphoid cells in cancer. Nat Rev Immunol 18:671, 
2018.
Crosby CM, Kronenberg M: Tissue-­specific functions of invariant 
natural killer T cells. Nat Rev Immunol 18:559, 2018.
Cyster JG, Allen CDC: B cell responses: cell interaction dynamics and 
decisions. Cell 177:524, 2019.
DeNardo DG, Ruffell B: Macrophages as regulators of tumour immu-
nity and immunotherapy. Nat Rev Immunol 19:369, 2019.
Eisenbarth SC: Dendritic cell subsets in T cell programming: location 
dictates function. Nat Rev Immunol 19:89, 2019.
Gattinoni L, Speiser DE, Lichterfeld M, Bonini C: T memory stem cells 
in health and disease. Nat Med 23:18, 2017.
Georg P, Sander LE: Innate sensors that regulate vaccine responses. 
Curr Opin Immunol 59:31, 2019.
Heath WR, Kato Y, Steiner TM, Caminschi I: Antigen presentation 
by dendritic cells for B cell activation. Curr Opin Immunol 58:44, 
2019.
Ho AW, Kupper TS: T cells and the skin: from protective immunity to 
inflammatory skin disorders. Nat Rev Immunol 19:490, 2019. 
Husebye ES, Anderson MS, Kämpe O: Autoimmune polyendocrine 
syndromes. N Engl J Med 378:1132, 2018.
Israel E, Reddel HK: Severe and difficult-­to-­treat asthma in adults. N 
Engl J Med 377:965, 2017.
Papi A, Brightling C, Pedersen SE, Reddel HK: Asthma. Lancet 
391:783, 2018.
Reis ES, Mastellos DC, Hajishengallis G, Lambris JD: New insights into 
the immune functions of complement. Nat Rev Immunol 19:503, 
2019. ­
Robson KJ, Ooi JD, Holdsworth SR, Rossjohn J, Kitching AR: HLA and 
kidney disease: from associations to mechanisms. Nat Rev Nephrol 
14:636, 2018.
Theofilopoulos AN, Kono DH, Baccala R: The multiple pathways to 
autoimmunity. Nat Immunol 18:716, 2017.
Yatim N, Cullen S, Albert ML: Dying cells actively regulate adaptive 
immune responses. Nat Rev Immunol 17:262, 2017.
U N I T  V I
	
471
ANTIGENICITY CAUSES IMMUNE 
REACTIONS OF BLOOD
When blood transfusions from one person to another 
were first attempted, immediate or delayed agglutina-
tion and hemolysis of the red blood cells (RBCs) often 
occurred, resulting in typical transfusion reactions 
that frequently led to death. Soon it was discovered 
that the blood types of different people have different 
antigenic and immune properties so that antibodies in 
the plasma of one blood type will react with antigens 
on the surfaces of the RBCs of another blood type. If 
proper precautions are taken, one can determine ahead 
of time whether the antibodies and antigens present in 
the donor and recipient blood will cause a transfusion 
reaction.
Multiplicity of Antigens in the Blood Cells
At least 30 commonly occurring antigens and hundreds 
of other rare antigens, each of which can at times cause 
antigen-­antibody reactions, have been found on the sur-
faces of the cell membranes of human blood cells. Most 
of the antigens are weak and therefore are of importance 
principally for studying the inheritance of genes to estab-
lish parentage.
Two particular types of antigens are much more likely 
than the others to cause blood transfusion reactions. They 
are the O-­A-­B system of antigens and the Rh system. 
O-­A-­B BLOOD TYPES
A AND B ANTIGENS—AGGLUTINOGENS
Two antigens—type A and type B—occur on the sur-
faces of the RBCs in a large proportion of people. It is 
these antigens (also called agglutinogens because they 
often cause RBC agglutination) that cause most blood 
transfusion reactions. Because of how these agglutino-
gens are inherited, people may have neither of them on 
their cells, they may have one, or they may have both 
simultaneously. 
Major O-­A-­B Blood Types. In transfusing blood from 
one person to another, the blood of donors and re-
cipients is normally classified into four major O-­A-­B 
blood types, as shown in Table 36-­1, depending on the 
presence or absence of the two agglutinogens, the A 
and B agglutinogens. When neither A nor B aggluti-
nogen is present, the blood is type O. When only type 
A agglutinogen is present, the blood is type A. When 
only type B agglutinogen is present, the blood is type 
B. When both A and B agglutinogens are present, the 
blood is type AB. 
Genetic Determination of the Agglutinogens. The ABO 
blood group genetic locus has three alleles, which means 
three different forms of the same gene. These three al-
leles—IA, IB, and IO—determine the three blood types. 
We typically call these alleles A, B, and O, but geneticists 
often represent alleles of a gene by variations of the same 
symbol. In this case, the common symbol is the letter “I,” 
which stands for immunoglobulin.
The type O allele is functionless or almost function-
less, so it causes no significant type O agglutinogen on 
the cells. Conversely, the type A and type B alleles do 
cause strong agglutinogens on the cells. Thus, the O 
allele is recessive to both the A and B alleles, which show 
co-­dominance.
Because each person has only two sets of chromosomes, 
only one of these alleles is present on each of the two chro-
mosomes in any individual. However, the presence of three 
different alleles means that there are six possible combina-
tions of alleles, as shown in Table 36-­1: OO, OA, OB, AA, 
BB, and AB. These combinations of alleles are known as 
the genotypes, and each person is one of the six genotypes.
One can also observe from Table 36-­1 that a person 
with genotype OO produces no agglutinogens, and there-
fore the blood type is O. A person with genotype OA or 
AA produces type A agglutinogens and therefore has 
blood type A. Genotypes OB and BB give type B blood, 
and genotype AB gives type AB blood. 
Relative Frequencies of Different Blood Types. The 
prevalence of the different blood types among one group 
of persons studied was approximately as follows:
 
• O: 47%
 
• A: 41%
 
• B:   9%
 
• AB: 3%
Blood Types; Transfusion; and Tissue and 
Organ Transplantation 
C H A P T E R  3 6
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
472
It is obvious from these percentages that the O and 
A genes occur frequently, whereas the B gene occurs 
infrequently. 
AGGLUTININS
When type A agglutinogen is not present in a person’s 
RBCs, antibodies known as anti-­A agglutinins develop in 
the plasma. Also, when type B agglutinogen is not pres-
ent in the RBCs, antibodies known as anti-­B agglutinins 
develop in the plasma.
Referring once again to Table 36-­1, note that type O 
blood, although containing no agglutinogens, does con-
tain both anti-­A and anti-­B agglutinins. Type A blood 
contains type A agglutinogens and anti-­B agglutinins, and 
type B blood contains type B agglutinogens and anti-­A 
agglutinins. Finally, type AB blood contains both A and B 
agglutinogens but no agglutinins.
Titer of Agglutinins at Different Ages. Immediately 
after birth, the quantity of agglutinins in the plasma is al-
most zero. At 2 to 8 months after birth, an infant begins 
to produce agglutinins—anti-­A agglutinins when type A 
agglutinogens are not present in the cells, and anti-­B ag-
glutinins when type B agglutinogens are not in the cells. 
Figure 36-­1 shows the changing titers of the anti-­A and 
anti-­B agglutinins at different ages. A maximum titer is 
usually reached at 8 to 10 years of age, and this titer grad-
ually declines throughout the remaining years of life. 
Origin of Agglutinins in Plasma. The agglutinins are 
gamma globulins, as are almost all antibodies, and they 
are produced by the same bone marrow and lymph gland 
cells that produce antibodies to any other antigens. Most 
of them are IgM and IgG immunoglobulin molecules.
But why are these agglutinins produced in people who 
do not have the respective agglutinogens in their RBCs? 
A possible answer to this question is that small amounts 
of type A and B antigens enter the body in food, bacteria, 
and other ways, and these substances initiate the develop-
ment of the anti-­A and anti-­B agglutinins.
For example, infusion of group A antigen into a recipi-
ent having a non-­A blood type causes a typical immune 
response, with formation of more anti-­A agglutinins 
than ever. Also, the neonate has few, if any, agglutinins, 
showing that agglutinin formation occurs almost entirely 
after birth. 
AGGLUTINATION PROCESS IN 
TRANSFUSION REACTIONS
When bloods are mismatched so that anti-­A or anti-­B 
plasma agglutinins are mixed with RBCs that contain A 
or B agglutinogens, respectively, the RBCs agglutinate 
as a result of the agglutinins attaching themselves to the 
RBCs. Because the agglutinins have two binding sites (IgG 
type) or ten binding sites (IgM type), a single agglutinin 
can attach to two or more RBCs at the same time, thereby 
causing the cells to be bound together by the agglutinin. 
This binding causes the cells to clump, which is the pro-
cess of agglutination. Then these clumps plug small blood 
vessels throughout the circulatory system. During the 
ensuing hours to days, physical distortion of the cells or 
attack by phagocytic white blood cells destroys the mem-
branes of the agglutinated cells, releasing hemoglobin into 
the plasma, called hemolysis of the RBCs.
Acute Hemolysis Occurs in Some Transfusion Reac-
tions. Sometimes, when recipient and donor bloods are 
mismatched, immediate hemolysis of RBCs occurs in the 
circulating blood. In this case, the antibodies cause lysis 
of the RBCs by activating the complement system and 
forming a membrane attack complex (also called cytol-
ytic complex) that inserts itself into the lipid bilayer of the 
cell membranes; this insertion creates membrane pores 
that are permeable to ions and causes osmotic lysis of the 
cells, as described in Chapter 35. Immediate intravascu-
lar hemolysis is far less common than agglutination fol-
lowed by delayed hemolysis, because not only does there 
have to be a high titer of antibodies for lysis to occur, but 
also a different type of antibody seems to be required, 
mainly the IgM antibodies; these antibodies are called 
hemolysins. 
BLOOD TYPING
Before giving a transfusion to a person, it is necessary to 
determine the blood type of the recipient and donor blood 
so that the bloods can be appropriately matched. This pro-
cess is called blood typing and blood matching, and these 
procedures are performed in the following way. The RBCs 
0
100
200
300
400
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Average titer of agglutinins
Age of person (years)
Anti-A agglutinins in
groups B and O blood
Anti-B agglutinins
in groups A and
O blood
Figure 36-­1.  Average titers of anti-­A and anti-­B agglutinins in the 
plasma of people with different blood types.
Table 36-­1    Blood Types With Their Genotypes and 
Constituent Agglutinogens and Agglutinins
Genotypes
Blood Types
Agglutinogens
Agglutinins
OO
O
–
Anti-­A and 
Anti-­B
OA or AA
A
A
Anti-­B
OB or BB
B
B
Anti-­A
AB
AB
A and B
–
Chapter 36  Blood Types; Transfusion; and Tissue and Organ Transplantation 
	
473
U N I T  V I
are first separated from the plasma and diluted with saline 
solution. One portion is then mixed with anti-­A aggluti-
nin and another portion is mixed with anti-­B agglutinin. 
After several minutes, the mixtures are observed under 
a microscope. If the RBCs have become clumped—that 
is, agglutinated—then an antibody-­antigen reaction has 
resulted.
Table 36-­2 lists the presence (+) or absence (−) of 
agglutination of the four types of RBCs. Type O RBCs 
have no agglutinogens and therefore do not react with the 
anti-­A or anti-­B agglutinins. Type A blood has A agglu-
tinogens and therefore agglutinates with anti-­A aggluti-
nins. Type B blood has B agglutinogens and agglutinates 
with anti-­B agglutinins. Type AB blood has both A and 
B agglutinogens and agglutinates with both types of 
agglutinins. 
Rh BLOOD TYPES
Along with the O-­A-­B blood type system, the Rh blood 
type system is also important when transfusing blood. 
The major difference between the O-­A-­B system and Rh 
system is the following. In the O-­A-­B system, the plasma 
agglutinins responsible for causing transfusion reactions 
develop spontaneously, whereas in the Rh system, sponta-
neous agglutinins almost never occur. Instead, the person 
must first be massively exposed to an Rh antigen—such 
as by transfusion of blood containing the Rh antigen—
before enough agglutinins to cause a significant transfu-
sion reaction will develop.
Rh Antigens—Rh-­Positive and Rh-­Negative. There are 
six common types of Rh antigens, each of which is called 
an Rh factor. These types are designated C, D, E, c, d, and 
e. A person who has a C antigen does not have the c anti-
gen, but the person missing the C antigen always has the 
c antigen. The same is true for the D-­d and E-­e antigens. 
Also, because of the manner of inheritance of these fac-
tors, each person has one of each of the three pairs of an-
tigens.
The type D antigen is widely prevalent in the popula-
tion and is considerably more antigenic than the other Rh 
antigens. Anyone who has this type of antigen is said to 
be Rh positive, whereas a person who does not have type 
D antigen is said to be Rh negative. However, it must be 
noted that even in Rh-­negative people, some of the other 
Rh antigens can still cause transfusion reactions, although 
the reactions are usually much milder.
About 85% of all whites are Rh positive, and 15% are 
Rh negative. In American blacks, the percentage of Rh-­
positives is about 95%, whereas in African blacks, it is 
nearly 100%. Over 95% of Native Americans and Asians 
living in China, Japan, and Korea are also Rh positive, 
and it is estimated that the worldwide frequencies of Rh-­
positive and Rh-­negative blood types are 95% and 6%, 
respectively. 
Rh IMMUNE RESPONSE
Formation of Anti-­Rh Agglutinins. When RBCs con-
taining Rh factor are injected into a person whose blood 
does not contain the Rh factor—that is, into an Rh-­
negative person—anti-­Rh agglutinins develop slowly, 
reaching a maximum concentration of agglutinins about 
2 to 4 months later. This immune response occurs to a 
much greater extent in some people than in others. With 
multiple exposures to the Rh factor, an Rh-­negative per-
son eventually becomes strongly sensitized to Rh factor. 
Characteristics of Rh Transfusion Reactions. If an Rh-­
negative person has never been exposed to Rh-­positive 
blood, transfusion of Rh-­positive blood into that person 
will likely cause no immediate reaction. However, anti-­Rh 
antibodies can develop in sufficient quantities during the 
next 2 to 4 weeks to cause agglutination of the transfused 
cells that are still circulating in the blood. These cells are 
then hemolyzed by the tissue macrophage system. Thus, 
a delayed transfusion reaction occurs, although it is usu-
ally mild. On subsequent transfusion of Rh-­positive blood 
into the same person, who is now already immunized 
against the Rh factor, the transfusion reaction is greatly 
enhanced and can be immediate and as severe as a trans-
fusion reaction caused by mismatched type A or B blood. 
Erythroblastosis Fetalis (Hemolytic 
Disease of the Newborn)
Erythroblastosis fetalis is a disease of the fetus and new-
born child characterized by agglutination and phagocyto-
sis of the fetus’s RBCs. In most cases of erythroblastosis 
fetalis, the mother is Rh negative and the father is Rh 
positive. The baby has inherited the Rh-­positive antigen 
from the father, and the mother develops anti-­Rh aggluti-
nins from exposure to the fetus’s Rh antigen. In turn, the 
mother’s agglutinins diffuse through the placenta into the 
fetus and cause RBC agglutination.
Incidence of Erythroblastosis Fetalis. An Rh-­negative 
mother having her first Rh-­positive child usually does not 
develop sufficient anti-­Rh agglutinins to cause any harm. 
However, about 3% of second Rh-­positive babies exhibit 
some signs of erythroblastosis fetalis, about 10% of third 
babies exhibit the disease, and the incidence rises pro-
gressively with subsequent pregnancies. 
Table 36-­2    Blood Typing: Agglutination of Cells of 
Different Blood Types With Anti-­A or Anti-­B Agglutinins 
in the Sera
Red Blood Cell Types
Sera
Anti-­A
Anti-­B
O
−
−
A
+
−
B
−
+
AB
+
+
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
474
Effect of Mother’s Antibodies on the Fetus. After anti-­
Rh antibodies have formed in the mother, they diffuse 
slowly through the placental membrane into the fetus’s 
blood. There they cause agglutination of the fetus’s blood. 
The agglutinated RBCs subsequently hemolyze, releasing 
hemoglobin into the blood. The fetus’s macrophages then 
convert the hemoglobin into bilirubin, which causes the 
baby’s skin to become yellow (jaundiced). The antibodies 
can also attack and damage other cells of the body. 
Clinical Picture of Erythroblastosis. The jaundiced, 
erythroblastotic newborn baby is usually anemic at birth, 
and the anti-­Rh agglutinins from the mother usually cir-
culate in the infant’s blood for another 1 to 2 months after 
birth, destroying more and more RBCs.
The hematopoietic tissues of the infant attempt 
to replace the hemolyzed RBCs. The liver and spleen 
become greatly enlarged and produce RBCs in the same 
manner that they normally do during the middle of gesta-
tion. Because of the rapid production of RBCs, many early 
forms of RBCs, including many nucleated blastic forms, 
are passed from the baby’s bone marrow into the circu-
latory system, and it is because of the presence of these 
nucleated blastic RBCs that the disease is called erythro-
blastosis fetalis.
Although the severe anemia of erythroblastosis fetalis is 
usually the cause of death, many children who barely sur-
vive the anemia exhibit permanent mental impairment or 
damage to motor areas of the brain because of precipita-
tion of bilirubin in the neuronal cells, causing the destruc-
tion of many of these cells, a condition called kernicterus. 
Treatment of Neonates With Erythroblastosis Fetalis. 
One treatment for erythroblastosis fetalis is to replace the 
neonate’s blood with Rh-­negative blood. The Rh-­negative 
blood is infused over a period of 1.5 or more hours while 
the neonate’s own Rh-­positive blood is being removed. 
This procedure may be repeated several times during the 
first few weeks of life, mainly to keep the bilirubin level 
low and thereby prevent kernicterus. By the time these 
transfused Rh-­negative cells are replaced with the infant’s 
own Rh-­positive cells, a process that requires 6 weeks or 
more, the anti-­Rh agglutinins that had come from the 
mother will have been destroyed. 
Prevention of Erythroblastosis Fetalis. The D antigen 
of the Rh blood group system is the primary culprit in 
causing immunization of an Rh-­negative mother to an 
Rh-­positive fetus. In the 1970s, a dramatic reduction in 
the incidence of erythroblastosis fetalis was achieved with 
the development of Rh immunoglobulin globin, an anti-
­D antibody that is administered to the expectant mother 
starting at 28 to 30 weeks of gestation. The anti-­D anti-
body is also administered to Rh-­negative women who 
deliver Rh-­positive babies to prevent sensitization of the 
mothers to the D antigen. This step greatly reduces the 
risk of developing large amounts of D antibodies during 
the second pregnancy.
The mechanism whereby Rh immunoglobulin globin 
prevents sensitization of the D antigen is not completely 
understood, but one effect of the anti-­D antibody is to 
inhibit antigen-­induced, B lymphocyte antibody produc-
tion in the expectant mother. The administered anti-­D 
antibody also attaches to D antigen sites on Rh-­positive 
fetal RBCs that may cross the placenta and enter the cir-
culation of the expectant mother, thereby interfering with 
the immune response to the D antigen. 
TRANSFUSION REACTIONS RESULTING 
FROM MISMATCHED BLOOD TYPES
If donor blood of one blood type is transfused into a 
recipient who has another blood type, a transfusion reac-
tion is likely to occur in which the RBCs of the donor blood 
are agglutinated. It is rare that the transfused blood causes 
agglutination of the recipient’s cells, for the following rea-
son. The plasma portion of the donor blood immediately 
becomes diluted by all the plasma of the recipient, thereby 
decreasing the titer of the infused agglutinins to a level 
usually too low to cause agglutination. However, the small 
amount of infused blood does not significantly dilute the 
agglutinins in the recipient’s plasma. Therefore, the recip-
ient’s agglutinins can still agglutinate the mismatched 
donor cells.
As explained earlier, all transfusion reactions eventu-
ally cause immediate hemolysis resulting from hemoly-
sins or later hemolysis resulting from phagocytosis of 
agglutinated cells. Hemoglobin released from the RBCs is 
then converted by the phagocytes into bilirubin and later 
excreted in the bile by the liver, as discussed in Chapter 
71. The concentration of bilirubin in the body fluids often 
rises high enough to cause jaundice—that is, the person’s 
internal tissues and skin become colored with yellow bile 
pigment. However, if liver function is normal, the bile pig-
ment will be excreted into the intestines by way of the 
liver bile, so jaundice usually does not appear in an adult 
unless more than 400 milliliters of blood are hemolyzed 
in less than a day.
Acute Kidney Failure After Transfusion Reactions. 
One of the most lethal effects of transfusion reactions is 
kidney failure, which can begin within a few minutes to 
a few hours and continue until the person dies of acute 
renal failure.
The kidney shutdown seems to have three causes:
 
1. The antigen-­antibody reaction of the transfusion re-
action releases toxic substances from the hemolyz-
ing blood that cause powerful renal vasoconstric-
tion.
	
2.	 Loss of circulating RBCs in the recipient, along 
with production of toxic substances from the 
hemolyzed cells and the immune reaction, often 
cause circulatory shock. The arterial blood pressure 
falls very low, and renal blood flow and urine output 
decrease.
Chapter 36  Blood Types; Transfusion; and Tissue and Organ Transplantation 
	
475
U N I T  V I
	
3.	 If the total amount of free hemoglobin released into 
the circulating blood is greater than the quantity 
that can bind with haptoglobin (a plasma protein 
that binds small amounts of hemoglobin), much of 
the excess leaks through the glomerular membranes 
into the kidney tubules.
If this amount is still slight, it can be reabsorbed 
through the tubular epithelium into the blood and will 
cause no harm; if large, then only a small percentage 
is reabsorbed. Yet, water continues to be reabsorbed, 
causing the tubular hemoglobin concentration to rise 
so high that the hemoglobin precipitates and blocks 
many of the kidney tubules. Thus, renal vasoconstric-
tion, circulatory shock, and renal tubular blockage 
together cause acute renal shutdown. If the shutdown 
is complete and fails to resolve, the patient dies within 
7 to 12 days, as explained in Chapter 32, unless treated 
with an artificial kidney. 
TRANSPLANTATION OF TISSUES AND 
ORGANS
Most of the different antigens of RBCs that cause trans-
fusion reactions are also widely present in other cells of 
the body, and each bodily tissue has its own additional 
complement of antigens. Consequently, foreign cells 
transplanted anywhere into the body of a recipient can 
produce an immune reaction. In other words, most recip-
ients are just as able to resist invasion by foreign tissue 
cells as to resist invasion by foreign bacteria or RBCs.
Autografts, Isografts, Allografts, and Xenografts. A 
transplant of a tissue or whole organ from one part of the 
same animal to another part is called an autograft; from 
one identical twin to another, an isograft; from one person 
to another or from an animal to another animal of the 
same species, an allograft; and from a nonhuman animal 
to a human or from an animal of one species to one of 
another species, a xenograft. 
Transplantation of Cellular Tissues. In the case of auto-
grafts and isografts, cells in the transplant contain virtually 
the same types of antigens as in the tissues of the recipi-
ent and will almost always continue to live normally and 
indefinitely if an adequate blood supply is provided. At the 
other extreme, immune reactions almost always occur in 
xenografts, causing death of the cells in the graft within 1 
day to 5 weeks after transplantation unless some specific 
therapy is used to prevent the immune reactions.
Some of the different cellular tissues and organs that 
have been transplanted from one person to another as 
allografts, either experimentally or for therapeutic pur-
poses, are skin, kidney, heart, liver, glandular tissue, 
bone marrow, and lung. With proper matching of tissues 
between persons, many kidney allografts have been suc-
cessful for at least 5 to 15 years and allograft liver and 
heart transplants for 1 to 15 years. 
ATTEMPTS TO OVERCOME IMMUNE 
REACTIONS IN TRANSPLANTED TISSUE
Because of the extreme potential importance of trans-
planting certain tissues and organs, serious attempts 
have been made to prevent antigen-­antibody reactions 
associated with transplantation. The following specific 
procedures have met with some degrees of clinical or 
experimental success.
Tissue Typing—Human Leukocyte Antigen Com-
plex of Antigens. The most important antigens for 
causing graft rejection are a complex called human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) antigens. Six of these antigens 
are present on the tissue cell membranes of each per-
son, but there are about 150 different HLA antigens to 
choose from, representing more than 1 trillion possible 
combinations. Consequently, it is virtually impossible 
for two persons, except in the case of identical twins, 
to have the same six HLA antigens. Development of 
significant immunity against any of these antigens can 
cause graft rejection.
The HLA antigens are on the white blood cells, as 
well as on the tissue cells. Therefore, tissue typing for 
these antigens is done on the membranes of lympho-
cytes that have been separated from the person’s blood. 
The lymphocytes are mixed with appropriate antisera 
and complement; after incubation, the cells are tested 
for membrane damage, usually by determining the rate 
of transmembrane uptake by the lymphocytic cells of a 
special dye.
Some of the HLA antigens are not severely antigenic. 
Therefore, a precise match of some antigens between 
donor and recipient is not always essential to allow 
allograft acceptance. By using a more advanced method 
of genetic testing and obtaining the best possible match 
between donor and recipient, the grafting procedure has 
become far less hazardous. The best success has been 
with tissue type matches between siblings and between 
parent and child. The match in identical twins is exact, 
so transplants between identical twins are almost never 
rejected because of an immune reaction. 
Prevention of Graft Rejection by 
Suppressing the Immune System
If the immune system were completely suppressed, graft 
rejection would not occur. In fact, in a person who has 
serious depression of the immune system, grafts can be 
successful without the use of significant therapy to pre-
vent rejection. However, in the person with a healthy 
immune system, even with the best possible tissue typing, 
allografts seldom resist rejection for more than a few days 
or weeks without the use of specific therapy to suppress 
the immune system. Furthermore, because the T cells 
are mainly the portion of the immune system important 
for killing grafted cells, their suppression is much more 
important than suppression of plasma antibodies. Some 
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
476
of the therapeutic agents that have been used for this pur-
pose include the following:
 
1. Glucocorticoid hormones from adrenal cortex 
glands (or drugs with glucocorticoid-­like activity). 
These drugs inhibit genes that code for several cy-
tokines, especially interleukin-­2 (IL-­2). IL-­2 is an 
essential factor that induces T-­cell proliferation and 
antibody formation.
	
2.	 Various drugs that have a toxic effect on the lym-
phoid system and therefore block formation of an-
tibodies and T cells, especially the drug azathio-
prine.
	
3.	 Cyclosporine and tacrolimus, which inhibit forma-
tion of T-­helper cells and, therefore, are especially 
efficacious in blocking the T-­cell rejection reac-
tion. These agents have proven to be highly valuable 
drugs because they do not depress some other por-
tions of the immune system.
 
4. Immunosuppressive antibody therapy. including spe-
cific antilymphocyte or IL-­2 receptor antibodies.
Use of these agents often leaves the person unpro-
tected from infectious disease; therefore, sometimes 
bacterial and viral infections become rampant. In addi-
tion, the incidence of cancer is several times greater in 
an immunosuppressed person, presumably because the 
immune system is important in destroying many early 
cancer cells before they can begin to proliferate.
Transplantation of living tissues in people has been 
successful mainly because of the development of drugs 
that suppress the responses of the immune system. With 
the introduction of improved immunosuppressive agents, 
successful organ transplantation has become much more 
common. The current approach to immunosuppressive 
therapy attempts to balance acceptable rates of rejection 
with moderation of the adverse effects of immunosup-
pressive drugs.
Bibliography
Branch DR: Anti-­A and anti-­B: what are they and where do they come 
from? Transfusion 55 Suppl 2:S74, 2015.
Burton NM, Anstee DJ: Structure, function and significance of Rh pro-
teins in red cells. Curr Opin Hematol 15:625, 2008.
Dierickx D, Habermann TM: Post-­transplantation lymphoproliferative 
disorders in adults. N Engl J Med 378:549, 2018. .
Ezekian B, Schroder PM, Freischlag K, et  al: Contemporary strate-
gies and barriers to transplantation tolerance. Transplantation 
102:1213, 2018.
Flegel WA: Pathogenesis and mechanisms of antibody-­mediated he-
molysis. Transfusion 55 Suppl 2:S47, 2015.
Kramer CSM, Israeli M, Mulder A, et al: The long and winding road 
towards epitope matching in clinical transplantation. Transpl Int 
32:16, 2019.
Loupy A, Lefaucheur C: Antibody-­mediated rejection of solid-­organ 
allografts. N Engl J Med 379:1150, 2018.
MacDonald KP, Blazar BR, Hill GR: Cytokine mediators of chronic 
graft-­versus-­host disease. J Clin Invest 127:2452, 2017.
Montgomery RA, Tatapudi VS, Leffell MS, Zachary AA: HLA in trans-
plantation. Nat Rev Nephrol 14:558, 2018.
Watchko JF, Tiribelli C: Bilirubin-­induced neurologic damage—mech-
anisms and management approaches. N Engl J Med 369:2021, 
2013.
Webb J, Delaney M: Red blood cell alloimmunization in the pregnant 
patient. Transfus Med Rev 32:213, 2018.
Westhoff CM: Blood group genotyping. Blood. 133:1814, 2019
Westhoff CM: The structure and function of the Rh antigen complex. 
Semin Hematol 44:42, 2007.
Yazer MH, Seheult J, Kleinman S, Sloan SR, Spinella PC: Who’s afraid 
of incompatible plasma? A balanced approach to the safe trans-
fusion of blood products containing ABO-­incompatible plasma. 
Transfusion 58:532, 2018.
U N I T  V I
	
477
HEMOSTASIS EVENTS
The term hemostasis means prevention of blood loss. 
Whenever a vessel is severed or ruptured, hemostasis is 
achieved by several mechanisms: (1) vascular constric-
tion; (2) formation of a platelet plug; (3) formation of a 
blood clot as a result of blood coagulation; and (4) even-
tual growth of fibrous tissue into the blood clot to close 
the hole in the vessel permanently.
VASCULAR CONSTRICTION
Immediately after a blood vessel has been cut or rup-
tured, the trauma to the vessel wall causes smooth muscle 
in the wall to contract; this instantaneously reduces the 
flow of blood from the ruptured vessel. The contraction 
results from the following: (1) local myogenic spasm; (2) 
local autacoid factors from the traumatized tissues, vas-
cular endothelium, and blood platelets; and (3) nervous 
reflexes. The nervous reflexes are initiated by pain nerve 
impulses or other sensory impulses that originate from the 
traumatized vessel or nearby tissues. However, even more 
vasoconstriction probably results from local myogenic 
contraction of the blood vessels initiated by direct dam-
age to the vascular wall. And, for the smaller vessels, the 
platelets are responsible for much of the vasoconstriction 
by releasing a vasoconstrictor substance, thromboxane A2.
The more severely a vessel is traumatized, the greater 
the degree of vascular spasm. The spasm can last for many 
minutes or even hours, during which time the processes 
of platelet plugging and blood coagulation can take place. 
FORMATION OF THE PLATELET PLUG
If the cut in the blood vessel is very small—many very 
small vascular holes develop throughout the body each 
day—the cut is often sealed by a platelet plug rather than 
by a blood clot. To understand this process, it is important 
that we first discuss the nature of platelets themselves.
Physical and Chemical Characteristics
Platelets (also called thrombocytes) are minute discs 1 to 
4 micrometers in diameter. They are formed in the bone 
marrow from megakaryocytes, which are extremely large 
hematopoietic cells in the marrow; the megakaryocytes 
fragment into the minute platelets in the bone marrow or 
soon after entering the blood, especially as they squeeze 
through capillaries. The normal concentration of platelets 
in the blood is between 150,000 and 450,000/μl.
Platelets have many functional characteristics of whole 
cells, even though they do not have nuclei and cannot 
reproduce. In their cytoplasm are the following: (1) actin 
and myosin molecules, which are contractile proteins 
similar to those found in muscle cells, and still another 
contractile protein, thrombosthenin, that can cause 
the platelets to contract; (2) residuals of both the endo-
plasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus that synthesize 
various enzymes and especially store large quantities of 
calcium ions; (3) mitochondria and enzyme systems that 
are capable of forming adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and 
adenosine diphosphate (ADP); (4) enzyme systems that 
synthesize prostaglandins, which are local hormones that 
cause many vascular and other local tissue reactions; (5) 
an important protein called fibrin-­stabilizing factor, which 
we discuss later in relation to blood coagulation; and (6) 
a growth factor that causes vascular endothelial cells, vas-
cular smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts to multiply and 
grow, thus causing cellular growth that eventually helps 
repair damaged vascular walls.
On the platelet cell membrane surface is a coat of glyco-
proteins that repulses adherence to normal endothelium 
and yet causes adherence to injured areas of the vessel 
wall, especially to injured endothelial cells and even more 
so to any exposed collagen from deep within the vessel 
wall. In addition, the platelet membrane contains large 
amounts of phospholipids that activate multiple stages in 
the blood-­clotting process, as discussed later.
Thus, the platelet is an active structure. It has a half-­life 
in the blood of only 8 to 12 days, so over several weeks its 
functional processes run out; it is then eliminated from 
the circulation mainly by the tissue macrophage system. 
More than half of the platelets are removed by macro-
phages in the spleen, where the blood passes through a 
latticework of tight trabeculae. 
Mechanism of Platelet Plug Formation
Platelet repair of vascular openings is based on several 
important functions of the platelet. When platelets 
 Hemostasis and Blood Coagulation
C H A P T E R  3 7
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
478
come in contact with a damaged vascular surface, 
especially with collagen fibers in the vascular wall, the 
platelets rapidly change their own characteristics dras-
tically (Figure 37-­1). They begin to swell, they assume 
irregular forms with numerous irradiating pseudo-
pods protruding from their surfaces, their contractile 
proteins contract forcefully and cause the release of 
granules that contain multiple active factors, and they 
become sticky so that they adhere to collagen in the 
tissues and to a protein called von Willebrand factor 
(vWF), which leaks into the traumatized tissue from 
the plasma. The platelet surface glycoproteins bind to 
vWF in the exposed matrix below the damaged endo-
thelium. The platelets then secrete increased quanti-
ties of ADP and platelet-­activating factor (PAF), and 
their enzymes form thromboxane A2. Thromboxane is 
a vasoconstrictor and, along with ADP and PAF, acts on 
nearby platelets to activate them as well; the stickiness 
of these additional activated platelets causes them to 
adhere to the original activated platelets.
Therefore, at the site of a puncture in a blood vessel 
wall, the damaged vascular wall activates successively 
increasing numbers of platelets that attract more and 
more additional platelets, thus forming a platelet plug. 
This plug is loose at first but is usually successful in block-
ing blood loss if the vascular opening is small. Then, dur-
ing the subsequent process of blood coagulation, fibrin 
threads form. These threads attach tightly to the platelets, 
thus constructing an unyielding plug.
Importance of Platelet Mechanism for Closing 
Vascular Holes. The platelet-­plugging mechanism is 
extremely important for closing minute ruptures in 
very small blood vessels that occur many thousands of 
times daily. Indeed, multiple small holes through the 
endothelial cells themselves are often closed by plate-
lets actually fusing with the endothelial cells to form 
additional endothelial cell membranes. Literally thou-
sands of small hemorrhagic areas develop each day un-
der the skin (petechiae, which appear as purple or red 
dots on the skin) and throughout the internal tissues 
of a person who has few blood platelets. This phenom-
enon does not occur in persons with normal numbers 
of platelets. 
BLOOD COAGULATION IN THE RUPTURED 
VESSEL
The third mechanism for hemostasis is formation of the 
blood clot. The clot begins to develop in 15 to 20 seconds 
if the trauma to the vascular wall is severe and in 1 to 2 
minutes if the trauma is minor. Activator substances from 
the traumatized vascular wall, from platelets, and from 
blood proteins adhering to the traumatized vascular wall 
initiate the clotting process. The physical events of this 
process are shown in Figure 37-­2; Table 37-­1 lists the 
most important clotting factors.
Within 3 to 6 minutes after rupture of a vessel, the 
entire opening or broken end of the vessel is filled with 
clot if the vessel opening is not too large. After 20 to 60 
minutes, the clot retracts, which closes the vessel still 
further. Platelets also play an important role in this clot 
retraction, as discussed later. 
FIBROUS ORGANIZATION OR 
DISSOLUTION OF BLOOD CLOTS
Once a blood clot has formed, it can follow one of two 
courses: (1) it can become invaded by fibroblasts, which 
Figure 37-­1.  Formation of a platelet plug 
in a severed blood vessel. Endothelial in-
jury and exposure of the vascular extracel-
lular matrix facilitates platelet adhesions 
and activation, which changes their shape 
and causes release of adenosine diphos-
phate (ADP), thromboxane A2 (TXA2), 
and platelet-­activating factor (PAF). These 
platelet-secreted factors recruit additional 
platelets (aggregation) to form a hemo-
static plug. Von Willebrand factor (vWF) 
serves as an adhesion bridge between sub-
endothelial collagen and the glycoprotein 
Ib (GpIb) platelet receptor.
Endothelium
Recruitment
Aggregation
Adhesion
Shape
change
Granule
release
(ADP, PAF, TXA2)
vWF
Gplb
Basement
membrane
Damaged blood
vessel wall
1. Severed vessel
2. Platelets agglutinate
3. Fibrin appears
5. Clot retraction occurs
4. Fibrin clot forms
Figure 37-­2.  Clotting process in a traumatized blood vessel. (Modi-
fied from Seegers WH: Hemostatic Agents. Springfield, IL: Charles C 
Thomas, 1948.)
Chapter 37  Hemostasis and Blood Coagulation
	
479
U N I T  V I
subsequently form connective tissue all through the clot; 
or (2) it can dissolve. The usual course for a clot that forms 
in a small hole of a vessel wall is invasion by fibroblasts, 
beginning within a few hours after the clot is formed, 
which is promoted at least partially by growth factor 
secreted by platelets. This process continues to complete 
organization of the clot into fibrous tissue within about 1 
to 2 weeks.
Conversely, when excess blood has leaked into the 
tissues, and tissue clots have formed where they are not 
needed, special substances in the clot usually become 
activated. These substances function as enzymes to dis-
solve the clot, as discussed later in the chapter. 
MECHANISM OF BLOOD COAGULATION
GENERAL MECHANISM
More than 50 important substances that cause or affect 
blood coagulation have been found in the blood and in 
the tissues—some that promote coagulation, called pro-
coagulants, and others that inhibit coagulation, called 
anticoagulants. Whether blood will coagulate depends on 
the balance between these two groups of substances. In 
the blood stream, the anticoagulants normally predomi-
nate, so the blood does not coagulate while it is circulating 
in the blood vessels. However, when a vessel is ruptured, 
procoagulants from the area of tissue damage become 
activated and override the anticoagulants, and then a clot 
does develop.
Clotting takes place in three essential steps:
	
1.	 In response to rupture of the vessel or damage to 
the blood itself, a complex cascade of chemical re-
actions occurs in the blood involving more than 12 
blood coagulation factors. The net result is the for-
mation of a complex of activated substances collec-
tively called prothrombin activator.
	
2.	 The prothrombin activator catalyzes the conversion 
of prothrombin into thrombin.
	
3.	 The thrombin acts as an enzyme to convert fibrino-
gen into fibrin fibers that enmesh platelets, blood 
cells, and plasma to form the clot.
We will first discuss the mechanism whereby the blood 
clot is formed, beginning with conversion of prothrombin 
to thrombin, and then come back to the initiating stages 
in the clotting process whereby prothrombin activator is 
formed. 
CONVERSION OF PROTHROMBIN TO 
THROMBIN
	
1.	 Prothrombin activator is formed as a result of rup-
ture of a blood vessel or as a result of damage to 
special substances in the blood.
	
2.	 Prothrombin activator, in the presence of sufficient 
amounts of ionic calcium (Ca2+), causes conver-
sion of prothrombin to thrombin (Figure 37-­3 and 
37-­4).
	
3.	 Thrombin causes polymerization of fibrinogen 
molecules into fibrin fibers within another 10 to 15 
seconds.
Thus, the rate-­limiting factor in causing blood coagula-
tion is usually the formation of prothrombin activator and 
not the subsequent reactions beyond that point because 
these terminal steps normally occur rapidly to form the 
clot.
Table 37-­1    Clotting Factors in Blood and Their 
Synonymsa
Clotting Factor
Synonym(s)
Fibrinogen
Factor I
Prothrombin
Factor II
Tissue factor
Factor III; tissue thromboplastin
Calcium
Factor IV
Factor V
Proaccelerin; labile factor; Ac-­
globulin (Ac-­G)
Factor VII
Serum prothrombin conversion 
accelerator (SPCA); proconvertin; 
stable factor
Factor VIII
Antihemophilic factor (AHF); 
antihemophilic globulin (AHG); 
antihemophilic factor A
Factor IX
Plasma thromboplastin component 
(PTC); Christmas factor; 
antihemophilic factor B
Factor X
Stuart factor; Stuart-­Prower factor
Factor XI
Plasma thromboplastin antecedent 
(PTA); antihemophilic factor C
Factor XII
Hageman factor
Factor XIII
Fibrin-­stabilizing factor
Prekallikrein
Fletcher factor
High-­molecular-­
weight kininogen
Fitzgerald factor; high-­molecular-­
weight kininogen (HMWK)
Platelets
aThese are listed here mainly for historical interest.
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Fibrin fibers
Cross-linked fibrin fibers
Thrombin
Activated
Fibrin monomer
Fibrinogen 
Prothrombin
activator
Ca2+
Ca2+
fibrin-stabilizing
factor
Figure 37-­3  Schema for conversion of prothrombin to thrombin and 
polymerization of fibrinogen to form fibrin fibers.
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
480
Platelets also play an important role in the conversion 
of prothrombin to thrombin because much of the pro-
thrombin first attaches to prothrombin receptors on the 
platelets that are already bound to the damaged tissue.
Prothrombin and Thrombin. Prothrombin is a plasma 
protein, an α2-­globulin, having a molecular weight of 
68,700. It is present in normal plasma in a concentration 
of about 15 mg/dl. It is an unstable protein that can split 
easily into smaller compounds, one of which is thrombin, 
which has a molecular weight of 33,700, almost half that 
of prothrombin.
Prothrombin is formed continually by the liver, and it 
is continually being used throughout the body for blood 
clotting. If the liver fails to produce prothrombin, in a day 
or so prothrombin concentration in the plasma falls too 
low to provide normal blood coagulation.
Vitamin K is required by the liver for normal activa-
tion of prothrombin, as well as a few other clotting fac-
tors. Therefore, lack of vitamin K or the presence of liver 
disease that prevents normal prothrombin formation can 
decrease the prothrombin to such a low level that a bleed-
ing tendency results. 
CONVERSION OF FIBRINOGEN TO 
FIBRIN—FORMATION OF THE CLOT
Fibrinogen Formed in the Liver Essential for Clot For-
mation. Fibrinogen is a high-­molecular-­weight protein 
(molecular weight ≈340,000) that occurs in the plasma in 
quantities of 100 to 700 mg/dl. Fibrinogen is formed in 
the liver, and liver disease can decrease the concentration 
of circulating fibrinogen, as it does the concentration of 
prothrombin, noted earlier.
Because of its large molecular size, little fibrinogen 
normally leaks from the blood vessels into the intersti-
tial fluids, and because fibrinogen is one of the essential 
factors in the coagulation process, interstitial fluids ordi-
narily do not coagulate. Yet, when the permeability of the 
capillaries becomes pathologically increased, fibrinogen 
does leak into the tissue fluids in sufficient quantities to 
allow clotting of these fluids in much the same way that 
plasma and whole blood can clot. 
Action of Thrombin on Fibrinogen to Form Fibrin. 
Thrombin is a protein enzyme with weak proteolytic 
capabilities. It acts on fibrinogen to remove four low-­
molecular-­weight peptides from each molecule of fi-
brinogen, forming one molecule of fibrin monomer that 
has the automatic capability to polymerize with other fi-
brin monomer molecules to form fibrin fibers. Therefore, 
many fibrin monomer molecules polymerize within sec-
onds into long fibrin fibers that constitute the reticulum of 
the blood clot.
In the early stages of polymerization, the fibrin mono-
mer molecules are held together by weak noncovalent 
hydrogen bonding, and the newly forming fibers are not 
cross-­linked with one another. Therefore, the resultant 
clot is weak and can be broken apart with ease. However, 
another process occurs during the next few minutes that 
greatly strengthens the fibrin reticulum. This process 
involves a substance called fibrin stabilizing factor that 
is present in small amounts in normal plasma globulins 
but is also released from platelets entrapped in the clot. 
Before fibrin stabilizing factor can have an effect on the 
fibrin fibers, it must be activated. The same thrombin that 
causes fibrin formation also activates the fibrin stabiliz-
ing factor. This activated substance then operates as an 
enzyme to form covalent bonds between more and more 
of the fibrin monomer molecules, as well as multiple 
cross-­linkages between adjacent fibrin fibers, thus adding 
tremendously to the three-­dimensional strength of the 
fibrin meshwork. 
Blood Clot. The clot is composed of a meshwork of fi-
brin fibers running in all directions and entrapping blood 
cells, platelets, and plasma (see Figure 37-­4). The fibrin 
fibers also adhere to damaged surfaces of blood vessels; 
therefore, the blood clot becomes adherent to any vascu-
lar opening and thereby prevents further blood loss. 
Clot Retraction and Expression of Serum. Within a few 
minutes after a clot is formed, it begins to contract and 
usually expresses most of the fluid from the clot within 
20 to 60 minutes. The fluid expressed is called serum be-
cause all its fibrinogen and most of the other clotting fac-
tors have been removed; in this way, serum differs from 
plasma and cannot clot because it lacks these factors.
Figure 37-­4.  Coagulation cascade after 
vascular injury. Exposure of blood to the 
vascular wall causes release of tissue factor 
(also called factor III or thromboplastin) from 
endothelial cells, phospholipid expression, 
activation of thrombin, which then acts on 
fibrinogen to form fibrin, and fibrin polym-
erization to form a meshwork that stabilizes 
the platelet plug.
Endothelium
Fibrin clot
Release of
tissue factor
Platelet
phospholipid
complex
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Fibrinogen
Fibrin
Cross-linked
fibrin
Chapter 37  Hemostasis and Blood Coagulation
	
481
U N I T  V I
Platelets are necessary for clot retraction to occur. 
Therefore, failure of clot retraction is an indication that the 
number of platelets in the circulating blood might be low. 
Electron micrographs of platelets in blood clots show that 
they become attached to the fibrin fibers in such a way that 
they actually bond different fibers together. Furthermore, 
platelets entrapped in the clot continue to release proco-
agulant substances, one of the most important of which 
is fibrin stabilizing factor, which causes more and more 
cross-­linking bonds between adjacent fibrin fibers. In addi-
tion, the platelets contribute directly to clot contraction 
by activating platelet thrombosthenin, actin, and myosin 
molecules, which are all contractile proteins in the plate-
lets; they cause strong contraction of the platelet spicules 
attached to the fibrin. This action also helps compress the 
fibrin meshwork into a smaller mass. The contraction is 
activated and accelerated by thrombin and by calcium ions 
released from calcium stores in the mitochondria, endo-
plasmic reticulum, and Golgi apparatus of the platelets.
As the clot retracts, the edges of the broken blood ves-
sel are pulled together, thus contributing still further to 
hemostasis. 
POSITIVE FEEDBACK OF CLOT 
FORMATION
Once a blood clot starts to develop, it normally extends 
within minutes into the surrounding blood—that is, the 
clot initiates a positive feedback to promote more clot-
ting. One of the most important causes of this clot pro-
motion is that the proteolytic action of thrombin allows 
it to act on many of the other blood-­clotting factors in 
addition to fibrinogen. For example, thrombin has a direct 
proteolytic effect on prothrombin, tending to convert it 
into still more thrombin, and it acts on some of the blood-­
clotting factors responsible for formation of prothrombin 
activator. (These effects, discussed in subsequent para-
graphs, include acceleration of the actions of factors VIII, 
IX, X, XI, and XII and aggregation of platelets.) Once a 
critical amount of thrombin is formed, a positive feedback 
develops that causes still more blood clotting and more 
and more thrombin to be formed; thus, the blood clot 
continues to grow until blood leakage ceases. 
INITIATION OF COAGULATION: 
FORMATION OF PROTHROMBIN 
ACTIVATOR
Now that we have discussed the clotting process, the 
more complex mechanisms that initiate clotting in the 
first place will be described. These mechanisms are set 
into play by the following: (1) trauma to the vascular wall 
and adjacent tissues; (2) trauma to the blood; or (3) con-
tact of the blood with damaged endothelial cells or with 
collagen and other tissue elements outside the blood ves-
sel. In each case, this leads to the formation of prothrom-
bin activator, which then causes prothrombin conversion 
to thrombin and all the subsequent clotting steps.
Prothrombin activator is generally considered to be 
formed in two ways, although, in reality, the two ways 
interact constantly with each other: (1) by the extrinsic 
pathway that begins with trauma to the vascular wall and 
surrounding tissues; and (2) by the intrinsic pathway that 
begins in the blood.
In both the extrinsic and the intrinsic pathways, a 
series of different plasma proteins called blood-­clotting 
factors plays a major role. Most of these proteins are inac-
tive forms of proteolytic enzymes. When converted to the 
active forms, their enzymatic actions cause the successive, 
cascading reactions of the clotting process.
Most of the clotting factors listed in Table 37-­1 are 
designated by Roman numerals. To indicate the activated 
form of the factor, a small letter “a” is added after the 
Roman numeral, such as factor VIIIa to indicate the acti-
vated state of factor VIII.
Extrinsic Pathway for Initiating Clotting
The extrinsic pathway for initiating the formation of 
prothrombin activator begins with a traumatized vas-
cular wall or traumatized extravascular tissues that 
come in contact with the blood. This condition leads 
to the following steps, as shown in Figure 37-­4 and 
Figure 37-­5:
	
1.	 Release of tissue factor. Traumatized tissue releases 
a complex of several factors called tissue factor or 
tissue thromboplastin. This factor is composed es-
pecially of phospholipids from the membranes of 
the tissue plus a lipoprotein complex that functions 
mainly as a proteolytic enzyme.
	
2.	 Activation of factor X—role of factor VII and tissue 
factor. The lipoprotein complex of tissue factor fur-
ther complexes with blood coagulation factor VII 
VIIa
Vll
Thrombin
Prothrombin
X
Activated X (Xa)
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Prothrombin
activator
Platelet
phospholipids
V
Tissue factor
Tissue trauma
(1)
(2)
(3)
Figure 37-­5.  Extrinsic pathway for initiating blood clotting.
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
482
and, in the presence of calcium ions, acts enzymati-
cally on factor X to form activated factor X (Xa).
	
3.	 Effect of Xa to form prothrombin activator—role 
of factor V. The activated factor X combines im-
mediately with tissue phospholipids that are part 
of tissue factors or with additional phospholipids 
released from platelets, as well as with factor V, 
to form the complex called prothrombin activator. 
Within a few seconds, in the presence of Ca2+, pro-
thrombin is split to form thrombin, and the clot-
ting process proceeds as already explained. At first, 
the factor V in the prothrombin activator complex 
is inactive, but once clotting begins and thrombin 
begins to form, the proteolytic action of thrombin 
activates factor V. This activation then becomes an 
additional strong accelerator of prothrombin ac-
tivation. Thus, in the final prothrombin activator 
complex, activated factor X is the actual protease 
that causes splitting of prothrombin to form throm-
bin. Activated factor V greatly accelerates this pro-
tease activity, and platelet phospholipids act as a 
vehicle that further accelerates the process. Note 
especially the positive feedback effect of thrombin, 
acting through factor V, to accelerate the entire pro-
cess once it begins. 
Intrinsic Pathway for Initiating Clotting
The second mechanism for initiating formation of pro-
thrombin activator, and therefore for initiating clotting, 
begins with trauma to the blood or exposure of the blood 
to collagen from a traumatized blood vessel wall. Then the 
process continues through the series of cascading reac-
tions shown in Figure 37-­6.
	
1.	 Blood trauma causes (1) activation of factor XII and 
(2) release of platelet phospholipids. Trauma to the 
blood or exposure of the blood to vascular wall col-
lagen alters two important clotting factors in the 
blood: factor XII and the platelets. When factor XII 
is disturbed, such as by coming into contact with 
collagen or with a wettable surface such as glass, it 
takes on a new molecular configuration that con-
verts it into a proteolytic enzyme called activated 
factor XII. Simultaneously, the blood trauma also 
damages the platelets because of adherence to col-
lagen or to a wettable surface (or by damage in other 
ways); this releases platelet phospholipids that con-
tain the lipoprotein called platelet factor 3, which 
also plays a role in subsequent clotting reactions.
	
2.	 Activation of factor XI. The activated factor XII also 
acts enzymatically on factor XI to activate this fac-
tor, which is the second step in the intrinsic path-
Figure 37-­6.  Intrinsic pathway for initiating 
blood clotting. HMW, High-­molecular weight.
XII
Activated XII (XIIa)
XI
Activated XI (XIa)
X
Activated X (Xa)
IX
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Activated IX (IXa)
(HMW kininogen, prekallikrein)
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
VIII
Thrombin
VIIIa
Thrombin
Thrombin
Prothrombin
V
Prothrombin
activator
Platelet
phospholipids
Blood trauma or
contact with collagen
Platelet
phospholipids
Chapter 37  Hemostasis and Blood Coagulation
	
483
U N I T  V I
way. This reaction also requires high-­molecular-­
weight kininogen and is accelerated by prekallikrein.
	
3.	 Activation of factor IX by activated factor XI. The 
activated factor XI then acts enzymatically on fac-
tor IX to activate this factor as well.
	
4.	 Activation of factor X—role of factor VIII. The acti-
vated factor IX, acting in concert with activated fac-
tor VIII and the platelet phospholipids and factor III 
from the traumatized platelets, activates factor X. It 
is clear that when either factor VIII or platelets are 
in short supply, this step is deficient. Factor VIII is 
the factor that is missing in a person who has clas-
sic hemophilia, so it is called antihemophilic factor. 
Platelets are the clotting factor that is lacking in the 
bleeding disease called thrombocytopenia.
	
5.	 Action of activated factor X to form prothrombin 
activator—role of factor V. This step in the intrinsic 
pathway is the same as the last step in the extrinsic 
pathway. That is, activated factor X combines with 
factor V and platelet or tissue phospholipids to form 
the complex called prothrombin activator. The pro-
thrombin activator, in turn, initiates the cleavage 
of prothrombin to form thrombin within seconds, 
thereby setting into motion the final clotting pro-
cess, as described earlier. 
Role of Calcium Ions in the Intrinsic and 
Extrinsic Pathways
Except for the first two steps in the intrinsic pathway, cal-
cium ions are required for promotion or acceleration of 
all the blood-­clotting reactions. Therefore, in the absence 
of calcium ions, blood clotting by either pathway does not 
occur.
In the living body, the calcium ion concentration 
seldom falls low enough to affect blood-­clotting kinet-
ics significantly. However, when blood is removed from 
someone, it can be prevented from clotting by reducing 
the calcium ion concentration below the threshold level 
for clotting by deionizing the calcium by causing it to 
react with substances such as citrate ion or by precipitat-
ing the calcium with substances such as oxalate ion. 
Interaction Between Extrinsic and 
Intrinsic Pathways—Summary of Blood-­
Clotting Initiation
It is clear from the schemas of the intrinsic and extrinsic 
systems that after blood vessels rupture, clotting occurs 
by both pathways simultaneously. Tissue factor initiates 
the extrinsic pathway, whereas contact of factor XII and 
platelets with collagen in the vascular wall initiates the 
intrinsic pathway.
An especially important difference between the 
extrinsic and intrinsic pathways is that the extrin-
sic pathway can be explosive; once initiated, its speed 
of completion to the final clot is limited only by the 
amount of tissue factor released from the traumatized 
tissues and by the quantities of factors X, VII, and V in 
the blood. With severe tissue trauma, clotting can occur 
in as little as 15 seconds. The intrinsic pathway is much 
slower to proceed, usually requiring 1 to 6 minutes to 
cause clotting. 
Intravascular Anticoagulants Prevent Blood 
Clotting in the Normal Vascular System
Endothelial Surface Factors. Probably the most impor-
tant factors for preventing clotting in the normal vas-
cular system are the following: (1) the smoothness of the 
endothelial cell surface, which prevents contact activation 
of the intrinsic clotting system; (2) a layer of glycocalyx on 
the endothelium (glycocalyx is a mucopolysaccharide ad-
sorbed to the surfaces of the endothelial cells), which repels 
clotting factors and platelets, thereby preventing activation 
of clotting; and (3) a protein bound with the endothelial 
membrane, thrombomodulin, which binds thrombin. Not 
only does the binding of thrombin with thrombomodulin 
slow the clotting process by removing thrombin, but the 
thrombomodulin-­thrombin complex also activates a plas-
ma protein, protein C, that acts as an anticoagulant by inac-
tivating activated factors V and VIII.
When the endothelial wall is damaged, its smoothness 
and glycocalyx-­thrombomodulin layer are lost, which 
activates both factor XII and the platelets, thus setting off 
the intrinsic pathway of clotting. If factor XII and platelets 
come into contact with the subendothelial collagen, the 
activation is even more powerful.
Intact endothelial cells also produce other substances 
such a prostacyclin and nitric oxide (NO) that inhibit 
platelet aggregation and initiation of blood clotting. Pros-
tacyclin, also called prostaglandin I2 (PGI2), is a member 
of the eicosanoid family of lipids and is a vasodilator, as 
well as an inhibitor of platelet aggregation. As discussed 
in Chapter 17, NO is a powerful vasodilator released from 
healthy vascular endothelial cells throughout the body, 
and it is an important inhibitor of platelet aggregation. 
When endothelial cells are damaged, their production of 
prostacyclin and NO is greatly diminished. 
Antithrombin Action of Fibrin and Antithrombin III. 
Among the most important anticoagulants in the blood 
are those that remove thrombin from the blood. The most 
powerful of these are the following: (1) the fibrin fibers 
that are formed during the process of clotting; and (2) 
an α globulin called antithrombin III or antithrombin-­
heparin cofactor.
While a clot is forming, about 85% to 90% of the throm-
bin formed from the prothrombin becomes adsorbed to 
the fibrin fibers as they develop. This adsorption helps 
prevent the spread of thrombin into the remaining blood 
and, therefore, prevents excessive spread of the clot.
The thrombin that does not adsorb to the fibrin 
fibers soon combines with antithrombin III. This further 
blocks the effect of thrombin on the fibrinogen and then 
also inactivates thrombin itself during the next 12 to 20 
minutes. 
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
484
Heparin. Heparin is another powerful anticoagulant but, 
because its concentration in the blood is normally low, 
it has significant anticoagulant effects only under special 
physiological conditions. However, heparin is used widely 
as a pharmacological agent in medical practice in much 
higher concentrations to prevent intravascular clotting.
The heparin molecule is a highly negatively charged 
conjugated polysaccharide. By itself, it has little or no 
anticoagulant properties, but when it combines with 
antithrombin III, the effectiveness of antithrombin III 
for removing thrombin increases by a hundredfold to a 
thousandfold and thus acts as an anticoagulant. There-
fore, in the presence of excess heparin, the removal of free 
thrombin from the circulating blood by antithrombin III 
is almost instantaneous.
The complex of heparin and antithrombin III removes 
several other activated coagulation factors in addition to 
thrombin, further enhancing the effectiveness of antico-
agulation. The others include activated factors IX through 
XII.
Heparin is produced by many different cells of the 
body, but the largest quantities are formed by the baso-
philic mast cells located in the pericapillary connec-
tive tissue throughout the body. These cells continually 
secrete small quantities of heparin that diffuse into the 
circulatory system. The basophil cells of the blood, which 
are functionally almost identical to the mast cells, release 
small quantities of heparin into the plasma.
Mast cells are abundant in tissue surrounding the cap-
illaries of the lungs and, to a lesser extent, capillaries of the 
liver. It is easy to understand why large quantities of hepa-
rin might be needed in these areas because the capillaries 
of the lungs and liver receive many embolic clots that have 
formed in slowly flowing venous blood; sufficient produc-
tion of heparin prevents further growth of the clots. 
PLASMIN CAUSES LYSIS OF BLOOD CLOTS
The plasma proteins contain a euglobulin called plas-
minogen (profibrinolysin) that when activated, becomes a 
substance called plasmin (fibrinolysin). Plasmin is a pro-
teolytic enzyme that resembles trypsin, the most impor-
tant proteolytic digestive enzyme of pancreatic secretion. 
Plasmin digests fibrin fibers and some other protein 
coagulants, such as fibrinogen, factor V, factor VIII, pro-
thrombin, and factor XII. Therefore, whenever plasmin 
is formed, it can cause lysis of a clot by destroying many 
of the clotting factors, thereby sometimes even causing 
hypocoagulability of the blood.
Activation of Plasminogen to Form Plasmin, Then 
Clot Lysis. When a clot is formed, a large amount of plas-
minogen is trapped in the clot, along with other plasma 
proteins. This will not become plasmin or cause lysis of 
the clot until it is activated. The injured tissues and vascu-
lar endothelium very slowly release a powerful activator 
called tissue plasminogen activator (t-­PA); a few days later, 
after the clot has stopped the bleeding, t-­PA eventually 
converts plasminogen to plasmin, which in turn removes 
the remaining unnecessary blood clot. In fact, many small 
blood vessels in which blood flow has been blocked by 
clots are reopened by this mechanism. Thus, an especially 
important function of the plasmin system is to remove 
minute clots from millions of tiny peripheral vessels that 
eventually would become occluded were there no way to 
clear them. 
CONDITIONS THAT CAUSE EXCESSIVE 
BLEEDING IN HUMANS
Excessive bleeding can result from a deficiency of any of 
the many blood-­clotting factors. Three particular types of 
bleeding tendencies that have been studied to the greatest 
extent are discussed here—bleeding caused by (1) vitamin 
K deficiency, (2) hemophilia, and (3) thrombocytopenia 
(platelet deficiency).
DECREASED PROTHROMBIN, FACTOR VII, 
FACTOR IX, AND FACTOR X CAUSED BY 
VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
With few exceptions, almost all the blood-­clotting fac-
tors are formed by the liver. Therefore, diseases of the 
liver such as hepatitis, cirrhosis, and acute yellow atrophy 
(degeneration of the liver caused by toxins, infections, or 
other agents) can sometimes depress the clotting system 
so much that the patient develops a severe tendency to 
bleed.
Another cause of depressed formation of clotting 
factors by the liver is vitamin K deficiency. Vitamin K 
is an essential factor to a liver carboxylase that adds a 
carboxyl group to glutamic acid residues on five of the 
important clotting factors—prothrombin, factor VII, fac-
tor IX, factor X, and protein C. On adding the carboxyl 
group to glutamic acid residues on the immature clot-
ting factors, vitamin K is oxidized and becomes inactive. 
Another enzyme, vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1 
(VKORC1), reduces vitamin K back to its active form. In 
the absence of active vitamin K, subsequent insufficiency 
of these coagulation factors in the blood can lead to seri-
ous bleeding tendencies.
Vitamin K is continually synthesized in the intestinal 
tract by bacteria, so vitamin K deficiency seldom occurs 
in healthy persons as a result of the absence of vitamin K 
from the diet (except in neonates, before they establish 
their intestinal bacterial flora). However, in persons with 
gastrointestinal disease, vitamin K deficiency often occurs 
as a result of poor absorption of fats from the gastrointes-
tinal tract because vitamin K is fat-­soluble and is ordinar-
ily absorbed into the blood along with the fats.
One of the most prevalent causes of vitamin K defi-
ciency is failure of the liver to secrete bile into the gas-
trointestinal tract, which occurs as a result of obstruction 
of the bile ducts or of liver disease. Lack of bile prevents 
adequate fat digestion and absorption and, therefore, 
Chapter 37  Hemostasis and Blood Coagulation
	
485
U N I T  V I
depresses vitamin K absorption as well. Thus, liver dis-
ease often causes decreased production of prothrombin 
and some other clotting factors because of poor vitamin 
K absorption and because of the diseased liver cells. As 
a result, vitamin K is injected into surgical patients with 
liver disease or with obstructed bile ducts before the 
surgical procedure is performed. Ordinarily, if vitamin 
K is given to a deficient patient 4 to 8 hours before the 
operation and the liver parenchymal cells are at least half-­
normal in function, sufficient clotting factors will be pro-
duced to prevent excessive bleeding during the operation. 
HEMOPHILIA
Hemophilia is a bleeding disease that occurs almost 
exclusively in males. In 85% of cases, it is caused by an 
abnormality or deficiency of factor VIII; this type of hemo-
philia is called hemophilia A or classic hemophilia. About 
1 of every 10,000 males in the United States has classic 
hemophilia. In the other 15% of patients with hemophilia 
B, the bleeding tendency is caused by deficiency of factor 
IX. Both these factors are transmitted genetically by way 
of the female (X) chromosome and are recessive in their 
inheritance. Therefore, a woman will rarely have hemo-
philia because at least one of her two X chromosomes will 
have the appropriate genes. If one of her X chromosomes 
is deficient, she will be a hemophilia carrier; her male off-
spring will have a 50% chance of inheriting the illness, and 
her female offspring will have a 50% chance of inheriting 
the carrier status.
Although female carriers have one normal allele and 
usually do not develop symptomatic hemophilia, some 
may experience a mild bleeding trait. It is also possible 
for female carriers to develop mild hemophilia due to 
loss of part or all of the normal X chromosome (as in 
Turner syndrome) or inactivation (lyonization) of the 
X-­chromosomes. For a female to inherit full-­blown 
symptomatic hemophilia A or B, she must receive two 
deficient X-­chromosomes, one from her carrier mother 
and the other from her father, who must have hemophilia. 
Most cases of hemophilia are inherited, but approxi-
mately one-third of hemophilia patients do not have a 
family history of the disease, which appears to be caused 
by novel mutation events.
The bleeding trait in hemophilia can have various 
degrees of severity, depending on the genetic deficiency. 
Bleeding usually does not occur except after trauma, but 
in some patients, the degree of trauma required to cause 
severe and prolonged bleeding may be so mild that it is 
hardly noticeable. For example, bleeding can often last for 
days after extraction of a tooth.
Factor VIII has two active components, a large compo-
nent with a molecular weight in the millions and a smaller 
component with a molecular weight of about 230,000. 
The smaller component is most important in the intrinsic 
pathway for clotting, and it is deficiency of this part of fac-
tor VIII that causes classic hemophilia. Another bleeding 
disease with somewhat different characteristics, called 
von Willebrand disease, results from loss of the large 
component.
When a person with classic hemophilia experiences 
severe prolonged bleeding, almost the only therapy that is 
truly effective is injection of purified factor VIII or factor 
IX. Both these clotting factors are now available as recom-
binant proteins, although they are expensive and their 
half-­lives are relatively short; therefore, these products are 
not readily available for many patients with hemophilia, 
especially in economically disadvantaged countries. 
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Thrombocytopenia means the presence of very low num-
bers of platelets in the circulating blood. People with 
thrombocytopenia have a tendency to bleed, as do hemo-
philiacs, except that the bleeding is usually from many 
small venules or capillaries, rather than from larger ves-
sels, as in hemophilia. As a result, small punctate hem-
orrhages occur throughout all the body tissues. The skin 
of such a person displays many small petechiae, red or 
purplish blotches, giving the disease the name throm-
bocytopenic purpura. As noted, platelets are especially 
important for the repair of minute breaks in capillaries 
and other small vessels.
Platelet counts below 30,000/μl, compared with the 
normal value of 150,000 to 450,000/μl, increase the risk 
for excessive bleeding after surgery or injury. Spontane-
ous bleeding, however, will not ordinarily occur until the 
number of platelets in the blood falls below 30,000/μl. 
Levels as low as 10,000/μl are frequently lethal.
Even without determining specific platelet counts in 
the blood, sometimes one can suspect the existence of 
thrombocytopenia if the person’s blood clot fails to retract. 
As noted earlier, clot retraction is normally dependent 
on release of multiple coagulation factors from the large 
numbers of platelets entrapped in the fibrin mesh of the 
clot.
The major causes of thrombocytopenia include the 
following: (1) decreased platelet production in the bone 
marrow due to infections or sepsis, nutrient deficiencies, 
or myelodysplastic disorders, which usually also reduce 
production of other cells (red blood cells [RBCs] and 
white blood cells); (2) peripheral platelet destruction by 
antibodies; (3) sequestration (pooling) of platelets in the 
spleen, especially in individuals with portal hypertension 
and excessively large spleens (splenomegaly); (4) con-
sumption of platelets in thrombi; and (4) dilution of the 
blood from fluid resuscitation or massive transfusion.
Most people with thrombocytopenia have the disease 
known as idiopathic thrombocytopenia, which means 
thrombocytopenia of unknown cause. In most of these 
people, it has been discovered that, for unknown reasons, 
specific antibodies have formed and react against the plate-
lets to destroy them. Relief from bleeding for 1 to 4 days 
can often be effected in a patient with thrombocytopenia 
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
486
by giving fresh whole blood transfusions that contain large 
numbers of platelets. Also, splenectomy may be helpful, 
sometimes resulting in an almost complete cure because 
the spleen normally removes large numbers of platelets 
from the blood. 
THROMBOEMBOLIC CONDITIONS
Thrombi and Emboli. An abnormal clot that develops 
in a blood vessel is called a thrombus. Once a clot has de-
veloped, continued flow of blood past the clot is likely to 
break it away from its attachment and cause the clot to 
flow with the blood; such freely flowing clots are known 
as emboli. Also, emboli that originate in large arteries or 
in the left side of the heart can flow peripherally and plug 
arteries or arterioles in the brain, kidneys, or elsewhere. 
Emboli that originate in the venous system or in the right 
side of the heart generally flow into the lungs to cause pul-
monary arterial embolism. 
Causes of Thromboembolic Conditions. The causes of 
thromboembolic conditions in people are usually twofold: 
(1) a roughened endothelial surface of a vessel—as may be 
caused by arteriosclerosis, infection, or trauma—is likely 
to initiate the clotting process; and (2) blood often clots 
when it flows very slowly through blood vessels, where 
small quantities of thrombin and other procoagulants are 
always being formed. 
Use of Tissue Plasminogen Activator in Treating In-
travascular Clots. Genetically engineered tissue plas-
minogen activator (t-­PA) is available. When delivered 
through a catheter to an area with a thrombus, it is effec-
tive in activating plasminogen to plasmin, which in turn 
can dissolve some intravascular clots. For example, if used 
within the 1 or 2 hours after thrombotic occlusion of a 
coronary artery, the heart is often spared serious damage. 
FEMORAL VENOUS THROMBOSIS AND 
MASSIVE PULMONARY EMBOLISM
Because clotting almost always occurs when blood flow 
is blocked for many hours in any vessel of the body, the 
immobility of patients confined to bed, plus the practice 
of propping the knees up with pillows, often causes intra-
vascular clotting because of blood stasis in one or more 
of the leg veins for hours at a time. Then the clot grows, 
mainly in the direction of the slowly moving venous 
blood, sometimes growing the entire length of the leg 
veins and occasionally even up into the common iliac vein 
and inferior vena cava. About 10% of the time, a large part 
of the clot disengages from its attachments to the vessel 
wall and flows freely with the venous blood through the 
right side of the heart and into the pulmonary arteries to 
cause massive blockage of the pulmonary arteries; this is 
called a massive pulmonary embolism. If the clot is large 
enough to occlude both pulmonary arteries at the same 
time, immediate death ensues. If only one pulmonary 
artery is blocked, death may not occur, or the embolism 
may lead to death a few hours to several days later because 
of further growth of the clot in the pulmonary vessels. 
However, again, t-­PA therapy can be a lifesaver. 
DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR 
COAGULATION
Occasionally, the clotting mechanism becomes activated 
in widespread areas of the circulation, giving rise to the 
condition called disseminated intravascular coagulation 
(DIC). This condition often results from the presence 
of large amounts of traumatized or dying tissue in the 
body that releases great quantities of tissue factor into 
the blood. Frequently, the clots are small but numerous, 
and they plug a large share of the small peripheral blood 
vessels. This process occurs especially in patients with 
widespread septicemia, in which circulating bacteria or 
bacterial toxins—especially endotoxins—activate the clot-
ting mechanisms. The plugging of small peripheral vessels 
greatly diminishes delivery of oxygen and other nutrients 
to the tissues, a situation that leads to or exacerbates cir-
culatory shock. It is partly for this reason that septicemic 
shock is lethal in 35% to 50% of patients.
A peculiar effect of disseminated intravascular coagu-
lation is that the patient, on occasion, begins to bleed. The 
reason for this bleeding is that so many of the clotting fac-
tors are removed by the widespread clotting that too few 
procoagulants remain to allow normal hemostasis of the 
remaining blood. 
ANTICOAGULANTS FOR CLINICAL USE
In some thromboembolic conditions, it is desirable to 
delay the coagulation process. Various anticoagulants 
have been developed for this purpose. The ones most 
clinically useful are heparin and the coumarins.
HEPARIN—INTRAVENOUS ANTICOAGULANT
Commercial heparin is extracted from several differ-
ent animal tissues and prepared in almost pure form. 
Injection of relatively small quantities, about 0.5 to 1 
mg/kg of body weight, causes the blood-­clotting time 
to increase from a normal of about 6 minutes to 30 or 
more minutes. Furthermore, this change in clotting time 
occurs instantaneously, thereby immediately preventing 
or slowing further development of a thromboembolic 
condition.
The action of heparin lasts about 1.5 to 4 hours. The 
injected heparin is destroyed by an enzyme in the blood 
known as heparinase. 
COUMARINS AS ANTICOAGULANTS
When a coumarin, such as warfarin, is given to a patient, 
the amounts of active prothrombin and factors VII, IX, 
and X, all formed by the liver, begin to fall. Warfarin 
causes this effect by inhibiting the enzyme VKORC1. As 
Chapter 37  Hemostasis and Blood Coagulation
	
487
U N I T  V I
discussed previously, this enzyme converts the inactive, 
oxidized form of vitamin K to its active, reduced form. 
By inhibiting VKORC1, warfarin decreases the avail-
able active form of vitamin K in the tissues. When this 
decrease occurs, the coagulation factors are no longer car-
boxylated and are biologically inactive. Over several days, 
the body stores of the active coagulation factors degrade 
and are replaced by inactive factors. Although the coagu-
lation factors continue to be produced, they have greatly 
decreased coagulant activity.
After administration of an effective dose of warfarin, 
the coagulant activity of the blood decreases to about 50% 
of normal by the end of 12 hours and to about 20% of 
normal by the end of 24 hours. In other words, the coagu-
lation process is not blocked immediately but must await 
the degradation of the active prothrombin and the other 
affected coagulation factors already present in the plasma. 
Normal coagulation usually returns 1 to 3 days after dis-
continuing coumarin therapy. 
PREVENTION OF BLOOD COAGULATION 
OUTSIDE THE BODY
Although blood removed from the body and held in a 
glass test tube normally clots in about 6 minutes, blood 
collected in siliconized containers often does not clot for 
1 hour or more. The reason for this delay is that preparing 
the surfaces of the containers with silicone prevents con-
tact activation of platelets and factor XII, the two princi-
pal factors that initiate the intrinsic clotting mechanism. 
Conversely, untreated glass containers allow contact acti-
vation of the platelets and factor XII, with the rapid devel-
opment of clots.
Heparin can be used for preventing coagulation of 
blood outside the body, as well as in the body. Heparin is 
especially used in surgical procedures in which the blood 
must be passed through a heart-­lung machine or artificial 
kidney machine and then back into the patient.
Various substances that decrease the concentration of 
calcium ions in the blood can also be used for preventing 
blood coagulation outside the body. For example, a solu-
ble oxalate compound mixed in a very small quantity with 
a sample of blood causes precipitation of calcium oxalate 
from the plasma and thereby decreases the ionic calcium 
level so much that blood coagulation is blocked.
Any substance that deionizes the blood calcium will 
prevent coagulation. The negatively charged citrate ion is 
especially valuable for this purpose; it is mixed with blood 
usually in the form of sodium, ammonium, or potassium 
citrate. The citrate ion combines with calcium in the 
blood to produce a nonionized calcium compound, and 
the lack of ionic calcium prevents coagulation. Citrate 
anticoagulants have an important advantage over the oxa-
late anticoagulants because oxalate is toxic to the body, 
whereas moderate quantities of citrate can be injected 
intravenously. After injection, the citrate ion is removed 
from the blood within a few minutes by the liver and is 
polymerized into glucose or metabolized directly for 
energy. Consequently, 500 milliliters of blood that has 
been rendered noncoagulable by citrate can ordinarily be 
transfused into a recipient within a few minutes, without 
dire consequences. However, if the liver is damaged, or 
if large quantities of citrated blood or plasma are given 
too rapidly (within fractions of a minute), the citrate ion 
may not be removed quickly enough, and the citrate can, 
under these conditions, greatly depress the level of cal-
cium ion in the blood, which can result in tetany and con-
vulsive death. 
BLOOD COAGULATION TESTS
BLEEDING TIME
When a sharp-­pointed knife is used to pierce the tip of the 
finger or earlobe, bleeding ordinarily lasts for 1 to 6 min-
utes. This time depends largely on the depth of the wound 
and degree of hyperemia in the finger or earlobe at the 
time of the test. Lack of any one of several of the clotting 
factors can prolong the bleeding time, but it is especially 
prolonged by lack of platelets. 
CLOTTING TIME
Many methods have been devised for determining blood-­
clotting time. The one most widely used is to collect 
blood in a chemically clean glass test tube and then to 
tip the tube back and forth about every 30 seconds until 
the blood has clotted. By this method, the normal clot-
ting time is 6 to 10 minutes. Procedures using multiple 
test tubes have also been devised for determining clotting 
time more accurately.
Unfortunately, the clotting time varies widely, depend-
ing on the method used for measuring it, so it is no lon-
ger used in many clinics. Instead, measurements of the 
clotting factors themselves are made, using sophisticated 
chemical procedures. 
PROTHROMBIN TIME AND 
INTERNATIONAL NORMALIZED RATIO
The prothrombin time indicates the concentration of 
prothrombin in the blood. Figure 37-­7 shows the rela-
tionship of prothrombin concentration to prothrombin 
time. The method for determining prothrombin time is 
the following.
Blood removed from the patient is immediately oxa-
lated so that none of the prothrombin can change into 
thrombin. Then, a large excess of calcium ion and tis-
sue factor is quickly mixed with the oxalated blood. The 
excess calcium nullifies the effect of the oxalate, and the 
tissue factor activates the prothrombin to thrombin reac-
tion by means of the extrinsic clotting pathway. The time 
required for coagulation to take place is known as the 
prothrombin time. The shortness of the time is determined 
mainly by the prothrombin concentration. The normal 
UNIT VI  Blood Cells, Immunity, and Blood Coagulation
488
prothrombin time is about 12 seconds. In each laboratory, 
a curve relating prothrombin concentration to prothrom-
bin time, such as that shown in Figure 37-­7, is drawn for 
the method used so that the prothrombin in the blood can 
be quantified.
The results obtained for prothrombin time may vary 
considerably, even in the same individual if there are 
differences in activity of the tissue factor and the ana-
lytical system used to perform the test. Tissue factor 
is isolated from human tissues, such as placental tis-
sue, and different batches may have different activity. 
The international normalized ratio (INR) was devised 
as a way to standardize measurements of prothrombin 
time. For each batch of tissue factor, the manufacturer 
assigns an international sensitivity index (ISI), which 
indicates the activity of the tissue factor with a stan-
dardized sample. The ISI usually varies between 1.0 
and 2.0. The INR is the ratio of the person’s prothrom-
bin time (PT) to a normal control sample raised to the 
power of the ISI:
INR = 
PTtest




PT normal
ISI
The normal range for INR in a healthy person is 0.9 to 
1.3. A high INR level (e.g., 4 or 5) indicates a high risk of 
bleeding, whereas a low INR (e.g., 0.5) suggests that there 
is a chance of having a clot. Patients undergoing warfarin 
therapy usually have an INR of 2.0 to 3.0.
Tests similar to that for prothrombin time and INR have 
been devised to determine the quantities of other blood-­
clotting factors. In each of these tests, excesses of calcium 
ions and all the other factors in addition to the one being 
tested are added to oxalated blood all at once. Then, the time 
required for coagulation is determined in the same manner 
as for prothrombin time. If the factor being tested is defi-
cient, the coagulation time is prolonged. The time itself can 
then be used to quantitate the concentration of the factor.
Bibliography
Becker RC, Sexton T, Smyth SS: Translational implications of platelets 
as vascular first responders. Circ Res 122:506, 2018.
Furie B, Furie BC: Mechanisms of thrombus formation. N Engl J Med 
359:938, 2008.
Gupta S, Shapiro AD: Optimizing bleed prevention throughout the 
lifespan: womb to tomb. Haemophilia 24 Suppl 6:76, 2018.
Hess CN, Hiatt WR: Antithrombotic therapy for peripheral artery dis-
ease in 2018. JAMA 319:2329, 2018.
Hunt BJ: Bleeding and coagulopathies in critical care. N Engl J Med 
370:847, 2014.
Koupenova M, Clancy L, Corkrey HA, Freedman JE: Circulating plate-
lets as mediators of immunity, inflammation, and thrombosis. Circ 
Res 122:337, 2018.
Kucher N: Clinical practice. Deep-­vein thrombosis of the upper ex-
tremities. N Engl J Med 364:861, 2011.
Leebeek FW, Eikenboom JC: Von Willebrand’s disease. N Engl J Med 
375:2067, 2016.
Luyendyk JP, Schoenecker JG, Flick MJ: The multifaceted role of fi-
brinogen in tissue injury and inflammation. Blood 133:511, 2019.
Maas C, Renné T: Coagulation factor XII in thrombosis and inflamma-
tion. Blood 131:1903, 2018.
McFadyen JD, Schaff M, Peter K: Current and future antiplatelet 
therapies: emphasis on preserving haemostasis. Nat Rev Cardiol 
15:181, 2018.
Mohammed BM, Matafonov A, Ivanov I, et al: An update on factor XI 
structure and function. Thromb Res 161:94, 2018.
Nachman RL, Rafii S: Platelets, petechiae, and preservation of the vas-
cular wall. N Engl J Med 359:1261, 2008.
Negrier C, Shima M, Hoffman M: The central role of thrombin in bleed-
ing disorders. Blood Rev 2019 May 22. pii: S0268-­960X(18)30097-­3. 
https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.blre.2019.05.006
Peters R, Harris T: Advances and innovations in haemophilia treat-
ment. Nat Rev Drug Discov 17:493, 2018.
Samuelson Bannow B, Recht M, Négrier C, et al: Factor VIII: long-­
established role in haemophilia A and emerging evidence beyond 
haemostasis. Blood Rev 35:43, 2019.
Tillman BF, Gruber A, McCarty OJT, Gailani D: Plasma contact factors 
as therapeutic targets. Blood Rev 32:433, 2018.
van der Meijden PEJ, Heemskerk JWM: Platelet biology and functions: 
new concepts and clinical perspectives. Nat Rev Cardiol 16:166, 2019.
Wells PS, Forgie MA, Rodger MA: Treatment of venous thromboem-
bolism. JAMA 311:717, 2014.
Weyand AC, Pipe SW: New therapies for hemophilia. Blood 133:389, 
2019.
0
6.25
12.5
25.0
50.0
Concentration (percent of normal)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
100
Prothrombin time
(seconds)
Figure 37-­7.  Relationship of prothrombin concentration in the blood 
to prothrombin time.
U N I T  V I I
	
491
The main functions of respiration are to provide oxygen 
to the tissues and remove carbon dioxide. The four major 
components of respiration are the following: (1) pulmo-
nary ventilation, which means the inflow and outflow of 
air between the atmosphere and the lung alveoli; (2) dif-
fusion of oxygen (O2) and carbon dioxide (CO2) between 
the alveoli and the blood; (3) transport of oxygen and car-
bon dioxide in the blood and body fluids to and from the 
body’s tissue cells; and (4) regulation of ventilation and 
other facets of respiration. This chapter is a discussion of 
pulmonary ventilation; the subsequent five chapters cover 
other respiratory functions plus the physiology of special 
respiratory abnormalities.
MECHANICS OF PULMONARY 
VENTILATION
MUSCLES THAT CAUSE LUNG EXPANSION 
AND CONTRACTION
The lungs can be expanded and contracted in two ways: 
(1) by downward or upward movement of the diaphragm 
to lengthen or shorten the chest cavity; and (2) by eleva-
tion or depression of the ribs to increase or decrease the 
anteroposterior diameter of the chest cavity. Figure 38-­1 
shows these two methods.
Normal quiet breathing is accomplished almost 
entirely by movement of the diaphragm. During inspi-
ration, contraction of the diaphragm pulls the lower 
surfaces of the lungs downward. Then, during expi-
ration, the diaphragm simply relaxes, and the elastic 
recoil of the lungs, chest wall, and abdominal structures 
compresses the lungs and expels the air. During heavy 
breathing, however, the elastic forces are not powerful 
enough to cause the necessary rapid expiration, so extra 
force is achieved mainly by contraction of the abdominal 
muscles, which pushes the abdominal contents upward 
against the bottom of the diaphragm, thereby compress-
ing the lungs.
The second method for expanding the lungs is to 
raise the rib cage. Raising the rib cage expands the lungs 
because, in the natural resting position, the ribs slant 
downward, as shown on the left side of Figure 38-­1, thus 
allowing the sternum to fall backward toward the verte-
bral column. When the rib cage is elevated, however, the 
ribs project almost directly forward, so the sternum also 
moves forward, away from the spine, making the antero-
posterior thickness of the chest about 20% greater during 
maximum inspiration than during expiration. Therefore, 
all the muscles that elevate the chest cage are classified as 
muscles of inspiration, and the muscles that depress the 
chest cage are classified as muscles of expiration.
The most important muscles that raise the rib cage are 
the external intercostals, but others that help are the fol-
lowing: (1) sternocleidomastoid muscles, which lift upward 
on the sternum; (2) anterior serrati, which lift many of the 
ribs; and (3) scaleni, which lift the first two ribs.
The muscles that pull the rib cage downward during 
expiration are mainly the following: (1) the abdominal 
recti, which have the powerful effect of pulling downward 
on the lower ribs at the same time that they and other 
abdominal muscles also compress the abdominal con-
tents upward against the diaphragm; and (2) the internal 
intercostals.
Figure 38-­1 also shows the mechanism whereby the 
external and internal intercostals act to cause inspiration 
and expiration. To the left, the ribs during expiration are 
angled downward, and the external intercostals are elon-
gated forward and downward. As they contract, they pull 
the upper ribs forward in relation to the lower ribs, which 
causes leverage on the ribs to raise them upward, thereby 
causing inspiration. The internal intercostals function in 
the opposite manner, functioning as expiratory muscles 
because they angle between the ribs in the opposite direc-
tion and cause opposite leverage. 
PRESSURES THAT CAUSE MOVEMENT OF 
AIR IN AND OUT OF THE LUNGS
See Video 38-1. The lung is an elastic structure that col-
lapses like a balloon and expels all its air through the tra-
chea whenever there is no force to keep it inflated. Also, 
there are no attachments between the lung and walls of 
the chest cage, except where it is suspended at its hilum 
from the mediastinum, the middle section of the chest 
cavity. Instead, the lung “floats” in the thoracic cavity, 
surrounded by a thin layer of pleural fluid that lubricates 
 Pulmonary Ventilation
C H A P T E R  3 8
UNIT VII   Respiration
492
movement of the lungs within the cavity. Furthermore, 
continual suction of excess fluid into lymphatic channels 
maintains a slight suction between the visceral surface of 
the lung pleura and the parietal pleural surface of the tho-
racic cavity. Therefore, the lungs are held to the thoracic 
wall as if glued there, except that they are well lubricated 
and can slide freely as the chest expands and contracts.
Pleural Pressure and Its Changes During Respira-
tion. Pleural pressure is the pressure of the fluid in the 
thin space between the lung pleura and chest wall pleura. 
This pressure is normally a slight suction, which means 
a slightly negative pressure. The normal pleural pressure 
at the beginning of inspiration is about −5 centimeters of 
water (cm H2O), which is the amount of suction required 
to hold the lungs open to their resting level. During nor-
mal inspiration, expansion of the chest cage pulls outward 
on the lungs with greater force and creates more negative 
pressure to an average of about −7.5 cm H2O.
These relationships between pleural pressure and 
changing lung volume are demonstrated in Figure 38-­2; 
in the lower panel shows the increasing negativity of the 
pleural pressure from −5 to −7.5 cm H2O during inspira-
tion and in the upper panel an increase in lung volume of 
0.5 liter. Then, during expiration, the events are essentially 
reversed. 
Alveolar Pressure—Air Pressure Inside the Lung Al-
veoli. When the glottis is open and no air is flowing into 
or out of the lungs, the pressures in all parts of the respira-
tory tree, all the way to the alveoli, are equal to atmos-
pheric pressure, which is considered to be zero reference 
pressure in the airways—that is, 0 cm H2O pressure. To 
cause inward flow of air into the alveoli during inspira-
tion, the pressure in the alveoli must fall to a value slightly 
below atmospheric pressure (below 0). The second curve 
(labeled “alveolar pressure”) of Figure 38-­2 demonstrates 
that during normal inspiration, alveolar pressure decreas-
es to about −1 cm H2O. This slight negative pressure is 
enough to pull 0.5 liter of air into the lungs in the 2 sec-
onds required for normal quiet inspiration.
During expiration, alveolar pressure rises to about +1 
cm H2O, which forces the 0.5 liter of inspired air out of 
the lungs during the 2 to 3 seconds of expiration. 
Transpulmonary Pressure—Difference between Al-
veolar and Pleural Pressures. Note in Figure 38-­2 that 
the transpulmonary pressure is the pressure difference be-
tween that in the alveoli and that on the outer surfaces of 
the lungs (pleural pressure); it is a measure of the elastic 
forces in the lungs that tend to collapse the lungs at each 
instant of respiration, called the recoil pressure. 
Figure 38-­1  Contraction and expan-
sion of the thoracic cage during expi-
ration and inspiration, demonstrating 
diaphragmatic contraction, function of 
the intercostal muscles, and elevation 
and depression of the rib cage. AP, An-
teroposterior.
Abdominals
contracted
Elevated
rib cage
EXPIRATION
INSPIRATION
Diaphragmatic
contraction
Increased
vertical diameter
Increased
AP diameter
External
intercostals
contracted
Internal
intercostals
relaxed
Pressure (cm H2O)
Volume change (liters)
0.25
0
+2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
0.50
Expiration
Inspiration
Transpulmonary pressure
Lung volume
Alveolar pressure
Pleural pressure
Figure 38-­2  Changes in lung volume, alveolar pressure, pleural pres-
sure, and transpulmonary pressure during normal breathing.
Chapter 38  Pulmonary Ventilation
	
493
U N I T  V I I
Compliance of the Lungs
The extent to which the lungs will expand for each unit 
increase in transpulmonary pressure (if enough time is 
allowed to reach equilibrium) is called the lung compli-
ance. The total compliance of both lungs together in the 
normal adult averages about 200 ml of air/cm H2O trans-
pulmonary pressure. That is, every time the transpulmo-
nary pressure increases by 1 cm H2O, the lung volume, 
after 10 to 20 seconds, will expand 200 ml.
Compliance Diagram of the Lungs. Figure 38-­3 is a di-
agram relating lung volume changes to changes in pleural 
pressure, which, in turn, alters transpulmonary pressure. 
Note that the relationship is different for inspiration and 
expiration. Each curve is recorded by changing the pleu-
ral pressure in small steps and allowing the lung volume 
to come to a steady level between successive steps. The 
two curves are called, respectively, the inspiratory com-
pliance curve and the expiratory compliance curve, and 
the entire diagram is called the compliance diagram of the 
lungs.
The characteristics of the compliance diagram are 
determined by the elastic forces of the lungs. These forces 
can be divided into two parts: (1) elastic forces of the lung 
tissue; and (2) elastic forces caused by surface tension of 
the fluid that lines the inside walls of the alveoli and other 
lung air spaces.
The elastic forces of the lung tissue are determined 
mainly by elastin and collagen fibers interwoven among 
the lung parenchyma. In deflated lungs, these fibers 
are in an elastically contracted and kinked state; then, 
when the lungs expand, the fibers become stretched and 
unkinked, thereby elongating and exerting even more 
elastic force.
The elastic forces caused by surface tension are much 
more complex. The significance of surface tension is 
shown in Figure 38-­4, which compares the compliance 
diagram of the lungs when filled with saline solution and 
when filled with air. When the lungs are filled with air, 
there is an interface between the alveolar fluid and the air 
in the alveoli. In lungs filled with saline solution, there is 
no air-­fluid interface and, therefore, the surface tension 
effect is not present; only tissue elastic forces are opera-
tive in the lung filled with saline solution.
Note that transpleural pressures required to expand 
air-­filled lungs are about three times as great as those 
required to expand lungs filled with saline solution. Thus, 
one can conclude that the tissue elastic forces tending to 
cause collapse of the air-­filled lung represent only about 
one-third of the total lung elasticity, whereas the fluid-­air 
surface tension forces in the alveoli represent about two- 
thirds.
The fluid-­air surface tension elastic forces of the lungs 
also increase tremendously when the substance called 
surfactant is not present in the alveolar fluid. 
Surfactant, Surface Tension, and Collapse 
of the Alveoli
Principle of Surface Tension. When water forms a sur-
face with air, the water molecules on the surface of the 
water have an especially strong attraction for one anoth-
er. As a result, the water surface is always attempting to 
contract. This is what holds raindrops together—a tight 
contractile membrane of water molecules around the 
entire surface of the raindrop. Now, let us reverse these 
principles and see what happens on the inner surfaces of 
the alveoli. Here, the water surface is also attempting to 
contract. This tends to force air out of the alveoli through 
the bronchi and, in doing so, causes the alveoli to try to 
collapse. The net effect is to cause an elastic contractile 
force of the entire lungs, which is called the surface ten-
sion elastic force. 
Surfactant and Its Effect on Surface Tension. Sur-
factant is a surface-­active agent in water, which means 
Lung volume change (liters)
0.50
Expiration
Inspiration
0.25
0
–4
–5
–6
Pleural pressure (cm H2O)
Figure 38-­3  Compliance diagram in a healthy person. This diagram 
shows changes in lung volume during changes in transpulmonary 
pressure (alveolar pressure minus pleural pressure).
Lung volume change (liters)
0.50
0.25
0
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
Pleural pressure (cm H2O)
Saline-filled
Air-filled
Inspiration
Expiration
Figure 38-­4  Comparison of the compliance diagrams of saline-­filled 
and air-­filled lungs when the alveolar pressure is maintained at at-
mospheric pressure (0 cm H2O) and pleural pressure is changed to 
change the transpulmonary pressure.
UNIT VII   Respiration
494
that it greatly reduces the surface tension of water. It is 
secreted by special surfactant-­secreting epithelial cells 
called type II alveolar epithelial cells, which constitute 
about 10% of the surface area of the alveoli. These cells are 
granular, containing lipid inclusions that are secreted in 
the surfactant into the alveoli.
Surfactant is a complex mixture of several phospholip-
ids, proteins, and ions. The most important components 
are the phospholipid dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine, 
surfactant apoproteins, and calcium ions. The dipalmitoyl 
phosphatidylcholine and several less important phospho-
lipids are responsible for reducing the surface tension. 
They perform this function by not dissolving uniformly 
in the fluid lining the alveolar surface. Instead, part of 
the molecule dissolves while the remainder spreads over 
the surface of the water in the alveoli. This surface has 
from one-­twelfth to one-­half the surface tension of a pure 
water surface.
Quantitatively, the surface tension of different water 
fluids is approximately the following: pure water, 72 
dynes/cm; normal fluids lining the alveoli but without 
surfactant, 50 dynes/cm; normal fluids lining the alveoli 
and with normal amounts of surfactant included, between 
5 and 30 dynes/cm. 
Pressure in Occluded Alveoli Caused by Surface Ten-
sion. If the air passages leading from the alveoli of the lungs 
are blocked, the surface tension in the alveoli tends to col-
lapse the alveoli. This collapse creates positive pressure in 
the alveoli, attempting to push the air out. The amount of 
pressure generated in this way in an alveolus can be calcu-
lated from the following formula:
Pressure = 2 × Surface tension
Radius of alveolus
For the average-­sized alveolus with a radius of about 
100 micrometers and lined with normal surfactant, this 
calculates to be about 4 cm H2O pressure (3 mm Hg). If the 
alveoli were lined with pure water without any surfactant, 
the pressure would be calculated as about 18 cm H2O pres-
sure—4.5 times as great. Thus, one sees the importance of 
surfactant in reducing alveolar surface tension and there-
fore also reducing the effort required by the respiratory 
muscles to expand the lungs. 
Pressure Caused by Surface Tension Is Inversely Related 
to Alveolar Radius. Note from the preceding formula that 
the smaller the alveolus, the greater the alveolar pressure 
caused by the surface tension. Thus, when the alveoli have 
half the normal radius (50 instead of 100 micrometers), the 
pressures noted earlier are doubled. This phenomenon is 
especially significant in small premature infants, many of 
whom have alveoli with radii less than 25% that of an adult 
person. Furthermore, surfactant does not normally begin 
to be secreted into the alveoli until between the sixth and 
seventh months of gestation and, in some cases, even later. 
Therefore, many premature infants have little or no sur-
factant in the alveoli when they are born, and their lungs 
have an extreme tendency to collapse, sometimes as much 
as six to eight times that in a normal adult person. This situ-
ation causes respiratory distress syndrome of the newborn. It 
is fatal if not treated with strong measures, especially prop-
erly applied continuous positive pressure breathing. 
EFFECT OF THE THORACIC CAGE ON 
LUNG EXPANSIBILITY
Thus far, we have discussed the expansibility of the lungs 
alone, without considering the thoracic cage. The tho-
racic cage has its own elastic and viscous characteristics 
and, even if the lungs were not present in the thorax, 
muscular effort would still be required to expand the 
thoracic cage.
Compliance of Thorax and Lungs 
Together
The compliance of the entire pulmonary system (the 
lungs and thoracic cage together) is measured while 
expanding the lungs of a totally relaxed or paralyzed 
subject. To measure compliance, air is forced into the 
lungs a little at a time while recording lung pressures and 
volumes. To inflate this total pulmonary system, almost 
twice as much pressure is required compared with the 
same lungs after removal from the chest cage. Therefore, 
the compliance of the combined lung-­thorax system is 
almost exactly half that of the lungs alone—110 ml/cm 
H2O pressure for the combined system, compared with 
200 ml/cm H2O for the lungs alone. Furthermore, when 
the lungs are expanded to high volumes or compressed 
to low volumes, the limitations of the chest become 
extreme. When near these limits, the compliance of the 
combined lung-­thorax system can be less than 20% of 
that of the lungs alone. 
Work of Breathing
We have already pointed out that during normal quiet 
breathing, all respiratory muscle contraction occurs during 
inspiration; expiration is almost entirely a passive process 
caused by elastic recoil of the lungs and chest cage. Thus, 
under resting conditions, the respiratory muscles normally 
perform “work” to cause inspiration but not to cause expi-
ration.
The work of inspiration can be divided into three frac-
tions: (1) that required to expand the lungs against the 
lung and chest elastic forces, called compliance work or 
elastic work; (2) that required to overcome the viscosity of 
the lung and chest wall structures, called tissue resistance 
work; and (3) that required to overcome airway resistance 
to movement of air into the lungs, called airway resistance 
work.
Energy Required for Respiration. During normal quiet 
respiration, only 3% to 5% of the total energy expended by 
the body is required for pulmonary ventilation. However, 
during heavy exercise, the amount of energy required can 
increase as much as 50-­fold, especially if the person has any 
degree of increased airway resistance or decreased pulmo-
nary compliance. Therefore, one of the major limitations 
on the intensity of exercise that can be performed is the 
person’s ability to provide enough muscle energy for the 
respiratory process alone. 
Chapter 38  Pulmonary Ventilation
	
495
U N I T  V I I
PULMONARY VOLUMES AND 
CAPACITIES
RECORDING CHANGES IN PULMONARY 
VOLUME—SPIROMETRY
Pulmonary ventilation can be studied by recording the 
volume movement of air into and out of the lungs, a 
method called spirometry. A typical basic spirometer is 
shown in Figure 38-­5. It consists of a drum inverted over 
a chamber of water, with the drum counterbalanced by 
a weight. In the drum is a breathing gas, usually air or 
oxygen; a tube connects the mouth with the gas chamber. 
When the person breathes into and out of the chamber, 
the drum rises and falls, and an appropriate recording is 
made.
Figure 38-­6 shows a spirogram indicating changes in 
lung volume under different conditions of breathing. For 
ease in describing the events of pulmonary ventilation, 
the air in the lungs has been subdivided in this diagram 
into four volumes and four capacities, which are the aver-
ages for a young adult man. Table 38-­1 summarizes the 
average pulmonary volumes and capacities for healthy 
men and women.
Pulmonary Volumes
Figure 38-­6 lists four pulmonary lung volumes that when 
added together, equal the maximum volume to which the 
lungs can be expanded. The lung volumes shown are for 
average adult males, but lung volumes vary considerably 
depending on physical fitness, age, height, sex, and other 
factors, such as the altitude at which a person resides. 
The significance of each of these lung volumes is the 
following:
	
1.	 The tidal volume is the volume of air inspired or ex-
pired with each normal breath; it amounts to about 
500 ml in the average healthy man.
	
2.	 The inspiratory reserve volume is the extra volume 
of air that can be inspired over and above the nor-
mal tidal volume when the person inspires with full 
force; it is usually equal to about 3000 ml.
	
3.	 The expiratory reserve volume is the maximum extra 
volume of air that can be expired by forceful expira-
tion after the end of a normal tidal expiration; this 
volume normally amounts to about 1100 ml in men.
	
4.	 The residual volume is the volume of air remaining 
in the lungs after the most forceful expiration; this 
volume averages about 1200 ml. 
Pulmonary Capacities
In describing events in the pulmonary cycle, it is some-
times useful to consider two or more of the volumes 
together. Such combinations are called pulmonary capac-
ities. To the right in Figure 38-­6 are listed the important 
pulmonary capacities, which can be described as follows:
	
1.	 The inspiratory capacity equals the tidal volume 
plus the inspiratory reserve volume. This capacity 
is the amount of air (≈3500 ml) that a person can 
breathe in, beginning at the normal expiratory level 
and distending the lungs to the maximum amount.
	
2.	 The functional residual capacity equals the expira-
tory reserve volume plus the residual volume. This 
capacity is the amount of air that remains in the 
lungs at the end of normal expiration ≈2300 ml).
Recording
drum
Mouthpiece
Counterbalancing
weight
Floating
drum
Oxygen
chamber
Water
Figure 38-­5  Spirometer.
Lung volume (ml)
5000
6000
1000
2000
3000
4000
Time
Inspiratory
capacity
Inspiratory
reserve
volume
Expiratory
reserve volume
Vital
capacity
Total lung
capacity
Tidal
volume
Functional
residual
capacity
Residual
volume
Figure 38-­6  Respiratory excursions during normal breathing and 
during maximal inspiration and maximal expiration.
Table 38-­1    Average Pulmonary Volumes and 
Capacities for Healthy, Young Adult Men and Women
Pulmonary Volumes and Capacities
Men
Women
Volume (ml)
Tidal volume
500
400
Inspiratory reserve volume
3000
1900
Expiratory volume
1100
700
Residual volume
1200
1100
Capacities (ml)
Inspiratory capacity
3500
2400
Functional residual capacity
2300
1800
Vital capacity
4600
3100
Total lung capacity
5800
4200
UNIT VII   Respiration
496
	
3.	 The vital capacity equals the inspiratory reserve vol-
ume plus the tidal volume plus the expiratory re-
serve volume. This capacity is the maximum amount 
of air a person can expel from the lungs after first 
filling the lungs to their maximum extent and then 
expiring to the maximum extent (≈4600 ml).
	
4.	 The total lung capacity is the maximum volume to 
which the lungs can be expanded with the greatest 
possible effort (≈5800 ml); it is equal to the vital ca-
pacity plus the residual volume.
Most pulmonary volumes and capacities are usually 
about 20% to 30% less in women than in men, and they 
are greater in large and athletic people than in small and 
asthenic people. 
ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS USED IN 
PULMONARY FUNCTION STUDIES
Spirometry is only one of many measurement procedures 
that pulmonary physicians use daily. Many of these pro-
cedures depend heavily on mathematical computations. 
To simplify these calculations, as well as the presentation 
of pulmonary function data, several abbreviations and 
symbols have become standardized. The more important 
of these are given in Table 38-­2. Using these symbols, 
we present here a few simple algebraic equations show-
ing some of the interrelationships among the pulmonary 
volumes and capacities; the student should think through 
and verify these interrelationships.
VC = IRV + VT + ERV
VC = IC + ERV
TLC = VC + RV
TLC = IC + FRC
FRC = ERV + RV 
DETERMINATION OF FUNCTIONAL 
RESIDUAL CAPACITY, RESIDUAL VOLUME, 
AND TOTAL LUNG CAPACITY—HELIUM 
DILUTION METHOD
The functional residual capacity (FRC), which is the vol-
ume of air that remains in the lungs at the end of each 
normal expiration, is important to lung function. Because 
its value changes markedly in some types of pulmonary 
disease, it is often desirable to measure this capacity. The 
spirometer cannot be used in to measure the FRC directly 
because the air in the residual volume of the lungs cannot 
be expired into the spirometer, and this volume consti-
tutes about half of the FRC. To measure FRC, the spirom-
eter must be used in an indirect manner, usually by means 
of a helium dilution method, as follows.
A spirometer of known volume is filled with air 
mixed with helium at a known concentration. Before 
Table 38-­2    Abbreviations and Symbols for Pulmonary 
Function
Abbreviation
Function
VT
Tidal volume
FRC
Functional residual capacity
ERV
Expiratory reserve volume
RV
Residual volume
IC
Inspiratory capacity
IRV
Inspiratory reserve volume
TLC
Total lung capacity
VC
Vital capacity
Raw
Resistance of the airways to flow of air 
into the lung
C
Compliance
VD
Volume of dead space gas
VA
Volume of alveolar gas
VI
Inspired volume of ventilation per minute
VE
Expired volume of ventilation per minute
VS
Shunt flow
VA
Alveolar ventilation per minute
Vo2
Rate of oxygen uptake per minute
Vco2
Amount of carbon dioxide eliminated per 
minute
Vco
Rate of carbon monoxide uptake per 
minute
DLO2
Diffusing capacity of the lungs for oxygen
DLCO
Diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon 
monoxide
PB
Atmospheric pressure
Palv
Alveolar pressure
Ppl
Pleural pressure
Po2
Partial pressure of oxygen
Pco2
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide
Pn2
Partial pressure of nitrogen
Pao2
Partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood
Paco2
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in 
arterial blood
Pao2
Partial pressure of oxygen in alveolar gas
Paco2
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in 
alveolar gas
Pah2o
Partial pressure of water in alveolar gas
R
Respiratory exchange ratio
Q
Cardiac output
Cao2
Concentration of oxygen in arterial blood
CVo2
Concentration of oxygen in mixed venous 
blood
So2
Percentage saturation of hemoglobin with 
oxygen
Sao2
Percentage saturation of hemoglobin with 
oxygen in arterial blood
Chapter 38  Pulmonary Ventilation
	
497
U N I T  V I I
breathing from the spirometer, the person expires nor-
mally. At the end of this expiration, the remaining vol-
ume in the lungs is equal to the FRC. At this point, the 
subject immediately begins to breathe from the spirom-
eter, and the gases of the spirometer mix with the gases 
of the lungs. As a result, the helium becomes diluted by 
the FRC gases, and the volume of the FRC can be calcu-
lated from the degree of dilution of the helium, using the 
following formula:
FRC =
( CiHe
CfHe
−1
)
ViSpir
where FRC is functional residual capacity, CiHe is the 
initial concentration of helium in the spirometer, CfHe is 
the final concentration of helium in the spirometer, and 
ViSpir is the initial volume of the spirometer.
Once the FRC has been determined, the residual vol-
ume (RV) can be determined by subtracting expiratory 
reserve volume (ERV), as measured by normal spirom-
etry, from the FRC. Also, the total lung capacity (TLC) 
can be determined by adding the inspiratory capacity (IC) 
to the FRC. That is:
RV = FRC −ERV
and
TLC = FRC + IC 
MINUTE RESPIRATORY VOLUME EQUALS 
RESPIRATORY RATE TIMES TIDAL 
VOLUME
The minute respiratory volume is the total amount of 
new air moved into the respiratory passages each min-
ute and is equal to the tidal volume times the respiratory 
rate per minute. The normal tidal volume is about 500 
ml, and the normal respiratory rate is about 12 breaths/
min. Therefore, the minute respiratory volume averages 
about 6 L/min. A person can live for a short period with 
a minute respiratory volume as low as 1.5 L/min and a 
respiratory rate of only 2 to 4 breaths/min.
The respiratory rate occasionally rises to 40 to 50 
breaths/min, and the tidal volume can become as great as 
the vital capacity, about 4600 ml in a young man. This can 
give a minute respiratory volume greater than 200 L/min, 
or more than 30 times normal. Most people cannot sus-
tain more than half to two-thirds of these values for longer 
than 1 minute. 
ALVEOLAR VENTILATION
The ultimate importance of pulmonary ventilation is to 
renew the air in the gas exchange areas of the lungs con-
tinually, where air is in proximity to the pulmonary blood. 
These areas include the alveoli, alveolar sacs, alveolar 
ducts, and respiratory bronchioles. The rate at which new 
air reaches these areas is called alveolar ventilation.
DEAD SPACE AND ITS EFFECT ON 
ALVEOLAR VENTILATION
Some of the air a person breathes never reaches the gas 
exchange areas but simply fills respiratory passages, such 
as the nose, pharynx, and trachea, where gas exchange 
does not occur. This air is called dead space air because it 
is not useful for gas exchange.
On expiration, the air in the dead space is expired first, 
before any of the air from the alveoli reaches the atmo-
sphere. Therefore, the dead space is very disadvantageous 
for removing the expiratory gases from the lungs.
Measurement of Dead Space Volume. A simple method 
for measuring dead space volume is demonstrated by the 
graph in Figure 38-­7. In making this measurement, the sub-
ject suddenly takes a deep breath of 100% O2, which fills the 
entire dead space with pure O2. Some oxygen also mixes with 
the alveolar air but does not completely replace this air. Then 
the person expires through a rapidly recording nitrogen meter, 
which makes the record shown in the figure. The first portion 
of the expired air comes from the dead space regions of the 
respiratory passageways, where the air has been completely re-
placed by O2. Therefore, in the early part of the record, only O2 
appears, and the nitrogen concentration is 0. Then, when al-
veolar air begins to reach the nitrogen meter, the nitrogen con-
centration rises rapidly because alveolar air containing large 
amounts of nitrogen begins to mix with the dead space air. 
After still more air has been expired, all the dead space air has 
been washed from the passages and only alveolar air remains. 
Therefore, the recorded nitrogen concentration reaches a pla-
teau level equal to its concentration in the alveoli, as shown at 
the right in the figure. The gray area represents the air that has 
no nitrogen in it and is a measure of the volume of dead space 
air. For exact quantification, the following equation is used:
VD =
Gray area × VE
Pink area + Gray area
where VD is dead space air and VE is the total volume 
of expired air.
Let us assume, for example, that the gray area on the 
graph is 30 square centimeters, the pink area is 70 square 
centimeters, and the total volume expired is 500 ml. The 
dead space would be
Percent nitrogen
0
20
40
0
100
Inspiration of pure oxygen
200
300
400
500
60
80
Air expired (ml)
Recorde
d
 
n
i
t
r
o
g
e
n concentration 
Figure 38-­7  Record of the changes in nitrogen concentration in the 
expired air after a single previous inspiration of pure oxygen. This 
record can be used to calculate dead space, as discussed in the text.
UNIT VII   Respiration
498
30
30 + 70
× 500 = 150 ml 
Normal Dead Space Volume. The normal dead space air 
in a young man is about 150 ml. Dead space air increases 
slightly with age. 
Anatomical Versus Physiological Dead Space. The 
method just described for measuring the dead space meas-
ures the volume of all the space of the respiratory system 
other than the alveoli and their other closely related gas ex-
change areas; this space is called the anatomic dead space. 
On occasion, some of the alveoli are nonfunctional or only 
partially functional because of absent or poor blood flow 
through the adjacent pulmonary capillaries. Therefore, 
these alveoli must also be considered dead space. When the 
alveolar dead space is included in the total measurement 
of dead space, this is called the physiological dead space, in 
contradistinction to the anatomical dead space. In a person 
with healthy lungs, the anatomical and physiological dead 
spaces are nearly equal because all alveoli are functional in 
the normal lung but, in a person with partially functional 
or nonfunctional alveoli in some parts of the lungs, the 
physiological dead space may be as much as 10 times the 
volume of the anatomical dead space, or 1 to 2 liters. These 
problems are discussed further in Chapter 40 in relation to 
pulmonary gaseous exchange and in Chapter 43 in relation 
to certain pulmonary diseases. 
RATE OF ALVEOLAR VENTILATION
Alveolar ventilation per minute is the total volume of new 
air entering the alveoli and adjacent gas exchange areas 
each minute. It is equal to the respiratory rate times the 
amount of new air that enters these areas with each breath:
VA = Freq × (VT −VD)
where 

A
V  is the volume of alveolar ventilation per min-
ute, Freq is the frequency of respiration per minute, Vt is 
the tidal volume, and Vd is the physiological dead space 
volume.
Thus, with a normal tidal volume of 500 ml, a normal 
dead space of 150 ml, and a respiratory rate of 12 breaths/
min, alveolar ventilation equals 12 × (500 − 150), or 4200 
ml/min.
Alveolar ventilation is one of the major factors deter-
mining the concentrations of oxygen and carbon dioxide 
in the alveoli. Therefore, almost all discussions of gaseous 
exchange in the following chapters on the respiratory sys-
tem focus on alveolar ventilation. 
Functions of Respiratory Passageways
Trachea, Bronchi, and Bronchioles
Figure 38-­8 highlights the respiratory passageways. The air 
is distributed to the lungs by way of the trachea, bronchi, 
and bronchioles.
One of the most important challenges in the respiratory 
passageways is to keep them open and allow easy passage 
of air to and from the alveoli. To keep the trachea from col-
lapsing, multiple cartilage rings extend about five-sixths of 
the way around the trachea. In the walls of the bronchi, less 
extensive curved cartilage plates also maintain a reasonable 
amount of rigidity yet allow sufficient motion for the lungs 
to expand and contract. These plates become progressively 
less extensive in the later generations of bronchi and are 
gone in the bronchioles, which usually have diameters less 
than 1.5 millimeters. The bronchioles are not prevented 
Figure 38-­8  Respiratory passages.
Epiglottis
Pharynx
Esophagus
Pulmonary arteries
Pulmonary
capillary
Alveolus
O2
O2
O2
CO2
CO2
CO2
Pulmonary veins
Conchae
Alveoli
Glottis
Larynx, vocal
cords
Trachea
Chapter 38  Pulmonary Ventilation
	
499
U N I T  V I I
from collapsing by the rigidity of their walls. Instead, they 
are kept expanded mainly by the same transpulmonary 
pressures that expand the alveoli. That is, as the alveoli en-
large, the bronchioles also enlarge, but not as much.
Muscular Wall of the Bronchi and Bronchioles. In all 
areas of the trachea and bronchi not occupied by cartilage 
plates, the walls are composed mainly of smooth mus-
cle. Also, the walls of the bronchioles are almost entirely 
smooth muscle, with the exception of the most terminal 
bronchiole, called the respiratory bronchiole, which is 
mainly pulmonary epithelium and underlying fibrous tissue 
plus a few smooth muscle fibers. Many obstructive diseases 
of the lung result from narrowing of the smaller bronchi 
and larger bronchioles, often because of excessive contrac-
tion of the smooth muscle. 
Resistance to Airflow in the Bronchial Tree. Under nor-
mal respiratory conditions, air flows through the respira-
tory passageways so easily that less than 1 cm H2O pressure 
gradient from the alveoli to the atmosphere is sufficient 
to cause enough airflow for quiet breathing. The greatest 
amount of resistance to airflow occurs not in the tiny air 
passages of the terminal bronchioles but in some of the 
larger bronchioles and bronchi near the trachea. The rea-
son for this high resistance is that there are relatively few of 
these larger bronchi in comparison with the approximately 
65,000 parallel terminal bronchioles, through each of which 
only a minute amount of air must pass.
In some disease conditions, the smaller bronchioles play 
a far greater role in determining airflow resistance because 
of their small size and because they are easily occluded 
by the following: (1) muscle contraction in their walls; (2) 
edema in the walls; or (3) mucus collecting in the lumens 
of the bronchioles. 
Nervous and Local Control of the Bronchiolar Muscu-
lature—Sympathetic Dilation of the Bronchioles. Direct 
control of the bronchioles by sympathetic nerve fibers is 
relatively weak because few of these fibers penetrate to the 
central portions of the lung. However, the bronchial tree 
is very much exposed to norepinephrine and epinephrine 
released into the blood by sympathetic stimulation of the 
adrenal gland medullae. Both these hormones, especially 
epinephrine because of its greater stimulation of beta-­
adrenergic receptors, cause dilation of the bronchial tree. 
Parasympathetic Constriction of the Bronchioles. 
A few parasympathetic nerve fibers derived from the va-
gus nerves penetrate the lung parenchyma. These nerves 
secrete acetylcholine and, when activated, cause mild to 
moderate constriction of the bronchioles. When a disease 
process such as asthma has already caused some bronchi-
olar constriction, superimposed parasympathetic nervous 
stimulation often worsens the condition. When this situa-
tion occurs, administration of drugs that block the effects 
of acetylcholine, such as atropine, can sometimes relax the 
respiratory passages enough to relieve the obstruction.
Sometimes the parasympathetic nerves are also acti-
vated by reflexes that originate in the lungs. Most of these 
reflexes begin with irritation of the epithelial membrane 
of the respiratory passageways, initiated by noxious gases, 
dust, cigarette smoke, or bronchial infection. Also, a bron-
chiolar constrictor reflex often occurs when microemboli 
occlude small pulmonary arteries. 
Local Secretory Factors May Cause Bronchiolar Constric-
tion. Several substances formed in the lungs are often active 
in causing bronchiolar constriction. Two of the most impor-
tant of these are histamine and slow reactive substance of 
anaphylaxis. Both these substances are released in the lung 
tissues by mast cells during allergic reactions, especially 
those caused by pollen in the air. Therefore, they play key 
roles in causing airway obstruction in allergic asthma; this is 
especially true of the slow reactive substance of anaphylaxis.
The same irritants that cause parasympathetic constric-
tor reflexes of the airways—smoke, dust, sulfur dioxide, and 
some of the acidic elements in smog—may also act directly 
on the lung tissues to initiate local, non-­nervous reactions 
that cause obstructive constriction of the airways. 
Mucus Lining the Respiratory Passageways and Cilia 
Action to Clear the Passageways
All the respiratory passages, from the nose to the terminal 
bronchioles, are kept moist by a layer of mucus that coats 
the entire surface. The mucus is secreted partly by individual 
mucous goblet cells in the epithelial lining of the passages and 
partly by small submucosal glands. In addition to keeping the 
surfaces moist, the mucus traps small particles out of the in-
spired air and keeps most of these particles from ever reach-
ing the alveoli. The mucus is removed from the passages in 
the following manner.
The entire surface of the respiratory passages, in the nose 
and the lower passages, down as far as the terminal bronchi-
oles, is lined with ciliated epithelium, with about 200 cilia on 
each epithelial cell. These cilia beat continually at a rate of 10 
to 20 times/sec by the mechanism explained in Chapter 2, and 
the direction of their “power stroke” is always toward the phar-
ynx. That is, the cilia in the lungs beat upward, whereas those 
in the nose beat downward. This continual beating causes the 
coat of mucus to flow slowly, at a velocity of a few millime-
ters per minute, toward the pharynx. Then the mucus and its  
entrapped particles are swallowed or coughed to the exterior. 
Cough Reflex
The bronchi and trachea are so sensitive to light touch that 
slight amounts of foreign matter or other causes of irritation 
initiate the cough reflex. The larynx and carina (the point where 
the trachea divides into the bronchi) are especially sensitive, and 
the terminal bronchioles and even the alveoli are sensitive to 
corrosive chemical stimuli such as sulfur dioxide gas or chlorine 
gas. Afferent nerve impulses pass from the respiratory passages 
mainly through the vagus nerves to the medulla of the brain. 
There, an automatic sequence of events is triggered by the neu-
ronal circuits of the medulla, causing the following effects.
	 1.	 Up to 2.5 liters of air are rapidly inspired.
	 2.	 The epiglottis closes, and the vocal cords shut tightly to 
entrap the air within the lungs.
	 3.	 The abdominal muscles contract forcefully, pushing 
against the diaphragm while other expiratory muscles, 
such as the internal intercostals, also contract forcefully. 
Consequently, the pressure in the lungs rises rapidly, to 
as much as 100 mm Hg or more.
	 4.	 The vocal cords and epiglottis suddenly open widely, so 
that air under this high pressure in the lungs explodes 
outward. Sometimes this air is expelled at velocities 
ranging from 75 to 100 miles/hour.
UNIT VII   Respiration
500
Importantly, the strong compression of the lungs col-
lapses the bronchi and trachea by causing their noncarti-
laginous parts to invaginate inward, so the exploding air 
actually passes through bronchial and tracheal slits. The 
rapidly moving air usually carries with it any foreign matter 
that is present in the bronchi or trachea. 
Sneeze Reflex
The sneeze reflex is very much like the cough reflex, except 
that it applies to the nasal passageways instead of the lower 
respiratory passages. The initiating stimulus of the sneeze 
reflex is irritation in the nasal passageways; the afferent im-
pulses pass in the fifth cranial nerve to the medulla, where 
the reflex is triggered. A series of reactions similar to those 
for the cough reflex takes place, but the uvula is depressed, 
so large amounts of air pass rapidly through the nose, thus 
helping clear the nasal passages of foreign matter. 
Normal Respiratory Functions of the Nose
As air passes through the nose, three distinct normal respira-
tory functions are performed by the nasal cavities: (1) the air 
is warmed by the extensive surfaces of the conchae and sep-
tum, a total area of about 160 square centimeters (see Figure 
38-­8); (2) the air is almost completely humidified, even before 
it passes beyond the nose; and (3) the air is partially filtered. 
These functions together are called the air-­conditioning func-
tion of the upper respiratory passageways. Ordinarily, the 
temperature of the inspired air rises to within 1°F of body tem-
perature and to within 2% to 3% of full saturation with water 
vapor before it reaches the trachea. When a person breathes 
air through a tube directly into the trachea (as through a tra-
cheostomy), the cooling and especially the drying effect in the 
lower lung can lead to serious lung crusting and infection.
Filtration Function of the Nose. The hairs at the entrance 
to the nostrils are important for filtering out large particles. 
Much more important, though, is the removal of particles by 
turbulent precipitation. That is, the air passing through the 
nasal passageways hits many obstructing vanes—the con-
chae (also called turbinates, because they cause turbulence 
of the air), the septum, and the pharyngeal wall. Each time 
air hits one of these obstructions, it must change its direc-
tion of movement. The particles suspended in the air, having 
far more mass and momentum than air, cannot change their 
direction of travel as rapidly as the air can. Therefore, they 
continue forward, striking the surfaces of the obstructions, 
and are entrapped in the mucous coating and transported by 
the cilia to the pharynx to be swallowed. 
Size of Particles Entrapped in the Respiratory Passag-
es. The nasal turbulence mechanism for removing particles 
from air is so effective that almost no particles larger than 6 
micrometers in diameter enter the lungs through the nose. 
This size is smaller than red blood cells.
Of the remaining particles, many that are between 1 and 
5 micrometers settle in the smaller bronchioles as a result 
of gravitational precipitation. For example, terminal bron-
chiolar disease is common in coal miners because of settled 
dust particles. Some of the still smaller particles (<1 mi-
crometer in diameter) diffuse against the walls of the alveoli 
and adhere to the alveolar fluid. However, many particles 
smaller than 0.5 micrometer in diameter remain suspend-
ed in the alveolar air and are expelled by expiration. For  
example, the particles of cigarette smoke are about 0.3 mi-
crometer. Almost none of these particles are precipitated in 
the respiratory passageways before they reach the alveoli. 
Unfortunately, up to one-third of them do precipitate in the 
alveoli by the diffusion process, with the balance remaining 
suspended and expelled in the expired air.
Many of the particles that become entrapped in the al-
veoli are removed by alveolar macrophages, as explained in 
Chapter 34, and others are carried away by the lung lym-
phatics. An excess of particles can cause growth of fibrous 
tissue in the alveolar septa, leading to permanent debility. 
Vocalization
Speech involves not only the respiratory system but also 
the following: (1) specific speech nervous control centers in 
the cerebral cortex, discussed in Chapter 58; (2) respiratory 
control centers of the brain; and (3) the articulation and 
resonance structures of mouth and nasal cavities. Speech 
is composed of two mechanical functions: (1) phonation, 
which is achieved by the larynx; and (2) articulation, which 
is achieved by the structures of the mouth.
Phonation. The larynx, shown in Figure 38-­9A, is es-
pecially adapted to act as a vibrator. The vibrating elements 
are the vocal folds, commonly called the vocal cords. The 
vocal cords protrude from the lateral walls of the larynx 
toward the center of the glottis; they are stretched and po-
sitioned by several specific muscles of the larynx itself.
Figure 38-­9B shows the vocal cords as they are seen 
when looking into the glottis with a laryngoscope. During 
normal breathing, the cords are wide open to allow easy pas-
sage of air. During phonation, the cords move together so 
that passage of air between them will cause vibration. The 
pitch of the vibration is determined mainly by the degree 
of stretch of the cords, but also by how tightly the cords are 
approximated to one another and by the mass of their edges.
Figure 38-­9A shows a dissected view of the vocal folds 
after removal of the mucous epithelial lining. Immediately in-
side each cord is a strong elastic ligament called the vocal liga-
ment. This ligament is attached anteriorly to the large thyroid 
cartilage, which is the cartilage that projects forward from the 
anterior surface of the neck and is called the Adam’s apple. 
Posteriorly, the vocal ligament is attached to the vocal pro-
cesses of two arytenoid cartilages. The thyroid cartilage and 
the arytenoid cartilages articulate from below with another 
cartilage (not shown in Figure 38-­9), the cricoid cartilage.
The vocal cords can be stretched by forward rotation of 
the thyroid cartilage or posterior rotation of the arytenoid 
cartilages, activated by muscles stretching from the thyroid 
cartilage and arytenoid cartilages to the cricoid cartilage. 
Muscles located in the vocal cords lateral to the vocal liga-
ments, the thyroarytenoid muscles, can pull the arytenoid 
cartilages toward the thyroid cartilage and, therefore, loos-
en the vocal cords. Also, slips of these muscles in the vocal 
cords can change the shapes and masses of the vocal cord 
edges, sharpening them to emit high-­pitched sounds and 
blunting them for the more bass sounds.
Several other sets of small laryngeal muscles lie between 
the arytenoid cartilages and cricoid cartilage and can ro-
tate these cartilages inward or outward or pull their bases 
together or apart to give the various configurations of the 
vocal cords, shown in Figure 38-­9B. 
Chapter 38  Pulmonary Ventilation
	
501
U N I T  V I I
Articulation and Resonance. The three major organs of 
articulation are the lips, tongue, and soft palate. They need 
not be discussed in detail here because we are all familiar 
with their movements during speech and other vocaliza-
tions.
The resonators include the mouth, the nose and associ-
ated nasal sinuses, the pharynx, and even the chest cavity. 
Again, we are familiar with the resonating qualities of these 
structures. For example, the function of the nasal resona-
tors is demonstrated by the change in voice quality when 
a person has a severe cold that blocks the air passages to 
these resonators.
Bibliography
Driessen AK, McGovern AE, Narula M, et al: Central mechanisms of 
airway sensation and cough hypersensitivity. Pulm Pharmacol Ther 
47:9, 2017.
Fahy JV, Dickey BF: Airway mucus function and dysfunction. N Engl J 
Med 363:2233, 2010.
Hogg JC, Paré PD, Hackett TL: The contribution of small airway ob-
struction to the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease. Physiol Rev 97:529, 2017.
Keller JA, McGovern AE, Mazzone SB: Translating cough mechanisms 
into better cough suppressants. Chest 152:833, 2017.
Lai-­Fook SJ: Pleural mechanics and fluid exchange. Physiol Rev 
84:385, 2004.
Levin DL, Schiebler ML, Hopkins SR: Physiology for the pulmonary 
functional imager. Eur J Radiol 86:308, 2017.
Lopez-­Rodriguez E, Pérez-­Gil J: Structure-­function relationships in 
pulmonary surfactant membranes: from biophysics to therapy. Bio-
chim Biophys Acta 1838:1568, 2014.
Ma J, Rubin BK, Voynow JA: Mucins, mucus, and goblet cells. Chest 
154:169, 2018.
Mazzone SB, Undem BJ: Vagal afferent innervation of the airways in 
health and disease. Physiol Rev 96:975, 2016.
Prakash YS: Emerging concepts in smooth muscle contributions to 
airway structure and function: implications for health and disease. 
Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 311:L1113, 2016.
Strohl KP, Butler JP, Malhotra A: Mechanical properties of the upper 
airway. Compr Physiol 2:1853, 2012.
Suki B, Sato S, Parameswaran H, et  al: Emphysema and mechani-
cal stress-­induced lung remodeling. Physiology (Bethesda) 28:404, 
2013.
Whitsett JA, Kalin TV, Xu Y, Kalinichenko VV: Building and regenerat-
ing the lung cell by cell. Physiol Rev 99:513, 2019.
Widdicombe JH, Wine JJ: Airway gland structure and function. Phys-
iol Rev 95:1241, 2015.
Thyroarytenoid
muscle
Full
abduction
Gentle
abduction
Stage
whisper
Phonation
Intermediate position–
loud whisper
Lateral
cricoarytenoid
muscle
Posterior
cricoarytenoid
muscle
Transverse
arytenoid
muscle
Thyroid
cartilage
Arytenoid
cartilage
Vocal
ligament
A
B
Figure 38-­9  A, Anatomy of the larynx. B, Laryngeal function in phonation, showing the positions of the vocal cords during different types of 
phonation. (Modified from Greene MC: The Voice and Its Disorders, 4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1980.)
U N I T  V I I
	
503
The lung has two circulations, a high-­pressure, low-­flow 
circulation and a low-­pressure, high-­flow circulation. The 
high-­pressure, low-­flow circulation supplies systemic arte-
rial blood to the trachea, bronchial tree (including the 
terminal bronchioles), supporting tissues of the lung, and 
outer coats (adventitia) of the pulmonary arteries and 
veins. The bronchial arteries, which are branches of the 
thoracic aorta, supply most of this systemic arterial blood 
at a pressure that is only slightly lower than the aortic 
pressure.
The low-­pressure, high-­flow circulation supplies venous 
blood from all parts of the body to the alveolar capillar-
ies where oxygen (O2) is added and carbon dioxide (CO2) 
is removed. The pulmonary artery, which receives blood 
from the right ventricle, and its arterial branches carry 
blood to the alveolar capillaries for gas exchange, and the 
pulmonary veins then return the blood to the left atrium 
to be pumped by the left ventricle though the systemic 
circulation.
In this chapter, we discuss the special aspects of the 
pulmonary circulation that are important for gas exchange 
in the lungs.
PHYSIOLOGICAL ANATOMY OF THE 
PULMONARY CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Pulmonary Vessels. The pulmonary artery extends only 
5 centimeters beyond the apex of the right ventricle and 
then divides into right and left main branches that supply 
blood to the two respective lungs.
The pulmonary artery has a wall thickness one-third 
that of the aorta. The pulmonary arterial branches are 
short, and all the pulmonary arteries, even the smaller 
arteries and arterioles, have larger diameters than their 
counterpart systemic arteries. This feature, combined 
with the fact that the vessels are thin and distensible, gives 
the pulmonary arterial tree a large compliance, averaging 
almost 7 ml/mm Hg, which is similar to that of the entire 
systemic arterial tree. This large compliance allows the 
pulmonary arteries to accommodate the stroke volume 
output of the right ventricle.
The pulmonary veins, like the pulmonary arteries, are 
also short. They immediately empty their effluent blood 
into the left atrium. 
Bronchial Vessels. Blood also flows to the lungs through 
small bronchial arteries that originate from the systemic 
circulation, amounting to 1% to 2% of the total cardiac 
output. This bronchial arterial blood is oxygenated blood, 
in contrast to the partially deoxygenated blood in the pul-
monary arteries. It supplies the supporting tissues of the 
lungs, including the connective tissue, septa, and large 
and small bronchi. After this bronchial and arterial blood 
passes through the supporting tissues, it empties into the 
pulmonary veins and enters the left atrium, rather than 
passing back to the right atrium. Therefore, the flow into 
the left atrium and left ventricular output are about 1% to 
2% greater than that of the right ventricular output. 
Lymphatics. Lymph vessels are present in all the support-
ive tissues of the lung, beginning in the connective tissue 
spaces that surround the terminal bronchioles, coursing 
to the hilum of the lung, and then mainly into the right 
thoracic lymph duct. Particulate matter entering the alve-
oli is partly removed by these lymph vessels, and plasma 
protein leaking from the lung capillaries is also removed 
from the lung tissues, thereby helping to prevent pulmo-
nary edema. 
PRESSURES IN THE PULMONARY 
SYSTEM
Pressures in the Right Ventricle. The pressure pulse 
curves of the right ventricle and pulmonary artery are 
shown in the lower portion of Figure 39-­1. These curves 
are contrasted with the much higher aortic pressure curve 
shown in the upper portion of the figure. The normal sys-
tolic pressure in the right ventricle averages about 25 mm 
Hg, and the diastolic pressure averages about 0 to 1 mm 
Hg, values that are only one-fifth those for the left ventricle. 
Pressures in the Pulmonary Artery. During systole, 
the pressure in the pulmonary artery is essentially equal 
to the pressure in the right ventricle, as also shown in 
Pulmonary Circulation, Pulmonary 
Edema, and Pleural Fluid 
C H A P T E R  3 9
UNIT VII  Respiration
504
Figure 39-­1. However, after the pulmonary valve closes 
at the end of systole, the ventricular pressure falls pre-
cipitously, whereas the pulmonary arterial pressure falls 
more slowly as blood flows through the lungs.
As shown in Figure 39-­2, the systolic pulmonary arte-
rial pressure normally averages about 25 mm Hg in the 
human being, the diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure is 
about 8 mm Hg, and the mean pulmonary arterial pres-
sure is 15 mm Hg. 
Pulmonary Capillary Pressure. The mean pulmonary 
capillary pressure, as diagrammed in Figure 39-­2, is about 
7 mm Hg. The importance of this low capillary pressure is 
discussed in detail later in the chapter in relation to fluid 
exchange functions of the pulmonary capillaries. 
Left Atrial and Pulmonary Venous Pressures. The 
mean pressure in the left atrium and major pulmonary 
veins averages about 2 mm Hg in the recumbent person, 
varying from as low as 1 mm Hg to as high as 5 mm Hg. 
It usually is not feasible to measure someone’s left atrial 
pressure using a direct measuring device because it is 
difficult to pass a catheter through the heart chambers 
into the left atrium. However, the left atrial pressure can 
be estimated with moderate accuracy by measuring the 
so-­called pulmonary wedge pressure. This is measured 
by inserting a catheter first through a peripheral vein to 
the right atrium, then through the right side of the heart 
and through the pulmonary artery into one of the small 
branches of the pulmonary artery, and finally pushing the 
catheter until it wedges tightly in the small branch.
The pressure measured through the catheter, called the 
“wedge pressure,” is about 5 mm Hg. Because all blood flow 
has been stopped in the small wedged artery, and because 
the blood vessels extending beyond this artery make a 
direct connection with the pulmonary capillaries, this 
wedge pressure is usually only 2 to 3 mm Hg higher than 
the left atrial pressure. When the left atrial pressure rises 
to high values, the pulmonary wedge pressure also rises. 
Therefore, wedge pressure measurements can be used to 
estimate changes in pulmonary capillary pressure and left 
atrial pressure in patients with congestive heart failure. 
BLOOD VOLUME OF THE LUNGS
The blood volume of the lungs is about 450 ml, about 9% 
of the total blood volume of the entire circulatory system. 
Approximately 70 ml of this pulmonary blood volume 
is in the pulmonary capillaries; the remainder is divided 
about equally between the pulmonary arteries and veins.
Lungs Serve as a Blood Reservoir. Under various physi-
ological and pathological conditions, the quantity of blood 
in the lungs can vary from as little as half-­normal up to 
twice normal. For example, when a person blows out air 
so hard that high pressure is built up in the lungs, such as 
when blowing a trumpet, as much as 250 ml of blood can 
be expelled from the pulmonary circulatory system into 
the systemic circulation. Also, loss of blood from the sys-
temic circulation by hemorrhage can be partly compen-
sated for by the automatic shift of blood from the lungs 
into the systemic vessels. 
Cardiac Pathology May Shift Blood From Systemic 
Circulation to Pulmonary Circulation. Failure of the 
left side of the heart, or increased resistance to blood flow 
through the mitral valve as a result of mitral stenosis or 
mitral regurgitation, causes blood to dam up in the pul-
monary circulation, sometimes increasing the pulmonary 
blood volume as much as 100% and causing large increas-
es in the pulmonary vascular pressures. Because the vol-
ume of the systemic circulation is about nine times that of 
the pulmonary system, a shift of blood from one system to 
the other affects the pulmonary system greatly but usually 
has only mild systemic circulatory effects. 
BLOOD FLOW THROUGH THE LUNGS 
AND ITS DISTRIBUTION
Blood flow through the lungs is essentially equal to the 
cardiac output. Therefore, the factors that control car-
diac output—mainly peripheral factors, as discussed in 
Chapter 20—also control pulmonary blood flow. Under 
most conditions, the pulmonary vessels act as distensible 
tubes that enlarge with increasing pressure and narrow 
Pulmonary
artery
Left
atrium
Pulmonary
capillaries
0
2
8
7
15
M
D
S
25
Left
atrium
Pulmonary
capillaries
Pressure (mm Hg)
Figure 39-­2.  Pressures in the different vessels of the lungs. The red 
curve denotes arterial pulsations. D, Diastolic; M, mean; S, systolic.
0
0
8
25
75
120
2
1
Aortic pressure curve
Pulmonary artery curve
Right ventricular curve
Seconds
Pressure (mm Hg)
Figure 39-­1.  Pressure pulse contours in the right ventricle, pulmo-
nary artery, and aorta.
Chapter 39  Pulmonary Circulation, Pulmonary Edema, and Pleural Fluid 
	
505
U N I T  V I I
with decreasing pressure. For adequate aeration of the 
blood to occur, the blood must be distributed to the seg-
ments of the lungs where the alveoli are best oxygenated. 
This distribution is achieved by the following mechanism.
Decreased Alveolar Oxygen Reduces Local Alveolar 
Blood Flow and Regulates Pulmonary Blood Flow 
Distribution. When the concentration of O2 in the air 
of the alveoli decreases below normal, especially when it 
falls below 70% of normal (i.e., <73 mm Hg Po2), the ad-
jacent blood vessels constrict (Figure 39-­3) and may in-
crease vascular resistance more than fivefold at extremely 
low O2 levels. This effect is opposite to the effect observed 
in systemic vessels, which dilate rather than constrict in 
response to low O2 levels. Although the mechanisms that 
promote pulmonary vasoconstriction during hypoxia are 
not completely understood, low O2 concentration may 
have the following effects: (1) stimulate release of, or in-
crease sensitivity to, vasoconstrictor substances such as 
endothelin or reactive oxygen species; or (2) decrease re-
lease of a vasodilator, such as nitric oxide, from the lung 
tissue.
Some studies have suggested that hypoxia may directly 
induce vasoconstriction by inhibition of oxygen-­sensitive 
potassium ion channels in pulmonary vascular smooth 
muscle cell membranes. With low partial pressures of oxy-
gen, these channels are blocked, leading to depolarization 
of the cell membrane and activation of calcium channels 
and causing the influx of calcium ions. The rise of calcium 
concentration then causes constriction of small arteries 
and arterioles.
The increase in pulmonary vascular resistance as a 
result of low O2 concentration has the important function 
of distributing blood flow where it is most effective. That 
is, if some alveoli are poorly ventilated and have a low O2 
concentration, the local vessels constrict. This constric-
tion causes the blood to flow through other areas of the 
lungs that are better aerated, thus providing an automatic 
control system for distributing blood flow to the pulmo-
nary areas in proportion to their alveolar O2 pressures. 
EFFECT OF HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE 
GRADIENTS IN THE LUNGS ON 
REGIONAL PULMONARY BLOOD FLOW
In Chapter 15, we pointed out that the blood pressure in 
the foot of a standing person can be as much as 90 mm Hg 
greater than the pressure at the level of the heart. This dif-
ference is caused by hydrostatic pressure—that is, by the 
weight of the blood itself in the blood vessels. The same 
effect, but to a lesser degree, occurs in the lungs. In the 
upright adult, the lowest point in the lungs is normally 
about 30 cm below the highest point, which represents a 
23-­mm Hg pressure difference, about 15 mm Hg of which 
is above the heart and 8 below. That is, the pulmonary 
arterial pressure in the uppermost portion of the lung of 
a standing person is about 15 mm Hg less than the pul-
monary arterial pressure at the level of the heart, and the 
pressure in the lowest portion of the lungs is about 8 mm 
Hg higher.
Such pressure differences have profound effects on 
blood flow through the different areas of the lungs. This 
effect is demonstrated by the lower curve in Figure 39-­4, 
which depicts blood flow per unit of lung tissue at differ-
ent levels of the lung in the upright person. Note that in 
NORMAL
Alveolus
Vasoconstriction
Increased
flow
Alveolus
HYPOXIA
PO2
Figure 39-­3.  Regulation of blood flow in the lungs during local tis-
sue hypoxia. Local tissue blood flow and alveolar ventilation are nor-
mally matched for optimal gas exchange (top panel). Decreased Po2 
in tissue surrounding poorly ventilated alveoli causes vasoconstriction 
of adjacent arterioles and diverts blood flow to alveoli that are well 
ventilated (bottom panel).
Middle
Lung level
Top
Bottom
Standing at rest
Exercise
Blood flow
(per unit of tissue)
Figure 39-­4.  Blood flow at different levels in the lung of an upright 
person at rest (red curve) and during exercise (blue curve). Note that 
when the person is at rest, the blood flow is very low at the top of the 
lungs; most of the flow is through the bottom of the lung.
UNIT VII  Respiration
506
the standing position at rest, there is little flow in the top 
of the lung but about five times as much flow in the bot-
tom. To help explain these differences, the lung is often 
described as being divided into three zones, as shown in 
Figure 39-­5. In each zone, the patterns of blood flow are 
quite different.
Zones 1, 2, and 3 of Pulmonary Blood 
Flow
The capillaries in the alveolar walls are distended by 
the blood pressure inside them but simultaneously are 
compressed by the alveolar air pressure on their out-
sides. Therefore, whenever the lung alveolar air pressure 
becomes greater than the capillary blood pressure, the 
capillaries close, and there is no blood flow. Under dif-
ferent normal and pathological lung conditions, one may 
find any one of three possible zones (patterns) of pulmo-
nary blood flow, as follows:
 
• Zone 1: No blood flow during all portions of the car-
diac cycle because the local alveolar capillary pressure 
in that area of the lung never rises higher than the al-
veolar air pressure during any part of the cardiac cycle
 
• Zone 2: Intermittent blood flow only during the 
peaks of pulmonary arterial pressure because the 
systolic pressure is then greater than the alveolar air 
pressure, but the diastolic pressure is less than the 
alveolar air pressure
 
• Zone 3: Continuous blood flow because the alveolar 
capillary pressure remains greater than alveolar air 
pressure during the entire cardiac cycle
Normally, the lungs have only zones 2 and 3 blood 
flow—zone 2 (intermittent flow) in the apices and zone 
3 (continuous flow) in all the lower areas. For example, 
when a person is in the upright position, the pulmonary 
arterial pressure at the lung apex is about 15 mm Hg less 
than the pressure at the level of the heart. Therefore, the 
apical systolic pressure is only 10 mm Hg (25 mm Hg at 
heart level minus 15 mm Hg hydrostatic pressure differ-
ence). This 10 mm Hg apical blood pressure is greater 
than the 0 alveolar air pressure, so blood flows through 
the pulmonary apical capillaries during cardiac systole. 
Conversely, during diastole, the 8 mm Hg diastolic pres-
sure at the level of the heart is not sufficient to push 
the blood up the 15 mm Hg hydrostatic pressure gradi-
ent required to cause diastolic capillary flow. Therefore, 
blood flow through the apical part of the lung is inter-
mittent, with flow during systole but cessation of flow 
during diastole; this is called zone 2 blood flow. Zone 2 
blood flow begins in normal lungs about 10 cm above 
the midlevel of the heart and extends from there to the 
top of the lungs.
In the lower regions of the lungs, from about 10 cm 
above the level of the heart all the way to the bottom of 
the lungs, the pulmonary arterial pressure during both 
systole and diastole remains greater than the 0 alveolar 
air pressure. Therefore, continuous flow occurs through 
the alveolar capillaries, or zone 3 blood flow. Also, when 
a person is lying down, no part of the lung is more than a 
few centimeters above the level of the heart. In this case, 
blood flow in a normal person is entirely zone 3 blood 
flow, including the lung apices.
Zone 1 Blood Flow Occurs Only Under Abnormal 
Conditions. Zone 1 blood flow, which means no blood 
flow at any time during the cardiac cycle, occurs when 
the pulmonary systolic arterial pressure is too low or 
the alveolar pressure is too high to allow flow. For ex-
ample, if an upright person is breathing against a posi-
tive air pressure so that the intra-­alveolar air pressure 
is at least 10 mm Hg greater than normal but the pul-
monary systolic blood pressure is normal, one would 
expect zone 1 blood flow—no blood flow—in the lung 
apices. Another case in which zone 1 blood flow oc-
curs is in an upright person whose pulmonary systolic 
arterial pressure is exceedingly low, as might occur after 
severe blood loss. 
Exercise Increases Blood Flow Through All Parts of 
the Lungs. Referring again to Figure 39-­4, one sees that 
the blood flow in all parts of the lung increases during ex-
ercise. A major reason for increased blood flow is that the 
pulmonary vascular pressures rise enough during exercise 
to convert the lung apices from a zone 2 pattern into a 
zone 3 pattern of flow. 
Artery
Vein
PALV
ZONE 1
Ppc
Artery
Vein
PALV
ZONE 2
Ppc
Artery
Vein
PALV
ZONE 3
Ppc
Figure 39-­5.  Mechanics of blood flow in the three blood flow zones 
of the lung: zone 1, no flow—alveolar air pressure (PALV) is greater 
than arterial pressure; zone 2, intermittent flow—systolic arterial 
pressure rises higher than alveolar air pressure, but diastolic arterial 
pressure falls below alveolar air pressure; and zone 3, continuous 
flow—arterial pressure and pulmonary capillary pressure (Ppc) remain 
greater than alveolar air pressure at all times.
Chapter 39  Pulmonary Circulation, Pulmonary Edema, and Pleural Fluid 
	
507
U N I T  V I I
Increased Cardiac Output During Heavy 
Exercise Is Normally Accommodated by 
the Pulmonary Circulation Without Large 
Increases in Pulmonary Artery Pressure
During heavy exercise, blood flow through the lungs may 
increase fourfold to sevenfold. This extra flow is accom-
modated in the lungs in three ways: (1) by increasing the 
number of open capillaries, sometimes as much as three-
fold; (2) by distending all the capillaries and increasing 
the rate of flow through each capillary more than two-
fold; and (3) by increasing the pulmonary arterial pres-
sure. Normally, the first two changes decrease pulmonary 
vascular resistance so much that the pulmonary arterial 
pressure rises very little, even during maximum exercise. 
This effect is shown in Figure 39-­6.
The ability of the lungs to accommodate greatly 
increased blood flow during exercise, without increas-
ing the pulmonary arterial pressure, conserves the energy 
of the right side of the heart. This ability also prevents a 
major rise in pulmonary capillary pressure and the devel-
opment of pulmonary edema. 
Function of Pulmonary Circulation When 
Left Atrial Pressure Rises as a Result of 
Left-­Sided Heart Failure
The left atrial pressure in a healthy person almost never 
rises above +6 mm Hg, even during the most strenuous 
exercise. These small changes in left atrial pressure have 
virtually no effect on pulmonary circulatory function 
because this merely expands the pulmonary venules and 
opens up more capillaries so that blood continues to flow 
with almost equal ease from the pulmonary arteries.
When the left side of the heart fails, however, blood 
begins to dam up in the left atrium. As a result, the left 
atrial pressure can rise on occasion from its normal value 
of 1 to 5 mm Hg to as high as 40 to 50 mm Hg. The ini-
tial rise in atrial pressure, up to about 7 mm Hg, has lit-
tle effect on pulmonary circulatory function. However, 
when the left atrial pressure rises to greater than 7 or 8 
mm Hg, further increases in left atrial pressure cause 
almost equally great increases in pulmonary arterial pres-
sure, thus causing a concomitant increased load on the 
right heart. Any increase in left atrial pressure above 7 or 
8 mm Hg increases capillary pressure almost equally as 
much. When the left atrial pressure rises above 30 mm 
Hg, causing similar increases in capillary pressure, pul-
monary edema is likely to develop, as discussed later in 
the chapter. 
PULMONARY CAPILLARY DYNAMICS
Exchange of gases between the alveolar air and pulmo-
nary capillary blood is discussed in the next chapter. How-
ever, it is important to note here that the alveolar walls 
are lined with so many capillaries that in most places, the 
capillaries almost touch one another side by side. There-
fore, it is often said that the capillary blood flows in the 
alveolar walls as a “sheet of flow,” rather than in individual 
capillaries.
Pulmonary Capillary Pressure. Although direct meas-
urements of pulmonary capillary pressure have not been 
reported, indirect estimates have suggested that it nor-
mally averages about 7 mm Hg. This value is probably 
nearly correct because the mean left atrial pressure is 
about 2 mm Hg, and the mean pulmonary arterial pres-
sure is only 15 mm Hg, so the mean pulmonary capillary 
pressure must lie somewhere between these two values. 
Length of Time Blood Stays in the Pulmonary Cap-
illaries. From histological studies of the total cross-­
sectional area of all the pulmonary capillaries, it can be 
calculated that when the cardiac output is normal, blood 
passes through the pulmonary capillaries in about 0.8 
second. When the cardiac output increases, this time 
can shorten to as little as 0.3 second. The shortened time 
would be much greater were it not for the fact that addi-
tional capillaries, which normally are collapsed, open up 
to accommodate the increased blood flow. Thus, in only 
a fraction of a second, blood passing through the alveolar 
capillaries becomes oxygenated and loses its excess car-
bon dioxide. 
Capillary Exchange of Fluid in the Lungs 
and Pulmonary Interstitial Fluid Dynamics
The dynamics of fluid exchange across the lung capillary 
membranes are qualitatively the same as for peripheral 
tissues. However, quantitatively, there are important dif-
ferences, as follows:
	
1.	 The pulmonary capillary pressure is low, about 7 
mm Hg, in comparison with a considerably higher 
functional capillary pressure in many peripheral tis-
sues of about 17 mm Hg.
	
2.	 The interstitial fluid pressure in the lung is slightly 
more negative than that in peripheral subcutane-
0
30
20
10
0
Normal value
4
8
12
16
20
24
Pulmonary arterial
pressure (mm Hg)
Cardiac output (L/min)
Figure 39-­6.  Effect on mean pulmonary arterial pressure caused by 
increasing the cardiac output during exercise.
UNIT VII  Respiration
508
ous tissue. (This pressure has been measured in 
two ways—by a micropipette inserted into the 
pulmonary interstitium, giving a value of about −5 
mm Hg, and by measuring the absorption pressure 
of fluid from the alveoli, giving a value of about −8 
mm Hg.)
	
3.	 The colloid osmotic pressure of the pulmonary inter-
stitial fluid is about 14 mm Hg, in comparison with 
less than half this value in most peripheral tissues.
	
4.	 The alveolar walls are extremely thin, and the alveo-
lar epithelium covering the alveolar surfaces is so 
weak that it can be ruptured by any positive pres-
sure in the interstitial spaces greater than alveolar 
air pressure (>0 mm Hg), which allows dumping 
of fluid from the interstitial spaces into the alveoli. 
Now let us see how these quantitative differences 
affect pulmonary fluid dynamics.
Interrelationships Between Interstitial Fluid Pressure 
and Other Pressures in the Lung. Figure 39-­7 shows a 
pulmonary capillary, pulmonary alveolus, and lymphatic 
capillary draining the interstitial space between the blood 
capillary and alveolus. Note the balance of forces at the 
blood capillary membrane, as follows:
mm Hg
Forces tending to cause movement of fluid outward  
from the capillaries and into the pulmonary  
interstitium:
 • Capillary pressure
 • Interstitial fluid colloid osmotic pressure
 • Negative interstitial fluid pressure
TOTAL OUTWARD FORCE
7
14
8
29
Forces tending to cause absorption of fluid into the  
capillaries:
 • Plasma colloid osmotic pressure
TOTAL INWARD FORCE
28
28
Thus, the normal outward forces are slightly greater 
than the inward forces, providing a mean filtration pres-
sure at the pulmonary capillary membrane that can be 
calculated as +29 − 28 mm Hg = +1 mm Hg.
This filtration pressure causes a slight continual flow of 
fluid from the pulmonary capillaries into the interstitial 
spaces and, except for a small amount that evaporates in 
the alveoli, this fluid is pumped back to the circulation 
through the pulmonary lymphatic system. 
Negative Pulmonary Interstitial Pressure and Mecha-
nism for Keeping Alveoli Dry. What keeps the alveoli 
from filling with fluid under normal conditions? The pulmo-
nary capillaries and pulmonary lymphatic system normally 
maintain a slight negative pressure in the interstitial spaces; 
whenever extra fluid appears in the alveoli, it is sucked me-
chanically into the lung interstitium through the small open-
ings between the alveolar epithelial cells. The excess fluid is 
then carried away through the pulmonary lymphatics. Thus, 
under normal conditions, the alveoli are kept “dry,” except 
for a small amount of fluid that seeps from the epithelium 
onto the lining surfaces of the alveoli to keep them moist. 
Pulmonary Edema
Pulmonary edema occurs in the same way that edema 
occurs elsewhere in the body. Any factor that increases 
fluid filtration out of the pulmonary capillaries or that 
impedes pulmonary lymphatic function and causes the 
pulmonary interstitial fluid pressure to rise from the 
negative range into the positive range will tend to cause 
filling of the pulmonary interstitial spaces and alveoli 
with free fluid.
The most common causes of pulmonary edema are as 
follows:
	 1.	 Left-­sided heart failure or mitral valve disease, with 
consequent great increases in pulmonary venous pres-
sure and pulmonary capillary pressure and flooding of 
the interstitial spaces and alveoli
	 2.	 Damage to the pulmonary blood capillary membranes 
caused by infections such as pneumonia or by breathing 
noxious substances such as chlorine gas or sulfur diox-
ide gas
Each of these mechanisms causes rapid leakage of plas-
ma proteins and fluid out of the capillaries and into the lung 
interstitial spaces and alveoli.
Pulmonary Edema Safety Factor. Experiments in ani-
mals have shown that the pulmonary capillary pressure 
normally must rise to a value at least equal to the colloid 
osmotic pressure of the plasma inside the capillaries before 
significant pulmonary edema will occur. To give an example, 
Figure 39-­8 shows how different levels of left atrial pressure 
increase the rate of pulmonary edema formation in dogs. 
Remember that every time the left atrial pressure rises to 
high values, the pulmonary capillary pressure rises to a level 
1 to 2 mm Hg greater than the left atrial pressure. In these 
experiments, as soon as the left atrial pressure rose above 
23 mm Hg (causing the pulmonary capillary pressure to rise 
above 25 mm Hg), fluid began to accumulate in the lungs. 
This fluid accumulation increased even more rapidly with 
Hydrostatic
pressure
−8
+7
−14
−8
Osmotic
pressure
Net
pressure
Capillary
Pressures Causing Fluid Movement
Alveolus
Lymphatic pump
(+1)
(0)
(Evaporation)
(Surface
tension
at pore)
−28
−5
−4
−8
Figure 39-­7.  Hydrostatic and osmotic forces in mm Hg at the capil-
lary (left) and alveolar membrane (right) of the lungs. Also shown is 
the tip end of a lymphatic vessel (center) that pumps fluid from the 
pulmonary interstitial spaces.
Chapter 39  Pulmonary Circulation, Pulmonary Edema, and Pleural Fluid 
	
509
U N I T  V I I
further increases in capillary pressure. The plasma colloid 
osmotic pressure during these experiments was equal to 
this 25 mm Hg critical pressure level. Therefore, in a person, 
whose normal plasma colloid osmotic pressure is 28 mm 
Hg, one can predict that the pulmonary capillary pressure 
must rise from the normal level of 7 mm Hg to more than 
28 mm Hg to cause substantial pulmonary edema, giving an 
acute safety factor against pulmonary edema of 21 mm Hg. 
Safety Factor in Chronic Conditions. When the pulmo-
nary capillary pressure remains elevated chronically (for 
at least 2 weeks), the lungs become even more resistant to 
pulmonary edema because the lymph vessels expand great-
ly, increasing their capability of carrying fluid away from 
the interstitial spaces perhaps as much as 10-­fold. There-
fore, in patients with chronic mitral stenosis, pulmonary 
capillary pressures of 40 to 45 mm Hg have been measured 
without the development of lethal pulmonary edema. 
Rapidity of Death in Persons With Acute Pulmonary 
Edema. When the pulmonary capillary pressure rises even 
slightly above the safety factor level, lethal pulmonary ede-
ma can occur within hours, or even within 20 to 30 minutes 
if the capillary pressure rises 25 to 30 mm Hg above the 
safety factor level. Thus, in acute left-­sided heart failure, in 
which the pulmonary capillary pressure occasionally does 
rise to 50 mm Hg, death may ensue in less than 30 minutes 
as a result of acute pulmonary edema. 
FLUID IN THE PLEURAL CAVITY
When the lungs expand and contract during normal 
breathing, they slide back and forth within the pleural 
cavity. To facilitate this movement, a thin layer of mucoid 
fluid lies between the parietal and visceral pleurae.
Figure 39-­9 shows the dynamics of fluid exchange 
in the pleural space. The pleural membrane is a porous, 
mesenchymal, serous membrane through which small 
amounts of interstitial fluid transude continually into the 
pleural space. These fluids carry tissue proteins with them, 
giving the pleural fluid a mucoid characteristic, which is 
what allows extremely easy slippage of the moving lungs.
The total amount of fluid in each pleural cavity is nor-
mally slight—only a few milliliters. Whenever the quan-
tity becomes more than barely enough to begin flowing 
in the pleural cavity, the excess fluid is pumped away by 
lymphatic vessels opening directly from the pleural cav-
ity into the following: (1) the mediastinum; (2) the supe-
rior surface of the diaphragm; and (3) the lateral surfaces 
of the parietal pleura. Therefore, the pleural space—the 
space between the parietal and visceral pleurae—is called 
a potential space because it normally is so narrow that it 
is not obviously a physical space.
Negative Pressure in Pleural Fluid. A negative force is 
always required on the outside of the lungs to keep the 
lungs expanded. This force is provided by negative pres-
sure in the normal pleural space. The basic cause of this 
negative pressure is pumping of fluid from the space 
by the lymphatics, which is also the basis of the nega-
tive pressure found in most tissue spaces of the body. 
Because the normal collapse tendency of the lungs is 
about −4 mm Hg, the pleural fluid pressure must al-
ways be at least as negative as −4 mm Hg to keep the 
lungs expanded. Actual measurements have shown 
that the pressure is usually about –7 mm Hg, which is 
a few millimeters of mercury more negative than the 
collapse pressure of the lungs. Thus, the negativity of 
the pleural fluid pressure keeps the normal lungs pulled 
against the parietal pleura of the chest cavity, except for 
an extremely thin layer of mucoid fluid that acts as a 
lubricant. 
x
x
x
x
x x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
xxx
xxx
xxx
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
Left atrial pressure (mmHg)
Rate of edema formation = Edema fluid per hour
30
35
40
45
50
Dry weight of lung
Figure 39-­8.  Rate of fluid loss into the lung tissues when the left 
atrial pressure (and pulmonary capillary pressure) is increased. (From 
Guyton AC, Lindsey AW: Effect of elevated left atrial pressure and 
decreased plasma protein concentration on the development of pul-
monary edema. Circ Res 7:649, 1959.)
Venous system
Lymphatics
Pulmonary arteries
Pulmonary
veins
Figure 39-­9.  Dynamics of fluid exchange in the intrapleural space.
UNIT VII  Respiration
510
Pleural Effusion—Collection of Large Amounts of Free 
Fluid in the Pleural Space. Pleural effusion is analogous 
to edema fluid in the tissues and can be called edema of the 
pleural cavity. The causes of the effusion are the same as 
the causes of edema in other tissues (discussed in Chap-
ter 25), including the following: (1) blockage of lymphatic 
drainage from the pleural cavity; (2) cardiac failure, which 
causes excessively high peripheral and pulmonary capil-
lary pressures, leading to excessive transudation of fluid 
into the pleural cavity; (3) greatly reduced plasma colloid 
osmotic pressure, thus allowing excessive transudation of 
fluid; and (4) infection or any other cause of inflamma-
tion of the surfaces of the pleural cavity, which increases 
permeability of the capillary membranes and allows rapid 
dumping of plasma proteins and fluid into the cavity.
Bibliography
Dunham-­Snary KJ, Wu D, Sykes EA, et  al: Hypoxic pulmonary va-
soconstriction: from molecular mechanisms to medicine. Chest 
151:181, 2017.
Effros RM, Parker JC: Pulmonary vascular heterogeneity and the Star-
ling hypothesis. Microvasc Res 78:71, 2009.
Frise MC, Robbins PA: The pulmonary vasculature-­-­lessons from Tibetans 
and from rare diseases of oxygen sensing. Exp Physiol 100:1233, 2015.
Guyton AC, Lindsey AW: Effect of elevated left atrial pressure and 
decreased plasma protein concentration on the development of 
pulmonary edema. Circ Res 7:649, 1959.
Hughes M, West JB: Gravity is the major factor determining the distri-
bution of blood flow in the human lung. J Appl Physiol 104:1531, 
2008.
Jaitovich A, Jourd’heuil D: A Brief overview of nitric oxide and reactive 
oxygen species signaling in hypoxia-­induced pulmonary hyperten-
sion. Adv Exp Med Biol 967:71, 2017.
Lumb AB, Slinger P: Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction: physi-
ology and anesthetic implications. Anesthesiology 122:932, 
2015.
Parker JC: Hydraulic conductance of lung endothelial phenotypes and 
Starling safety factors against edema. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol 
Physiol 292:L378, 2007.
Stickland MK, Lindinger MI, Olfert IM, Heigenhauser GJ, Hopkins SR: 
Pulmonary gas exchange and acid-­base balance during exercise. 
Compr Physiol 3:693, 2013.
Suresh K, Shimoda LA: Lung circulation. Compr Physiol 6:897, 
2018.
Sylvester JT, Shimoda LA, Aaronson PI, Ward JP: Hypoxic pulmonary 
vasoconstriction. Physiol Rev 92:367, 2012.
Tabima DM, Philip JL, Chesler NC: Right ventricular-­pulmonary vascu-
lar interactions. Physiology (Bethesda) 32:346, 2017.
Townsley MI: Structure and composition of pulmonary arteries, capil-
laries, and veins. Compr Physiol 2:675, 2012.
Zielinska-­Krawczyk M, Krenke R, Grabczak EM, Light RW: Pleural 
manometry-­historical background, rationale for use and methods 
of measurement. Respir Med 136:21, 2018.
U N I T  V I I
	
511
After the alveoli are ventilated with fresh air, the next step 
in respiration is diffusion of oxygen (O2) from the alveoli 
into the pulmonary blood and diffusion of carbon diox-
ide (CO2) in the opposite direction, out of the blood into 
the alveoli. The process of diffusion is simply the random 
motion of molecules in all directions through the respira-
tory membrane and adjacent fluids. However, in respira-
tory physiology, we are concerned not only with the basic 
mechanism by which diffusion occurs but also with the 
rate at which it occurs, which is a much more complex 
issue, requiring a deeper understanding of the physics of 
diffusion and gas exchange.
Physics of Gas Diffusion and Gas Partial Pressures
Molecular Basis of Gas Diffusion
All the gases of concern in respiratory physiology are sim-
ple molecules that are free to move among one another by 
diffusion. This is also true of gases dissolved in the fluids 
and tissues of the body.
For diffusion to occur, there must be a source of energy. 
This source of energy is provided by the kinetic motion 
of the molecules. Except at absolute zero temperature, all 
molecules of all matter are continually undergoing motion. 
For free molecules that are not physically attached to oth-
ers, this means linear movement at high velocity until they 
strike other molecules. They then bounce away in new di-
rections and continue moving until they strike other mol-
ecules again. In this way, the molecules move rapidly and 
randomly among one another.
Net Diffusion of a Gas in One Direction—Effect of a 
Concentration Gradient. If a gas chamber or solution has a 
high concentration of a particular gas at one end of the cham-
ber and a low concentration at the other end, as shown in 
Figure 40-­1, net diffusion of the gas will occur from the high-­
concentration area toward the low-­concentration area. The 
reason is obvious. There are far more molecules at end A of the 
chamber to diffuse toward end B than there are molecules to 
diffuse in the opposite direction. Therefore, the rates of diffu-
sion in each of the two directions are proportionately different, 
as demonstrated by the lengths of the arrows in the figure. 
Gas Pressures in a Mixture of Gases—Partial Pressures of 
Individual Gases
Pressure is caused by multiple impacts of moving mole-
cules against a surface. Therefore, the pressure of a gas act-
ing on the surfaces of the respiratory passages and alveoli 
is proportional to the summated force of impact of all the 
molecules of that gas striking the surface at any given in-
stant. This means that the pressure is directly proportional 
to the concentration of the gas molecules.
In respiratory physiology, one deals with mixtures of 
gases, mainly oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide. The rate 
of diffusion of each of these gases is directly proportional 
to the pressure caused by that gas alone, which is called the 
partial pressure of that gas. The concept of partial pressure 
can be explained as follows.
Consider air, which has an approximate composition of 
79% nitrogen and 21% oxygen. The total pressure of this 
mixture at sea level averages 760 mm Hg. It is clear from 
the preceding description of the molecular basis of pres-
sure that each gas contributes to the total pressure in direct 
proportion to its concentration. Therefore, 79% of the 760 
mm Hg is caused by nitrogen (600 mm Hg) and 21% by 
O2 (160 mm Hg). Thus, the partial pressure of nitrogen in 
the mixture is 600 mm Hg, and the partial pressure of O2 
is 160 mm Hg; the total pressure is 760 mm Hg, the sum 
of the individual partial pressures. The partial pressures of 
individual gases in a mixture are designated by the symbols 
Po2, Pco2, Pn2, Phe, and so forth. 
Pressures of Gases Dissolved in Water and Tissues
Gases dissolved in water or in body tissues also exert pres-
sure because the dissolved gas molecules are moving ran-
domly and have kinetic energy. Furthermore, when the gas 
dissolved in fluid encounters a surface, such as the mem-
brane of a cell, it exerts its own partial pressure in the same 
way as a gas in the gas phase. The partial pressures of the 
separate dissolved gases are designated the same as the par-
tial pressures in the gas state—that is, Po2, Pco2, Pn2, Phe, 
and so forth.
Factors That Determine Partial Pressure of a Gas 
Dissolved in a Fluid. The partial pressure of a gas in a so-
lution is determined not only by its concentration but also 
by the solubility coefficient of the gas. That is, some types 
of molecules, especially CO2, are physically or chemically 
attracted to water molecules, whereas other types of mol-
ecules are repelled. When molecules are attracted, far more 
of them can be dissolved without building up excess par-
tial pressure within the solution. Conversely, in the case of 
molecules that are repelled, high partial pressure will devel-
op with fewer dissolved molecules. These relationships are 
 Principles of Gas Exchange; Diffusion of 
Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Through 
the Respiratory Membrane
C H A P T E R  4 0
UNIT VII  Respiration
512
expressed by the following formula, which is Henry’s law:
Partial pressure = Concentration of dissolved gas
Solubility coefﬁcient
When partial pressure is expressed in atmospheres (1 
atmosphere [1 atm] pressure equals 760 mm Hg) and con-
centration is expressed in volume of gas dissolved in each 
volume of water, the solubility coefficients for important 
respiratory gases at body temperature are the following:
Oxygen:
0.024
Carbon dioxide:
0.57
Carbon monoxide:
0.018
Nitrogen:
0.012
Helium:
0.008
From this list, one can see that CO2 is more than 20 
times as soluble as O2. Therefore, the partial pressure of 
CO2 for a given concentration is less than one-twentieth 
(5%) of that exerted by O2. 
Diffusion of Gases Between Gas Phase in Alveoli and 
Dissolved Phase in Pulmonary Blood. The partial pressure of 
each gas in the alveolar respiratory gas mixture tends to force 
molecules of that gas into solution in the blood of the alveo-
lar capillaries. Conversely, the molecules of the same gas that 
are already dissolved in the blood are bouncing randomly in 
the fluid of the blood, and some of these bouncing molecules 
escape back into the alveoli. The rate at which they escape 
is directly proportional to their partial pressure in the blood.
But, in which direction will net diffusion of the gas oc-
cur? The answer is that net diffusion is determined by the 
difference between the two partial pressures. If the partial 
pressure is greater in the gas phase in the alveoli, as is nor-
mally true for oxygen, then more molecules will diffuse into 
the blood than in the other direction. Alternatively, if the 
partial pressure of the gas is greater in the dissolved state in 
the blood, which is normally true for CO2, then net diffu-
sion will occur toward the gas phase in the alveoli. 
Vapor Pressure of Water
When nonhumidified air is breathed into the respiratory 
passageways, water immediately evaporates from the surfac-
es of these passages and humidifies the air. This results from 
the fact that water molecules, like different dissolved gas 
molecules, are continually escaping from the water surface 
into the gas phase. The partial pressure that water molecules 
­exert to escape through the surface is called the vapor pres-
sure of the water. At normal body temperature, 37°C (98.6°F), 
this vapor pressure is 47 mm Hg. Therefore, once the gas 
mixture has become fully humidified—that is, once it is in 
equilibrium with the water—the partial pressure of the water 
vapor in the gas mixture is 47 mm Hg. This partial pressure, 
like the other partial pressures, is designated as Ph2o.
The vapor pressure of water depends entirely on the tem-
perature of the water. The higher the temperature, the great-
er the kinetic activity of the molecules and, therefore, the 
greater the likelihood that the water molecules will escape 
from the surface of the water into the gas phase. For example, 
the water vapor pressure at 0°C is 5 mm Hg, and at 100°C it 
is 760 mm Hg. The most important value to remember is the 
vapor pressure at body temperature, 47 mm Hg. This value 
appears in many of our subsequent discussions. 
Pressure Difference Causes Net Diffusion of Gases 
Through Fluids
From the preceding discussion, it is clear that when the par-
tial pressure of a gas is greater in one area than in another 
area, there will be net diffusion from the high-­pressure area 
toward the low-­pressure area. For example, returning to 
Figure 40-­1, one can readily see that the molecules in the 
area of high pressure, because of their greater number, have a 
greater chance of moving randomly into the area of low pres-
sure than do molecules attempting to go in the other direc-
tion. However, some molecules do bounce randomly from 
the low-­pressure area toward the high-­pressure area. There-
fore, the net diffusion of gas from the area of high pressure 
to the area of low pressure is equal to the number of mol-
ecules bouncing in this forward direction minus the number 
bouncing in the opposite direction, which is proportional to 
the gas partial pressure difference between the two areas, 
called simply the pressure difference for causing diffusion.
Quantifying Net Rate of Diffusion in Fluids. In addition 
to the pressure difference, several other factors affect the 
rate of gas diffusion in a fluid: (1) the solubility of the gas in 
the fluid; (2) the cross-­sectional area of the fluid; (3) the dis-
tance through which the gas must diffuse; (4) the molecular 
weight of the gas; and (5) the temperature of the fluid. In 
the body, the temperature remains reasonably constant and 
usually need not be considered.
The greater the solubility of the gas, the greater the num-
ber of molecules available to diffuse for any given partial 
pressure difference. The greater the cross-­sectional area of 
the diffusion pathway, the greater the total number of mol-
ecules that diffuse. Conversely, the greater the distance the 
molecules must diffuse, the longer it will take the molecules 
to diffuse the entire distance. Finally, the greater the veloc-
ity of kinetic movement of the molecules, which is inversely 
proportional to the square root of the molecular weight, the 
greater the rate of diffusion of the gas. All these factors can 
be expressed in a single formula, as follows:
D ∝ΔP × A × S
d ×
√
MW
in which D is the diffusion rate, ΔP is the partial pres-
sure difference between the two ends of the diffusion path-
way, A is the cross-­sectional area of the pathway, S is the 
Dissolved gas molecules
Figure 40-­1.  Diffusion of oxygen from one end of a chamber to the 
other. The difference between the lengths of the arrows represents 
net diffusion.
Chapter 40  Principles of Gas Exchange; Diffusion of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Through the Respiratory Membrane
	
513
U N I T  V I I
solubility of the gas, d is the distance of diffusion, and MW 
is the molecular weight of the gas.
It is obvious from this formula that the characteristics 
of the gas determine two factors of the formula—solubility 
and molecular weight. Together, these two factors deter-
mine the diffusion coefficient of the gas, which is propor-
tional to S/
√
MW; that is, the relative rates at which differ-
ent gases at the same partial pressure levels will diffuse are 
proportional to their diffusion coefficients. Assuming that 
the diffusion coefficient for O2 is 1, the relative diffusion 
coefficients for different gases of respiratory importance in 
the body fluids are as follows:
Oxygen:
1.0
Carbon dioxide:
20.3
Carbon monoxide:
0.81
Nitrogen:
0.53
Helium:
0.95
 Diffusion of Gases Through Tissues
The gases that are of respiratory importance are all highly 
soluble in lipids and, consequently, are highly soluble in cell 
membranes. Because of this, the major limitation to move-
ment of gases in tissues is the rate at which the gases can 
diffuse through the tissue water instead of through the cell 
membranes. Therefore, diffusion of gases through tissues, in-
cluding through the respiratory membrane, is almost equal to 
the diffusion of gases in water, as given in the preceding list. 
COMPOSITIONS OF ALVEOLAR AIR AND 
ATMOSPHERIC AIR ARE DIFFERENT
Alveolar air does not have the same concentrations of 
gases as atmospheric air (Table 40-­1). There are several 
reasons for the differences. First, alveolar air is only par-
tially replaced by atmospheric air with each breath. Sec-
ond, O2 is constantly being absorbed into the pulmonary 
blood from the alveolar air. Third, CO2 is constantly dif-
fusing from the pulmonary blood into the alveoli. And 
fourth, dry atmospheric air that enters the respiratory 
passages is humidified even before it reaches the alveoli.
Air Is Humidified in the Respiratory 
Passages
Table 40-­1 shows that atmospheric air is composed almost 
entirely of nitrogen and O2; it normally contains almost no 
CO2 and little water vapor. However, as soon as the atmo-
spheric air enters the respiratory passages, it is exposed to 
the fluids that cover the respiratory surfaces. Even before the 
air enters the alveoli, it becomes almost totally humidified.
The partial pressure of water vapor at a normal body 
temperature of 37°C is 47 mm Hg, which is therefore the 
partial pressure of water vapor in the alveolar air. Because 
the total pressure in the alveoli cannot rise to more than 
the atmospheric pressure (760 mm Hg at sea level), this 
water vapor simply dilutes all the other gases in the 
inspired air. Table 40-­1 also shows that humidification of 
the air dilutes the oxygen partial pressure at sea level from 
an average of 159 mm Hg in atmospheric air to 149 mm 
Hg in the humidified air, and it dilutes the nitrogen partial 
pressure from 597 to 563 mm Hg. 
Alveolar Air Is Slowly Renewed by 
Atmospheric Air
In Chapter 38, we pointed out that the average functional 
residual capacity of the lungs (the volume of air remain-
ing in the lungs at the end of normal expiration) measures 
about 2300 ml in men. Yet only 350 ml of new air is brought 
into the alveoli with each normal inspiration, and this same 
amount of old alveolar air is expired. Therefore, the volume 
of alveolar air replaced by new atmospheric air with each 
breath is only one-seventh of the total, so multiple breaths 
are required to exchange most of the alveolar air. Figure 40-­2 
shows this slow rate of renewal of the alveolar air. In the first 
alveolus of the figure, excess gas is present in the alveoli, but 
note that even at the end of 16 breaths, the excess gas still has 
not been completely removed from the alveoli.
Figure 40-­3 demonstrates graphically the rate at which 
excess gas in the alveoli is normally removed, showing 
that with normal alveolar ventilation, about half the gas is 
removed in 17 seconds. When a person’s rate of alveolar 
ventilation is only half-­normal, half of the gas is removed 
in 34 seconds, and when the rate of ventilation is twice 
normal, half is removed in about 8 seconds.
Table 40-­1    Partial Pressures (in mm Hg) and 
composition (in percentages) of Respiratory Gases as 
They Enter and Leave the Lungsa
Atmo-
spheric 
Air
Humidi-
fied Air
Alveolar 
Air
Expired 
Air
N2
597 
(78.62)
563.4 
(74.09)
569  
(74.9)
566  
(74.5)
O2
159 
(20.84)
149.3 
(19.67)
104  
(13.6)
120  
(15.7)
CO2
0.3 (0.04)
0.3 (0.04)
40 (5.3)
27 (3.6)
H2O
3.7 (0.50)
47 (6.20)
47 (6.2)
47 (6.2)
Total
760 (100)
760 (100)
760 (100)
760 (100)
aAt sea level.
1st breath
2nd breath
3rd breath
8th breath
4th breath
12th breath
16th breath
Figure 40-­2.  Expiration of a gas from an alveolus with successive 
breaths.
UNIT VII  Respiration
514
Slow Replacement of Alveolar Air Helps Stabilize Res-
piratory Control. The slow replacement of alveolar air is 
of particular importance in preventing sudden changes in 
gas concentrations in the blood. This makes the respira-
tory control mechanism much more stable than it would 
be otherwise, and it helps prevent excessive increases and 
decreases in tissue oxygenation, tissue CO2 concentration, 
and tissue pH when respiration is temporarily interrupted. 
Oxygen Concentration and Partial 
Pressure in Alveoli
Oxygen is continually being absorbed from the alveoli into 
the blood of the lungs, and new O2 is continually being 
breathed into the alveoli from the atmosphere. The more 
rapidly O2 is absorbed, the lower its concentration in the 
alveoli becomes; conversely, the more rapidly new O2 is 
breathed into the alveoli from the atmosphere, the higher 
its concentration becomes. Therefore, O2 concentration 
in the alveoli, as well as its partial pressure, is controlled 
by the following: (1) the rate of absorption of O2 into the 
blood; and (2) the rate of entry of new O2 into the lungs 
by the ventilatory process.
Figure 40-­4 shows the effect of alveolar ventilation 
and rate of O2 absorption into the blood on the alveolar 
Po2. One curve represents O2 absorption at a rate of 250 
ml/min, and the other curve represents a rate of 1000 ml/
min. At a normal ventilatory rate of 4.2 L/min and an O2 
consumption of 250 ml/min, the normal operating point 
in Figure 40-­4 is point A. The figure also shows that when 
1000 ml of O2 is being absorbed each minute, as during 
moderate exercise, the rate of alveolar ventilation must 
increase fourfold to maintain the alveolar Po2 at the nor-
mal value of 104 mm Hg.
Another effect shown in Figure 40-­4 is that even an 
extreme increase in alveolar ventilation can never increase 
the alveolar Po2 above 149 mm Hg as long as the person 
is breathing normal atmospheric air at sea level pressure, 
because 149 mm Hg is the maximum Po2 in humidified 
air at this pressure. If the person breathes gases that con-
tain partial pressures of O2 higher than 149 mm Hg, the 
alveolar Po2 can approach these higher pressures at high 
rates of ventilation. 
CO2 Concentration and Partial Pressure in 
Alveoli
Carbon dioxide is continually formed in the body and 
then carried in the blood to the alveoli; it is continually 
removed from the alveoli by ventilation. Figure 40-­5 
shows the effects on the alveolar partial pressure of Pco2 
of both alveolar ventilation and two rates of CO2 excre-
tion, 200 and 800 ml/min. One curve represents a normal 
rate of CO2 excretion of 200 ml/min. At the normal rate of 
alveolar ventilation of 4.2 L/min, the operating point for 
alveolar Pco2 is at point A in Figure 40-­5 (i.e., 40 mm Hg).
Two other facts are also evident from Figure 40-­5. 
First, the alveolar Pco2 increases directly in proportion to 
the rate of CO2 excretion, as represented by the fourfold 
elevation of the curve (when 800 ml of CO2 are excreted 
per minute). Second, the alveolar Pco2 decreases in 
inverse proportion to alveolar ventilation. Therefore, the 
concentrations and partial pressures of both O2 and CO2 
in the alveoli are determined by the rates of absorption or 
excretion of the two gases and by the amount of alveolar 
ventilation. 
Nor
mal
 al
ve
ola
r v
en
til
ati
on
 
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
10
40
50
30
20
60
Concentration of gas
(% of original concentration)
Time (seconds)
1/2 no
rmal alv
eolar
 ven
tila
tio
n 
2 × 
norm
a
l 
a
l
v
e
ol
ar
 v
entilatio
n 
Figure 40-­3.  Rate of removal of excess gas from alveoli.
0
150
125
100
75
50
25
0
10
15
25
5
20
40
35
30
Upper limit at maximum ventilation
250 ml O2/min
1000 ml O2/min
Normal alveolar PO2
Alveolar partial pressure
of oxygen (mm Hg)
Alveolar ventilation (L/min)
A
Figure 40-­4.  Effect of alveolar ventilation on the alveolar partial pres-
sure of oxygen (Po2) at two rates of oxygen absorption from the alveo-
li—250 ml/min and 1000 ml/min. Point A is the normal operating point.
Normal alveolar PCO2
0
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0
10
15
25
5
20
40
35
30
A
200 ml CO2/min
800 ml CO2/min
Alveolar partial pressure
of CO2 (mm Hg)
Alveolar ventilation (L/min)
Figure 40-­5.  Effect of alveolar ventilation on the alveolar partial 
pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2) at two rates of carbon dioxide ex-
cretion from the blood—800 ml/min and 200 ml/min. Point A is the 
normal operating point.
Chapter 40  Principles of Gas Exchange; Diffusion of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Through the Respiratory Membrane
	
515
U N I T  V I I
Expired Air Is a Combination of Dead Space Air and 
Alveolar Air
The overall composition of expired air is determined by 
the following: (1) the amount of the expired air that is dead 
space air; and (2) the amount that is alveolar air. Figure 
40-­6 shows the progressive changes in O2 and CO2 partial 
pressures in the expired air during the course of expiration. 
The first portion of this air, the dead space air from the res-
piratory passageways, is typical humidified air, as shown 
in Table 40-­1. Then, progressively more and more alveo-
lar air becomes mixed with the dead space air until all the 
dead space air has finally been washed out, and nothing but 
alveolar air is expired at the end of expiration. Therefore, 
the method of collecting alveolar air for study is simply to 
collect a sample of the last portion of the expired air after 
forceful expiration has removed all the dead space air.
Normal expired air, containing both dead space air and 
alveolar air, has gas concentrations and partial pressures ap-
proximately as shown in Table 40-­1 (i.e., concentrations be-
tween those of alveolar air and humidified atmospheric air). 
DIFFUSION OF GASES THROUGH THE 
RESPIRATORY MEMBRANE
Respiratory Unit. Figure 40-­7 shows the respira-
tory unit (also called respiratory lobule), which is 
composed of a respiratory bronchiole, alveolar 
ducts, atria, and alveoli. There are about 300 mil-
lion alveoli in the two lungs, and each alveolus has 
an average diameter of about 0.2 millimeter. The 
alveolar walls are extremely thin, and between the 
alveoli is an almost solid network of interconnect-
ing capillaries, shown in Figure 40-­8. Because of 
Carbon dioxide (Pco2)
Oxygen  (Po2)
0
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
200
Air expired (milliliters)
Pressures of O2 and CO2
(mm Hg)
500
400
300
Alveolar air
Alveolar air
and dead
space air
Dead
space
air
Figure 40-­6.  Oxygen and carbon dioxide partial pressures (Po2 and 
Pco2) in the various portions of normal expired air.
Terminal 
bronchiole
Alveolar duct
Alveolar sacs
Respiratory 
bronchiole
Smooth
muscle
Elastic
fibers
Figure 40-­7.  Respiratory unit.
Vein
Artery
Perivascular
interstitial space
Interstitial space
Capillaries
Lymphatic
vessel
Alveolus
100µ
Alveolus
Alveolus
B
A
Alveolus
Figure 40-­8.  A, Surface view of capillaries in an alveolar wall. B, 
Cross-­sectional view of alveolar walls and their vascular supply. (A, 
From Maloney JE, Castle BL: Pressure-­diameter relations of capillar-
ies and small blood vessels in frog lung. Respir Physiol 7:150, 1969.)
UNIT VII  Respiration
516
the extensiveness of the capillary plexus, the flow 
of blood in the alveolar wall has been described as 
a sheet of flowing blood. Thus, it is obvious that 
the alveolar gases are in very close proximity to the 
blood of the pulmonary capillaries. Furthermore, 
gas exchange between the alveolar air and pulmo-
nary blood occurs through the membranes of all the 
terminal portions of the lungs, not merely in the al-
veoli. All these membranes are collectively known 
as the respiratory membrane, also called the pulmo-
nary membrane. 
Respiratory Membrane. Figure 40-­9 shows the ultra-
structure of the respiratory membrane drawn in cross 
section on the left and a red blood cell on the right. It 
also shows diffusion of O2 from the alveolus into the red 
blood cell and diffusion of CO2 in the opposite direc-
tion. Note the following different layers of the respiratory 
membrane:
	
1.	 A layer of fluid containing surfactant that lines the al-
veolus and reduces the surface tension of alveolar fluid
	
2.	 The alveolar epithelium, composed of thin epithelial 
cells
	
3.	 An epithelial basement membrane
	
4.	 A thin interstitial space between the alveolar epi-
thelium and capillary membrane
	
5.	 A capillary basement membrane that in many places 
fuses with the alveolar epithelial basement membrane
	
6.	 The capillary endothelial membrane
Despite the large number of layers, the overall thick-
ness of the respiratory membrane in some areas is as 
little as 0.2 micrometer and averages about 0.6 microm-
eter, except where there are cell nuclei. From histological 
studies, it has been estimated that the total surface area 
of the respiratory membrane is about 70 square meters in 
healthy men, which is equivalent to the floor area of a 25 × 
30-­foot room. The total quantity of blood in the capillar-
ies of the lungs at any given instant is 60 to 140 ml. Now, 
imagine this small amount of blood spread over the entire 
surface of a 25 × 30-­foot floor, and it is easy to understand 
the rapidity of the respiratory exchange of O2 and CO2.
The average diameter of the pulmonary capillaries is 
only about 5 micrometers, which means that red blood 
cells must squeeze through them. The red blood cell 
membrane usually touches the capillary wall, so O2 and 
CO2 need not pass through significant amounts of plasma 
as they diffuse between the alveolus and red blood cell. 
This, too, increases the rapidity of diffusion. 
Factors Affecting Rate of Gas Diffusion 
Through the Respiratory Membrane
Referring to the earlier discussion of diffusion of gases in 
water, one can apply the same principles to diffusion of 
gases through the respiratory membrane. Thus, the fac-
tors that determine how rapidly a gas will pass through 
the membrane are the following: (1) the thickness of the 
membrane; (2) the surface area of the membrane; (3) the 
diffusion coefficient of the gas in the substance of the 
membrane; and (4) the partial pressure difference of the 
gas between the two sides of the membrane.
The thickness of the respiratory membrane occasionally 
increases—for example, as a result of edema fluid in the 
interstitial space of the membrane and in the alveoli—so 
the respiratory gases must then diffuse not only through 
the membrane but also through this fluid. Also, some pul-
monary diseases cause fibrosis of the lungs, which can 
increase the thickness of some portions of the respira-
tory membrane. Because the rate of diffusion through the 
membrane is inversely proportional to the thickness of the 
membrane, any factor that increases the thickness to more 
than two to three times normal can interfere significantly 
with normal respiratory exchange of gases.
The surface area of the respiratory membrane can 
be greatly decreased by many conditions. For example, 
removal of an entire lung decreases the total surface area 
to half-­normal. Also, in emphysema, many of the alveoli 
coalesce, with dissolution of many alveolar walls. There-
fore, the new alveolar chambers are much larger than the 
original alveoli, but the total surface area of the respira-
tory membrane is often decreased as much as fivefold 
because of loss of the alveolar walls. When the total sur-
face area is decreased to about one-­third to one-­fourth 
normal, exchange of gases through the membrane is 
Capillary basement membrane
Capillary endothelium
Epithelial
basement
membrane
Alveolar
epithelium
Fluid and
surfactant
layer
Alveolus
Capillary
Interstitial space
Diffusion
Diffusion
O2
Red blood cell
CO2
Figure 40-­9.  Ultrastructure of the alveolar respiratory membrane, 
shown in cross section.
Chapter 40  Principles of Gas Exchange; Diffusion of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Through the Respiratory Membrane
	
517
U N I T  V I I
substantially impeded, even under resting conditions, and 
during competitive sports and other strenuous exercise, 
even the slightest decrease in surface area of the lungs can 
be a serious detriment to respiratory exchange of gases.
The diffusion coefficient for transfer of each gas through 
the respiratory membrane depends on the gas’s solubility 
in the membrane and, inversely, on the square root of the 
gas’s molecular weight. The rate of diffusion in the respira-
tory membrane is almost exactly the same as that in water, 
for reasons explained earlier. Therefore, for a given pres-
sure difference, CO2 diffuses about 20 times as rapidly as 
O2. Oxygen diffuses about twice as rapidly as nitrogen.
The pressure difference across the respiratory membrane 
is the difference between the partial pressure of the gas in 
the alveoli and the partial pressure of the gas in the pul-
monary capillary blood. Therefore, the difference between 
these two pressures is a measure of the net tendency for the 
gas molecules to move through the membrane.
When the partial pressure of a gas in the alveoli is 
greater than the pressure of the gas in the blood, as is true 
for O2, net diffusion from the alveoli into the blood occurs. 
When the pressure of the gas in the blood is greater than 
the partial pressure in the alveoli, as is true for CO2, net 
diffusion from the blood into the alveoli occurs. 
Diffusing Capacity of the Respiratory 
Membrane
The ability of the respiratory membrane to exchange a gas 
between the alveoli and pulmonary blood is expressed in 
quantitative terms by the respiratory membrane’s diffusing 
capacity, which is defined as the volume of a gas that will 
diffuse through the membrane each minute for a partial 
pressure difference of 1 mm Hg. All the factors discussed 
earlier that affect diffusion through the respiratory mem-
brane can affect this diffusing capacity.
Diffusing Capacity for Oxygen. In the average young 
man, the diffusing capacity for O2 under resting conditions 
averages 21 ml/min per mm Hg. In functional terms, what 
does this mean? The mean O2 pressure difference across 
the respiratory membrane during normal quiet breathing is 
about 11 mm Hg. Multiplying this pressure by the diffusing 
capacity (11 × 21) gives a total of about 230 ml of oxygen 
diffusing through the respiratory membrane each minute, 
which is equal to the rate at which the resting body uses O2. 
Increased Oxygen Diffusing Capacity During Exercise. 
During strenuous exercise or other conditions that greatly 
increase pulmonary blood flow and alveolar ventilation, the 
diffusing capacity for O2 increases to about three times the 
diffusing capacity under resting conditions. This increase 
is caused by several factors, including the following: (1) 
opening up of many previously dormant pulmonary capil-
laries or extra dilation of already open capillaries, thereby 
increasing the surface area of the blood into which the O2 
can diffuse; and (2) a better match between the ventilation 
of the alveoli and perfusion of the alveolar capillaries with 
blood, called the ventilation-­perfusion ratio, explained later 
in this chapter. Therefore, during exercise, oxygenation of 
the blood is increased not only by increased alveolar venti-
lation but also by greater diffusing capacity of the respira-
tory membrane for transporting O2 into the blood. 
Diffusing Capacity for Carbon Dioxide. The diffusing 
capacity for CO2 has never been measured because CO2 
diffuses through the respiratory membrane so rapidly that 
the average Pco2 in the pulmonary blood is not very dif-
ferent from the Pco2 in the alveoli—the average difference 
is less than 1 mm Hg. With currently available techniques, 
this difference is too small to be measured.
Nevertheless, measurements of diffusion of other gases 
have shown that the diffusing capacity varies directly with 
the diffusion coefficient of the particular gas. Because the 
diffusion coefficient of CO2 is slightly more than 20 times 
that of O2, one would expect a diffusing capacity for CO2 
under resting conditions of about 400 to 450 ml/min per 
mm Hg and during exercise of about 1200 to 1300 ml/
min per mm Hg. Figure 40-­10 compares the measured 
or calculated diffusing capacities of carbon monoxide, O2, 
and CO2 at rest and during exercise, showing the extreme 
diffusing capacity of CO2 and the effect of exercise on the 
diffusing capacity of each of these gases. 
Measurement of Diffusing Capacity—Carbon Monox-
ide Method. The O2 diffusing capacity can be calculated 
from measurements of the following: (1) alveolar Po2; (2) 
Po2 in the pulmonary capillary blood; and (3) the rate of 
O2 uptake by the blood. However, measuring the Po2 in the 
pulmonary capillary blood is so difficult and imprecise that 
1300
CO2
O2
CO
Resting
Exercise
Diffusing capacity (ml/min/mm Hg)
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Figure 40-­10.  Diffusing capacities for carbon monoxide, oxygen, 
and carbon dioxide in the normal lungs under resting conditions and 
during exercise.
UNIT VII  Respiration
518
it is not practical to measure oxygen diffusing capacity by 
such a direct procedure, except on an experimental basis.
To obviate the difficulties encountered in measuring ox-
ygen diffusing capacity directly, physiologists usually meas-
ure carbon monoxide (CO) diffusing capacity instead and 
then calculate the O2 diffusing capacity from this. The prin-
ciple of the CO method is as follows. A small amount of CO 
is breathed into the alveoli, and the partial pressure of the 
CO in the alveoli is measured from appropriate alveolar air 
samples. The CO pressure in the blood is essentially zero 
because hemoglobin combines with this gas so rapidly that 
its pressure never has time to build up. Therefore, the pres-
sure difference of CO across the respiratory membrane is 
equal to its partial pressure in the alveolar air sample. Then, 
by measuring the volume of CO absorbed in a short period 
and dividing this by the alveolar CO partial pressure, one 
can determine the CO diffusing capacity accurately.
To convert CO diffusing capacity to O2 diffusing capac-
ity, the value is multiplied by a factor of 1.23 because the 
diffusion coefficient for O2 is 1.23 times that for CO. Thus, 
the average diffusing capacity for CO in healthy young men 
at rest is 17 ml/min per mm Hg, and the diffusing capacity 
for O2 is 1.23 times this, or 21 ml/min per mm Hg. 
Effect of Ventilation-­Perfusion Ratio on Alveolar Gas 
Concentration
Earlier in this chapter, we learned that two factors deter-
mine the Po2 and Pco2 in the alveoli: (1) the rate of alveo-
lar ventilation; and (2) the rate of transfer of O2 and CO2 
through the respiratory membrane. This discussion made 
the assumption that all the alveoli are ventilated equally, 
and that blood flow through the alveolar capillaries is the 
same for each alveolus. However, even normally to some 
extent, and especially in many lung diseases, some areas 
of the lungs are well ventilated but have almost no blood 
flow, whereas other areas may have excellent blood flow 
but little or no ventilation. In either of these conditions, 
gas exchange through the respiratory membrane is seri-
ously impaired, and the person may suffer severe respira-
tory distress, despite normal total ventilation and normal 
total pulmonary blood flow, but with the ventilation and 
blood flow going to different parts of the lungs. Therefore, 
a highly quantitative concept has been developed to help us 
understand respiratory exchange when there is imbalance 
between alveolar ventilation and alveolar blood flow. This 
concept is called the ventilation-­perfusion ratio.
In quantitative terms, the ventilation-­perfusion ratio is ex-
pressed as ˙VA/ ˙Q. When ˙VA (alveolar ventilation) is normal 
for a given alveolus, and ˙Q (blood flow) is also normal for the 
same alveolus, the ventilation-­perfusion ratio ( ˙VA/ ˙Q) is also 
said to be normal. When the ventilation ( ˙VA) is zero, yet there 
is still perfusion ( ˙Q) of the alveolus, the ˙VA/ ˙Q is zero. Or, at 
the other extreme, when there is adequate ventilation ( ˙VA) but 
zero perfusion ( ˙Q), the ratio ˙VA/ ˙Q is infinity. At a ratio of ei-
ther zero or infinity, there is no exchange of gases through the 
respiratory membrane of the affected alveoli. Therefore, let us 
explain the respiratory consequences of these two extremes.
Alveolar Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Partial Pres-
sures When ˙VA/ ˙Q Equals Zero. When ˙VA/ ˙Q is equal to 
zero—that is, without any alveolar ventilation—the air in the 
alveolus comes to equilibrium with the blood O2 and CO2 be-
cause these gases diffuse between the blood and alveolar air. 
Because the blood that perfuses the capillaries is venous blood 
returning to the lungs from the systemic circulation, it is the 
gases in this blood with which the alveolar gases equilibrate. 
In Chapter 41, we describe how the normal venous blood (V )  
has a Po2 of 40 mm Hg and a Pco2 of 45 mm Hg. Therefore, 
these are also the normal partial pressures of these two gases 
in alveoli that have blood flow but no ventilation. 
Alveolar Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Partial Pressures 
When ˙VA/ ˙Q Equals Infinity. The effect on the alveolar gas 
partial pressures when ˙VA/ ˙Q equals infinity is entirely dif-
ferent from the effect when ˙VA/ ˙Q equals zero because now 
there is no capillary blood flow to carry O2 away or to bring 
CO2 to the alveoli. Therefore, instead of the alveolar gases 
coming to equilibrium with the venous blood, the alveolar 
air becomes equal to the humidified inspired air. That is, 
the air that is inspired loses no O2 to the blood and gains 
no CO2 from the blood. Furthermore, because normal 
inspired and humidified air has a Po2 of 149 mm Hg and 
a Pco2 of 0 mm Hg, these will be the partial pressures of 
these two gases in the alveoli. 
Gas Exchange and Alveolar Partial Pressures When 
˙VA/ ˙Q Is Normal. When there is both normal alveolar 
ventilation and normal alveolar capillary blood flow 
(normal alveolar perfusion), exchange of O2 and CO2 
through the respiratory membrane is nearly optimal, 
and alveolar Po2 is normally at a level of 104 mm Hg, 
which lies between that of the inspired air (149 mm Hg) 
and that of venous blood (40 mm Hg). Likewise, alveolar 
Pco2 lies between two extremes; it is normally 40 mm 
Hg, in contrast to 45 mm Hg in venous blood and 0 mm 
Hg in inspired air. Thus, under normal conditions, the 
alveolar air Po2 averages 104 mm Hg and the Pco2 aver-
ages 40 mm Hg. 
Po2-­Pco2, ˙VA/˙Q Diagram
The concepts presented in the preceding sections are 
shown in graphic form in Figure 40-­11, called the Po2-­
Pco2, ˙VA/ ˙Q diagram. The curve in the diagram represents 
all possible Po2 and Pco2 combinations between the limits 
of ˙VA/ ˙Q equals zero and ˙VA/ ˙Q equals infinity when the gas 
pressures in the venous blood are normal, and the person is 
breathing air at sea level pressure. Thus, point ˙VA/ ˙Q is the 
plot of Po2 and Pco2 when ˙VA/ ˙Q equals zero. At this point, 
50
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140 160
(PO2 = 40)
(PCO2 = 45)
Normal 
alveolar air
(PO2 = 104)
(PCO2 = 40)
(PO2 = 149)
(PCO2 = 0)
I
PCO2 (mm Hg)
PO2 (mm Hg)
VA/Q = 0
v
VA/Q = Normal
VA/Q = ∞
40
30
20
10
Figure 40-­11.  Normal partial pressure of oxygen (Po2)–partial pres-
sure of carbon dioxide (Pco2) ventilation-­perfusion ( ˙VA/ ˙Q) ratio (Po2-­
Pco2, ( ˙VA/ ˙Q) diagram.
Chapter 40  Principles of Gas Exchange; Diffusion of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Through the Respiratory Membrane
	
519
U N I T  V I I
the Po2 is 40 mm Hg, and the Pco2 is 45 mm Hg, which are 
the values in normal venous blood.
At the other end of the curve, when ˙VA/ ˙Q equals infin-
ity, point I represents inspired air, showing Po2 to be 149 
mm Hg while Pco2 is zero. Also plotted on the curve is 
the point that represents normal alveolar air when ˙VA/ ˙Q 
is normal. At this point, Po2 is 104 mm Hg, and Pco2 is 40 
mm Hg. 
Concept of Physiological Shunt (When ˙VA/˙Q Is Below 
Normal)
Whenever ˙VA/ ˙Q is below normal, there is inadequate ven-
tilation to provide the O2 needed to fully oxygenate the 
blood flowing through the alveolar capillaries. Therefore, 
a certain fraction of the venous blood passing through the 
pulmonary capillaries does not become oxygenated. This 
fraction is called shunted blood. Also, some additional 
blood flows through bronchial vessels rather than through 
alveolar capillaries, normally about 2% of the cardiac out-
put; this, too, is unoxygenated, shunted blood.
The total quantitative amount of shunted blood per min-
ute is called the physiological shunt. This physiological shunt 
is measured in clinical pulmonary function laboratories by 
analyzing the concentration of O2 in both mixed venous 
blood and arterial blood, along with simultaneous measure-
ment of cardiac output. From these values, the physiological 
shunt can be calculated by the following equation:
˙QPS
˙QT
= CiO2 −CaO2
CiO2 −CvO2
in which ˙QPS is the physiological shunt blood flow per 
minute, ˙QT is cardiac output per minute, CiO2 is the concen-
tration of oxygen in the arterial blood if there is an “ideal” 
ventilation-­perfusion ratio, CaO2 is the measured concen-
tration of oxygen in the arterial blood, and Cv_
O2 is the meas-
ured concentration of oxygen in the mixed venous blood.
The greater the physiological shunt, the greater the 
amount of blood that fails to be oxygenated as it passes 
through the lungs. 
Concept of Physiological Dead Space When ˙VA/˙Q 
Greater Than Normal
When ventilation of some of the alveoli is great but alveo-
lar blood flow is low, there is far more available oxygen in 
the alveoli than can be transported away from the alveoli 
by the flowing blood. Thus, the ventilation of these alve-
oli is said to be wasted. The ventilation of the anatomical 
dead space areas of the respiratory passageways is also 
wasted. The sum of these two types of wasted ventila-
tion is called the physiological dead space. This space is 
measured in the clinical pulmonary function laboratory 
by making appropriate blood and expiratory gas meas-
urements and by using the following equation, called the 
Bohr equation:
˙VDphys
˙VT
= PaCO2 −PeCO2
PaCO2
in which ˙VDphys is the physiological dead space, ˙VT is 
the tidal volume, Paco2 is the partial pressure of CO2 in the 
arterial blood, and Pe_
co2 is the average partial pressure of 
CO2 in the entire expired air.
When the physiological dead space is great, much of the 
work of ventilation is wasted effort because so much of the 
ventilating air never reaches the blood. 
Abnormalities of Ventilation-­Perfusion Ratio
Abnormal ˙VA/ ˙Q in Upper and Lower Normal Lung. In 
a healthy person in the upright position, both pulmonary 
capillary blood flow and alveolar ventilation are consider-
ably less in the upper part of the lung than in the lower 
part; however, the decrease of blood flow is considerably 
greater than the decrease in ventilation. Therefore, at the 
top of the lung, ˙VA/ ˙Q is as much as 2.5 times as great as the 
ideal value, which causes a moderate degree of physiologi-
cal dead space in this area of the lung.
At the other extreme, at the bottom of the lung, there 
is slightly too little ventilation in relation to blood flow, 
with ˙VA/ ˙Q as low as 0.6 times the ideal value. In this area, 
a small fraction of the blood fails to become normally oxy-
genated, and this represents a physiological shunt.
In both extremes, inequalities of ventilation and perfu-
sion slightly decrease the lung’s effectiveness for exchang-
ing O2 and CO2. However, during exercise, blood flow to 
the upper part of the lung increases markedly, so far less 
physiological dead space occurs, and the effectiveness of 
gas exchange now approaches optimum. 
Abnormal ˙VA/˙Q in Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease
Most people who smoke for many years develop various 
degrees of bronchial obstruction; in many of them, this 
condition eventually becomes so severe that serious al-
veolar air trapping develops, with resultant emphysema. 
The emphysema, in turn, causes many of the alveolar walls 
to be destroyed. Thus, two abnormalities occur in smok-
ers to cause abnormal ˙VA/ ˙Q. First, because many of the 
small bronchioles are obstructed, the alveoli beyond the 
obstructions are unventilated, causing a ˙VA/ ˙Q that ap-
proaches zero. Second, in the areas of the lung where the 
alveolar walls have mainly been destroyed but there is 
still alveolar ventilation, most of the ventilation is wasted 
because of inadequate blood flow to transport the blood 
gases.
Thus, in chronic obstructive lung disease, some areas of 
the lung exhibit serious physiological shunt, and other areas 
exhibit serious physiological dead space. Both conditions 
tremendously decrease the effectiveness of the lungs as gas 
exchange organs, sometimes reducing their effectiveness to 
as little as one-­tenth normal. In fact, this condition is the 
most prevalent cause of pulmonary disability today.
Bibliography
Clark A, Tawhai M: Pulmonary vascular dynamics. Compr Physiol 
9:1081, 2019.
Del Buono MG, Arena R, Borlaug BA, Carbone S, et al: Exercise intol-
erance in patients with heart failure: JACC state-­of-­the-­art review. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 73:2209, 2019.
Dempsey TM, Scanlon PD: Pulmonary function tests for the general-
ist: a brief review. Mayo Clin Proc 93:763, 2018.
Glenny RW, Robertson HT: Spatial distribution of ventilation and per-
fusion: mechanisms and regulation. Compr Physiol 1:375, 2011.
UNIT VII  Respiration
520
Hsia CC, Hyde DM, Weibel ER: Lung structure and the intrinsic chal-
lenges of gas exchange. Compr Physiol 6:827, 2016.
Molgat-­Seon Y, Schaeffer MR, Ryerson CJ, Guenette JA: Exer-
cise pathophysiology in interstitial lung disease. Clin Chest Med 
40:405, 2019.
Naeije R, Chesler N: Pulmonary circulation at exercise. Compr Physiol 
2:711, 2012.
Neder JA, Berton DC, Muller PT, O’Donnell DE: Incorporating lung 
diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide in clinical decision making 
in chest medicine. Clin Chest Med 40:285, 2019.
O’Donnell DE, James MD, Milne KM, Neder JA: the pathophysiology 
of dyspnea and exercise intolerance in chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease. Clin Chest Med 40:343, 2019.
Rahn H, Farhi EE: Ventilation, perfusion, and gas exchange—the Va/Q 
concept. In: Fenn WO, Rahn H (eds): Handbook of Physiology. Sec 
3, Vol 1. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1964, p 125.
Robertson HT: Dead space: the physiology of wasted ventilation. Eur 
Respir J 45:1704, 2015.
Skloot GS: The Effects of aging on lung structure and function. Clin 
Geriatr Med 33:447, 2017.
Stickland MK, Lindinger MI, Olfert IM, Heigenhauser GJ, Hopkins SR: 
Pulmonary gas exchange and acid-­base balance during exercise. 
Compr Physiol 3:693, 2013.
Wagner PD: The physiological basis of pulmonary gas exchange: 
implications for clinical interpretation of arterial blood gases. Eur 
Respir J 45:227, 2015
Weibel ER: Lung morphometry: the link between structure and func-
tion. Cell Tissue Res 367:413, 2017.
West JB: Role of the fragility of the pulmonary blood-­gas barrier in 
the evolution of the pulmonary circulation. Am J Physiol Regul In-
tegr Comp Physiol 304:R171, 2013.
U N I T  V I I
	
521
Once oxygen (O2) has diffused from the alveoli into the 
pulmonary blood, it is transported to the tissue capillaries 
almost entirely in combination with hemoglobin. The pres-
ence of hemoglobin in the red blood cells allows the blood 
to transport 30 to 100 times as much O2 as could be trans-
ported in the form of dissolved O2 in the water of the blood.
In the body’s tissue cells, O2 reacts with various food-
stuffs to form large quantities of carbon dioxide (CO2). 
This CO2 enters the tissue capillaries and is transported 
back to the lungs. Carbon dioxide, like O2, also combines 
with chemical substances in the blood that increase CO2 
transport 15-­ to 20-­fold.
This chapter presents the physical and chemical prin-
ciples of O2 and CO2 transport in the blood and tissue 
fluids qualitatively and quantitatively.
TRANSPORT OF OXYGEN FROM THE 
LUNGS TO THE BODY TISSUES
In Chapter 40, we pointed out that gases can move from 
one point to another by diffusion, and that the cause of 
this movement is always a partial pressure difference from 
the first point to the next. Thus, O2 diffuses from the alve-
oli into the pulmonary capillary blood because the oxygen 
partial pressure (Po2) in the alveoli is greater than the Po2 
in the pulmonary capillary blood. In the other tissues of 
the body, a higher Po2 in the capillary blood than in the 
tissues causes O2 to diffuse into the surrounding cells.
Conversely, when O2 is metabolized in the cells to 
form CO2, the intracellular CO2 partial pressure (Pco2) 
rises, causing CO2 to diffuse into the tissue capillaries. 
After blood flows to the lungs, the CO2 diffuses out of the 
blood into the alveoli because the Pco2 in the pulmonary 
capillary blood is greater than that in the alveoli. Thus, the 
transport of O2 and CO2 by the blood depends on both 
diffusion and the flow of blood. We now consider quanti-
tatively the factors responsible for these effects.
DIFFUSION OF OXYGEN FROM THE 
ALVEOLI TO THE PULMONARY CAPILLARY 
BLOOD
The top part of Figure 41-1 shows a pulmonary alveo-
lus adjacent to a pulmonary capillary, demonstrating 
diffusion of O2 between alveolar air and pulmonary 
blood. The Po2 of the gaseous O2 in the alveolus aver-
ages 104 mm Hg, whereas the Po2 of the venous blood 
entering the pulmonary capillary at its arterial end 
averages only 40 mm Hg because a large amount 
of O2 was removed from this blood as it passed through 
the peripheral tissues. Therefore, the initial pressure 
difference that causes O2 to diffuse into the ­pulmonary 
capillary is 104 − 40 mm Hg, or 64 mm Hg. In the 
graph at the bottom of the figure, the curve shows the 
rapid rise in blood Po2 as the blood passes through 
the capillary; the blood Po2 rises almost to that of the 
alveolar air by the time the blood has moved a third of 
the distance through the capillary, becoming almost 104 
mm Hg.
Uptake of Oxygen by the Pulmonary Blood During 
Exercise. During strenuous exercise, a person’s body 
may require as much as 20 times the normal amount 
of oxygen. Also, because of increased cardiac output 
during exercise, the time that the blood remains in the 
pulmonary capillary may be reduced to less than one-­
half normal. Yet, because of the great safety factor for 
diffusion of O2 through the pulmonary membrane, the 
blood still becomes almost saturated with O2 by the time 
it leaves the pulmonary capillaries. This can be explained 
as follows.
First, in Chapter 40, we pointed out that the diffusing 
capacity for O2 increases almost threefold during exer-
cise. This results mainly from increased surface area of 
capillaries participating in the diffusion and also from a 
more nearly ideal ventilation-­perfusion ratio in the upper 
part of the lungs.
Second, note in the curve of Figure 41-1 that under 
nonexercising conditions, the blood becomes almost 
saturated with O2 by the time it has passed through 
one-third of the pulmonary capillary, and little additional 
O2 normally enters the blood during the latter two-thirds 
of its transit. That is, the blood normally stays in the lung 
capillaries about three times as long as needed to cause 
full oxygenation. Therefore, during exercise, even with a 
shortened time of exposure in the capillaries, the blood 
can still become almost fully oxygenated. 
Transport of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide in 
Blood and Tissue Fluids
C H A P T E R  4 1
UNIT VII  Respiration
522
TRANSPORT OF OXYGEN IN ARTERIAL 
BLOOD
About 98% of the blood that enters the left atrium from 
the lungs has just passed through the alveolar capillaries 
and has become oxygenated up to a Po2 of about 104 
mm Hg. Another 2% of the blood has passed from the 
aorta through the bronchial circulation, which supplies 
mainly the deep tissues of the lungs and is not exposed 
to lung air. This blood flow is called shunt flow, meaning 
that blood is shunted past the gas exchange areas. On 
leaving the lungs, the Po2 of the shunt blood is approxi-
mately that of normal systemic venous blood—about 40 
mm Hg. When this blood combines in the pulmonary 
veins with the oxygenated blood from the alveolar capil-
laries, this so-­called venous admixture of blood causes 
the Po2 of the blood entering the left heart and pumped 
into the aorta to fall to about 95 mm Hg. These changes 
in blood Po2 at different points in the circulatory system 
are shown in Figure 41-2. 
DIFFUSION OF OXYGEN FROM THE 
PERIPHERAL CAPILLARIES INTO THE 
TISSUE FLUID
When the arterial blood reaches the peripheral tissues, 
its Po2 in the capillaries is still 95 mm Hg. Yet, as shown 
in Figure 41-3, the Po2 in the interstitial fluid that sur-
rounds the tissue cells averages only 40 mm Hg. Thus, 
there is a large initial pressure difference that causes O2 to 
diffuse rapidly from the capillary blood into the tissues—
so rapidly that the capillary Po2 falls almost to equal the 
40-­mm Hg pressure in the interstitium. Therefore, the 
Po2 of the blood leaving the tissue capillaries and entering 
the systemic veins is also about 40 mm Hg.
Increasing Blood Flow Raises Interstitial Fluid Po2. If the 
blood flow through a particular tissue is increased, greater 
quantities of O2 are transported into the tissue, and the tissue 
Po2 becomes correspondingly higher. This effect is shown in 
Figure 41-4. Note that an increase in flow to 400% of normal 
increases the Po2 from 40 mm Hg (at point A in the figure) 
to 66 mm Hg (at point B). However, the upper limit to which 
the Po2 can rise, even with maximal blood flow, is 95 mm 
Hg because this is the O2 pressure in the arterial blood. Con-
versely, if blood flow through the tissue decreases, the tissue 
Po2 also decreases, as shown at point C. 
Increasing Tissue Metabolism Decreases Interstitial 
Fluid Po2. If the cells use more O2 for metabolism than nor-
mal, the interstitial fluid Po2 is reduced. Figure 41-4 also 
100
80
60
40
20
0
Systemic
venous
blood
Systemic
arterial
blood
Systemic
capillaries
Systemic
venous
blood
Mixed with
pulmonary
shunt blood
PO2 (mm Hg)
Pulmonary
capillaries
Figure 41-2  Changes in Po2 in the pulmonary capillary blood, sys-
temic arterial blood, and systemic capillary blood demonstrating the 
effect of venous admixture.
23 mm Hg
Arterial end
of capillary
Venous end
of capillary
40 mm Hg
PO2 = 40 mm Hg
PO2 = 95 mm Hg
Figure 41.3  Diffusion of oxygen from a peripheral tissue capillary to 
the cells. (Po2 in interstitial fluid = 40 mm Hg; in tissue cells, Pco2 = 
23 mm Hg.)
Upper limit of infinite blood flow
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
200
300
Blood flow (percent of normal)
500
100
400
700
600
A
B
C
Interstitial fluid PO2 (mm Hg)
1/
4 
n
o
r
m
a
l 
O
2 
co
ns
um
ption
 
N
o
r
ma
l O
2 co
nsum
ption 
4 × 
nor
mal 
O2 c
ons
ump
tion 
Figure 41-4  Effect of blood flow and rate of oxygen consumption 
on tissue Po2.
Alveolus PO2 = 104 mm Hg
PO2 = 40 mm Hg
Blood PO2 (mm Hg)
Blood PO2
PO2 = 104 mm Hg
Pulmonary capillary
Alveolar oxygen partial pressure
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
Arterial end
Venous end
Figure 41-1  Uptake of oxygen by the pulmonary capillary blood. (Data 
from Milhorn HT Jr, Pulley PE Jr: A theoretical study of pulmonary capil-
lary gas exchange and venous admixture. Biophys J 8:337, 1968.)
Chapter 41  Transport of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide in Blood and Tissue Fluids
	
523
U N I T  V I I
demonstrates this effect, showing reduced interstitial fluid 
Po2 when the cellular oxygen consumption is increased 
and increased Po2 when consumption is decreased.
In summary, tissue Po2 is determined by a balance 
between (1) the rate of O2 transport to the tissues in the 
blood, and (2) the rate at which the O2 is used by the 
tissues. 
DIFFUSION OF OXYGEN FROM 
PERIPHERAL CAPILLARIES TO TISSUE CELLS
Oxygen is always being used by the cells. Therefore, the 
intracellular Po2 in peripheral tissues remains lower than 
the Po2 in peripheral capillaries. Also, in many cases, there 
is considerable physical distance between the capillaries 
and cells. Therefore, the normal intracellular Po2 ranges 
from as low as 5 mm Hg to as high as 40 mm Hg, averag-
ing (by direct measurement in experimental animals) 23 
mm Hg. Because only 1 to 3 mm Hg of O2 pressure is nor-
mally required for full support of the chemical processes 
that use oxygen in the cell, even this low intracellular Po2 
of 23 mm Hg is more than adequate and provides a large 
safety factor. 
DIFFUSION OF CO2 FROM PERIPHERAL 
TISSUE CELLS INTO CAPILLARIES AND 
FROM PULMONARY CAPILLARIES INTO 
ALVEOLI
When O2 is used by the cells, virtually all of it becomes 
CO2, and this transformation increases the intracellular 
Pco2; because of this elevated tissue cell Pco2, CO2 dif-
fuses from the cells into the capillaries and is then carried 
by the blood to the lungs. In the lungs, it diffuses from the 
pulmonary capillaries into the alveoli and is expired.
Thus, at each point in the gas transport chain, CO2 
diffuses in the direction exactly opposite to the diffu-
sion of O2. Yet, there is one major difference between 
diffusion of CO2 and of O2—CO2 can diffuse about 20 
times as rapidly as O2. Therefore, the pressure differ-
ences required to cause CO2 diffusion are, in each case, 
far less than the pressure differences required to cause 
O2 diffusion. The CO2 pressures are approximately the 
following:
	
1.	 Intracellular Pco2, 46 mm Hg; interstitial Pco2, 45 
mm Hg. Thus, there is only a 1 ­mm Hg pressure dif-
ferential, as shown in Figure 41-5.
	
2.	 Pco2 of the arterial blood entering the tissues, 40 
mm Hg; Pco2 of the venous blood leaving the tis-
sues, 45 mm Hg. Thus, as shown in Figure 41-5, 
the tissue capillary blood comes almost exactly to 
equilibrium with the interstitial Pco2 of 45 mm Hg.
	
3.	 Pco2 of the blood entering the pulmonary capillar-
ies at the arterial end, 45 mm Hg; Pco2 of the alveo-
lar air, 40 mm Hg. Thus, only a 5 ­mm Hg pressure 
difference causes all the required CO2 diffusion out 
of the pulmonary capillaries into the alveoli. Fur-
thermore, as shown in Figure 41-6, the Pco2 of the 
pulmonary capillary blood falls to almost exactly 
equal the alveolar Pco2 of 40 mm Hg before it has 
passed more than about one-third of the distance 
through the capillaries. This is the same effect that 
was observed earlier for O2 diffusion, except that it 
is in the opposite direction.
Effect of Tissue Metabolism and Tissue Blood Flow 
Rate on Interstitial Pco2. Tissue capillary blood flow and 
tissue metabolism affect the Pco2 in ways exactly oppo-
site to their effect on tissue Po2. Figure 41-7 shows these 
effects, as follows:
	
1.	 A decrease in blood flow from normal (point A) to 
one-­quarter normal (point B) increases peripheral tis-
sue Pco2 from the normal value of 45 mm Hg to an 
elevated level of 60 mm Hg. Conversely, increasing the 
blood flow to six times normal (point C) decreases the 
interstitial Pco2 from the normal value of 45 to 41 mm 
Hg, almost equal to the Pco2 in the arterial blood (40 
mm Hg) entering the tissue capillaries.
	
2.	 Note also that a 10-­fold increase in tissue metabolic 
rate greatly elevates the interstitial fluid Pco2 at all 
rates of blood flow, whereas decreasing the metabo-
lism to one-­quarter normal causes the interstitial 
fluid Pco2 to fall to about 41 mm Hg, closely ap-
proaching that of the arterial blood, 40 mm Hg. 
Arterial end
of capillary
Venous end
of capillary
PCO2 = 40 mm Hg
45 mm Hg
46 mm Hg
PCO2 = 45 mm Hg
Figure 41-­5  Uptake of carbon dioxide by the blood in the tissue cap-
illaries. (Pco2 in tissue cells = 46 mm Hg; in interstitial fluid, Pco2 = 
45 mm Hg.)
Alveolus PCO2 = 40 mm Hg
PCO2 = 45 mm Hg
Blood PCO2 (mm Hg)
PCO2 = 40 mm Hg
Pulmonary capillary
Alveolar carbon dioxide partial pressure
45
44
43
42
41
40
Arterial end
Venous end
Pulmonary capillary blood
Figure 41-6  Diffusion of carbon dioxide from the pulmonary blood 
into the alveolus. (Data from Milhorn HT Jr, Pulley PE Jr: A theoretical 
study of pulmonary capillary gas exchange and venous admixture. 
Biophys J 8:337, 1968.)
UNIT VII  Respiration
524
ROLE OF HEMOGLOBIN IN OXYGEN 
TRANSPORT
Normally, about 97% of the oxygen transported from the 
lungs to the tissues is carried in chemical combination with 
hemoglobin in the red blood cells. The remaining 3% is 
transported in the dissolved state in the water of the plasma 
and blood cells. Thus, under normal conditions, oxygen is 
carried to the tissues almost entirely by hemoglobin.
Reversible Combination of O2 With 
Hemoglobin
The chemistry of hemoglobin is presented in Chapter 33, 
where we pointed out that the O2 molecule combines 
loosely and reversibly with the heme portion of hemoglo-
bin. When Po2 is high, as in the pulmonary capillaries, 
O2 binds with hemoglobin, but when Po2 is low, as in the 
tissue capillaries, O2 is released from hemoglobin. This is 
the basis for almost all O2 transport from the lungs to the 
tissues.
Oxygen-­Hemoglobin Dissociation Curve. Figure 41-8  
shows the O2-­hemoglobin dissociation curve, which 
demonstrates a progressive increase in the percentage of 
hemoglobin bound with O2 as blood Po2 increases, called 
the percent saturation of hemoglobin. Because the blood 
leaving the lungs and entering the systemic arteries usu-
ally has a Po2 of about 95 mm Hg, it can be seen from 
the dissociation curve that the usual O2 saturation of sys-
temic arterial blood averages 97%. Conversely, in normal 
venous blood returning from the peripheral tissues, the 
Po2 is about 40 mm Hg, and the saturation of hemoglobin 
averages 75%. 
Maximum Amount of Oxygen That Can Combine 
With the Hemoglobin of the Blood. The blood of a 
normal person contains about 15 grams of hemoglobin 
in each 100 ml of blood, and each gram of hemoglobin 
can bind with a maximum of 1.34 ml of O2 (1.39 ml when 
the hemoglobin is chemically pure, but impurities such 
as methemoglobin reduce this). Therefore, 15 times 1.34 
equals 20.1, which means that on average, the 15 grams of 
hemoglobin in 100 ml of blood can combine with a total 
of about 20 ml of O2 if the hemoglobin is 100% saturated. 
This is usually expressed as 20 volume percent. The O2-­
hemoglobin dissociation curve for the normal person can 
also be expressed in terms of volume percent of O2, as 
shown by the far right scale in Figure 41-8, instead of per-
cent saturation of hemoglobin. 
Amount of Oxygen Released From Hemoglobin 
When Systemic Arterial Blood Flows Through Tis-
sues. The total quantity of O2 bound with hemoglobin in 
normal systemic arterial blood, which is 97% saturated, is 
about 19.4 ml/100 ml of blood, as shown in Figure 41-9. 
On passing through the tissue capillaries, this amount is 
reduced, on average, to 14.4 ml (Po2 of 40 mm Hg, 75% 
saturated hemoglobin). Thus, under normal conditions, 
about 5 ml of O2 are transported from the lungs to the tis-
sues by each 100 ml of blood flow. 
Transport of Oxygen Is Markedly Increased During 
Strenuous Exercise. During heavy exercise, the muscle 
cells use O2 at a rapid rate, which in extreme cases can 
Normal metabolism
Lower limit of infinite blood flow
0
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
200
300
Blood flow (percent of normal)
500
100
400
600
A
B
Interstitial fluid PCO2 (mm Hg)
C
1/4 normal metabolism
10 × normal metabolism
Figure 41-7  Effect of blood flow and metabolic rate on peripheral 
tissue Pco2.
100
120
0
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
20 30
50
10
40
60 70
Pressure of oxygen in blood (PO2) (mmHg)
80 90
110
Volumes (%)
130 140
Oxygenated blood
leaving the lungs
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Reduced blood returning
from tissues
Hemoglobin saturation (%)
Figure 41-8  Oxygen-­hemoglobin dissociation curve.
0
Oxygen in blood (volumes %)
Venous blood in exercise
Normal venous blood
Normal arterial blood
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
60
80
Pressure of oxygen in blood (PO2) (mm Hg)
120
40
20
100
140
 
 
O
2 
b
o
un
d 
wit
h h
emo
globi
n 
Figure 41-9  Effect of blood PO2 on the quantity of oxygen bound 
with hemoglobin in each 100 ml of blood.
Chapter 41  Transport of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide in Blood and Tissue Fluids
	
525
U N I T  V I I
cause the muscle interstitial fluid Po2 to fall from the nor-
mal 40 mm Hg to as low as 15 mm Hg. At this low pres-
sure, only 4.4 ml of O2 remains bound with the hemo-
globin in each 100 ml of blood, as shown in Figure 41-9. 
Thus, 19.4 − 4.4 ml, or 15 ml, is the quantity of O2 that is 
actually delivered to the tissues by each 100 ml of blood 
flow, meaning that three times as much O2 as normal is 
delivered in each volume of blood that passes through 
the tissues. Keep in mind that the cardiac output can in-
crease to six to seven times normal in well-­trained mara-
thon runners. Thus, multiplying the increase in cardiac 
output (6-­ to 7-fold) by the increase in O2 transport in 
each volume of blood (3-fold) gives a 20-­fold increase in 
O2 transport to the tissues. We will see later in the chap-
ter that several other factors facilitate delivery of O2 into 
muscles during exercise, so muscle tissue Po2 often falls 
just slightly below normal, even during very strenuous 
exercise. 
Utilization Coefficient. The percentage of the blood that 
gives up its O2 as it passes through the tissue capillaries 
is called the utilization coefficient. The normal value for 
this is about 25%, as is evident from the preceding discus-
sion—that is, 25% of the oxygenated hemoglobin gives its 
O2 to the tissues. During strenuous exercise, the utiliza-
tion coefficient in the entire body can increase to 75% to 
85%. In local tissue areas where blood flow is extremely 
slow or the metabolic rate is very high, utilization coef-
ficients approaching 100% have been recorded—that is, 
essentially all the O2 is given to the tissues. 
Hemoglobin “Buffers” Tissue Po2
Although hemoglobin is necessary for the transport of O2 
to the tissues, it performs another function essential to 
life. This is its function as a tissue oxygen buffer system. 
That is, the hemoglobin in the blood is mainly respon-
sible for stabilizing the Po2 in the tissues, which can be 
explained as follows.
Hemoglobin Helps Maintain Nearly Constant Po2 
in the Tissues. Under basal conditions, the tissues re-
quire about 5 ml of O2 from each 100 ml of blood pass-
ing through the tissue capillaries. Referring to the O2-­
hemoglobin dissociation curve in Figure 41-9, note that 
for the normal 5 ml of O2 to be released per 100 ml of 
blood flow, the Po2 must fall to about 40 mm Hg. There-
fore, the tissue Po2 normally cannot rise above this 40 
mm Hg level because, if it did, the amount of O2 needed 
by the tissues would not be released from the hemoglobin. 
In this way, the hemoglobin normally sets an upper limit 
on the Po2 in the tissues at about 40 mm Hg.
Conversely, during heavy exercise, extra amounts of 
O2 (as much as 20 times normal) must be delivered from 
the hemoglobin to the tissues. However, this delivery of 
extra O2 can be achieved with little further decrease in tis-
sue Po2 because of (1) the steep slope of the dissociation 
curve, and (2) the increase in tissue blood flow caused by 
the decreased Po2. That is, a very small fall in Po2 causes 
large amounts of extra O2 to be released from hemoglo-
bin. Thus, hemoglobin in the blood automatically delivers 
O2 to the tissues at a pressure that is held rather tightly 
between about 15 and 40 mm Hg. 
When Atmospheric Oxygen Concentration Changes 
Markedly, the Buffer Effect of Hemoglobin Still Main-
tains Almost Constant Tissue Po2. The normal Po2 
in the alveoli is about 104 mm Hg, but as one ascends 
a mountain or ascends in an airplane, the Po2 can easily 
fall to less than half this amount. Alternatively, when one 
enters areas of compressed air, such as deep in the sea or 
in pressurized chambers, the Po2 may rise to 10 times this 
level. Even so, the tissue Po2 changes little.
It can be seen from the oxygen-­hemoglobin dissociation 
curve in Figure 41-8 that when the alveolar Po2 is decreased 
to as low as 60 mm Hg, the arterial hemoglobin is still 89% 
saturated with O2—only 8% below the normal saturation of 
97%. Furthermore, the tissues still remove about 5 ml of O2 
from each 100 ml of blood passing through the tissues. To 
remove this O2, the Po2 of the venous blood falls to 35 mm 
Hg—only 5 mm Hg below the normal value of 40 mm Hg. 
Thus, the tissue Po2 hardly changes, despite the marked fall 
in alveolar Po2 from 104 to 60 mm Hg.
Conversely, when the alveolar Po2 rises as high as 500 
mm Hg, the maximum O2 saturation of hemoglobin can 
never rise above 100%, which is only 3% above the normal 
level of 97%. Only a small amount of additional O2 dis-
solves in the fluid of the blood, as will be discussed subse-
quently. Then, when the blood passes through the tissue 
capillaries and loses several milliliters of O2 to the tissues, 
this reduces the Po2 of the capillary blood to a value only 
a few milliliters higher than the normal 40 mm Hg. Con-
sequently, the level of alveolar O2 may vary greatly—from 
60 to more than 500 mm Hg Po2—and still the Po2 in 
the peripheral tissues does not vary more than a few mil-
liliters from normal, demonstrating beautifully the tissue 
“oxygen buffer” function of the blood hemoglobin system. 
Factors That Shift the Oxygen-­
Hemoglobin Dissociation Curve—Their 
Importance for Oxygen Transport
The O2-­hemoglobin dissociation curves of Figures 41-8 
and 41-­9 are for normal average blood. However, several 
factors can displace the dissociation curve in one direction 
or the other, as shown in Figure 41-10. This figure shows 
that when the blood becomes slightly acidic, with the pH 
decreasing from the normal value of 7.4 to 7.2, the O2-­
hemoglobin dissociation curve shifts, on average, about 15% 
to the right. Conversely, an increase in pH from the normal 
7.4 to 7.6 shifts the curve a similar amount to the left.
In addition to pH changes, several other factors are known 
to shift the curve. Three of these, which shift the curve to 
the right are the following: (1) increased CO2 concentra-
tion; (2) increased blood temperature; and (3) increased 
UNIT VII  Respiration
526
2,3-­biphosphoglycerate (BPG), a metabolically important 
phosphate compound present in the blood in different con-
centrations under different metabolic conditions. 
Increased Delivery of Oxygen to Tissues 
When CO2 and H+ Shift the Oxygen-­
Hemoglobin Dissociation Curve—the 
Bohr Effect
A shift of the oxygen-­hemoglobin dissociation curve to 
the right in response to increases in blood CO2 and H+ 
levels has a significant effect by enhancing the release 
of O2 from the blood in the tissues and enhancing oxy-
genation of the blood in the lungs. This is called the Bohr 
effect, which can be explained as follows. As the blood 
passes through the tissues, CO2 diffuses from tissue cells 
into the blood. This diffusion increases the blood Pco2, 
which in turn raises blood H2CO3 (carbonic acid) and 
H+ concentration. These effects shift the O2-­hemoglobin 
dissociation curve to the right and downward, as shown 
in Figure 41-10, forcing O2 away from the hemoglobin 
and therefore delivering increased amounts of O2 to the 
tissues.
Exactly the opposite effects occur in the lungs, where 
CO2 diffuses from the blood into alveoli. This diffusion 
reduces blood Pco2 and H+ concentration, shifting the 
O2-­hemoglobin dissociation curve to the left and upward. 
Therefore, the quantity of O2 that binds with the hemo-
globin at any given alveolar Po2 becomes considerably 
increased, thus allowing greater O2 transport to the 
tissues. 
Effect of BPG to Cause Rightward  
Shift of the Oxygen-­Hemoglobin 
Dissociation Curve
The normal BPG in the blood always keeps the O2-­
hemoglobin dissociation curve shifted slightly to the right. 
In hypoxic conditions that last longer than a few hours, 
the quantity of BPG in the blood increases considerably, 
thus shifting the O2-­hemoglobin dissociation curve even 
farther to the right. This shift causes O2 to be released to 
the tissues at as much as 10 mm Hg higher tissue O2 pres-
sure than would be the case without this increased BPG. 
Therefore, under some conditions, the BPG mechanism 
can be important for adaptation to hypoxia, especially to 
hypoxia caused by poor tissue blood flow. 
Rightward Shift of the Oxygen-­
Hemoglobin Dissociation Curve During 
Exercise
During exercise, several factors shift the dissociation curve 
considerably to the right, thus delivering extra amounts of 
O2 to the active, exercising muscle fibers. The exercising 
muscles, in turn, release large quantities of CO2; this and 
several other acids released by the muscles increase the H+ 
concentration in the muscle capillary blood. In addition, 
the temperature of the muscle often rises 2° to 3°C, which 
can increase O2 delivery to the muscle fibers even more. All 
these factors act together to shift the oxygen-­hemoglobin 
dissociation curve of the muscle capillary blood consider-
ably to the right. This rightward shift of the curve forces O2 
to be released from blood hemoglobin to the muscle at Po2 
levels as great as 40 mm Hg, even when 70% of the O2 has 
already been removed from the hemoglobin. Then, in the 
lungs, the shift occurs in the opposite direction, allowing 
extra amounts of O2 to be picked up from alveoli. 
METABOLIC USE OF OXYGEN BY CELLS
Effect of Intracellular Po2 on Oxygen Usage Rate. 
Only a minute level of O2 pressure is required in the cells 
for normal intracellular chemical reactions to take place. 
The reason for this phenomenon is that the respiratory 
enzyme systems of the cell, discussed in Chapter 68, have 
been configured so that when the cellular Po2 is more than 
1 mm Hg, O2 availability is no longer a limiting factor in 
the rates of the chemical reactions. Instead, the main lim-
iting factor is the concentration of adenosine diphosphate 
(ADP) in the cells. This effect is demonstrated in Figure 
41-11, which shows the relationship between intracellu-
lar Po2 and the O2 usage rate at different concentrations 
of ADP. Note that whenever the intracellular Po2 is above 
1 mm Hg, O2 usage rate becomes constant for any given 
concentration of ADP in the cell. Conversely, when the 
ADP concentration is altered, the rate of O2 usage chang-
es in proportion to the change in ADP concentration.
As explained in Chapter 3, when adenosine triphos-
phate (ATP) is used in the cells to provide energy, it 
is converted into ADP. The increasing concentration 
of ADP increases metabolic usage of O2 as it combines 
with the various cell nutrients, releasing energy that 
reconverts the ADP back to ATP. Under normal operating 
conditions, the rate of O2 usage by the cells is ­controlled 
ultimately by the rate of energy expenditure within the 
cells—that is, by the rate at which ADP is formed from ATP. 
0
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
7.6
pH
7.4
7.2
60
50
80
70
120130
40
30
20
10
100110
90
140
Hemoglobin saturation (%)
Shift to right:
(1) Increased hydrogen ions
(2) Increased CO2
(3) Increased temperature
(4) Increased BPG
Pressure of oxygen in blood (PO2) (mmHg)
Figure 41-10  Shift of the oxygen-­hemoglobin dissociation curve to 
the right caused by an increase in H+ concentration (decrease in pH). 
BPG, 2,3-­Biphosphoglycerate.
Chapter 41  Transport of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide in Blood and Tissue Fluids
	
527
U N I T  V I I
Effect of Diffusion Distance From the Capillary to the 
Cell on Oxygen Usage. Tissue cells are seldom more than 
50 micrometers away from a capillary, and O2 normally 
can diffuse readily enough from the capillary to the cell 
to supply all the required amounts of O2 for metabolism. 
However, occasionally, cells are located farther from the 
capillaries, and the rate of O2 diffusion to these cells can 
become so low that intracellular Po2 falls below the critical 
level required to maintain maximal intracellular metabo-
lism. Thus, under these conditions, O2 usage by the cells 
is diffusion-­limited and is no longer determined by the 
amount of ADP formed in the cells. However, this situation 
almost never occurs, except in pathological states. 
Effect of Blood Flow on Metabolic Use of Oxygen. 
The total amount of O2 available each minute for use in 
any given tissue is determined by (1) the quantity of O2 
that can be transported to the tissue in each 100 ml of 
blood, and (2) the rate of blood flow. If blood flow rate 
falls to zero, the amount of available O2 also falls to zero. 
Thus, there are times when blood flow rate through a tis-
sue can be so low that tissue Po2 falls below the critical 
1 mm Hg required for intracellular metabolism. Under 
these conditions, the rate of tissue usage of O2 is blood 
flow–limited. Neither diffusion-­limited nor blood flow–
limited oxygen states can continue for long, however, be-
cause the cells receive less O2 than is required to continue 
the life of the cells. 
Transport of Oxygen in the Dissolved State
At the normal arterial Po2 of 95 mm Hg, about 0.29 ml of 
O2 is dissolved in every 100 ml of water in the blood, and 
when the Po2 of the blood falls to the normal 40 mm Hg in 
the tissue capillaries, only 0.12 ml of O2 remains dissolved. 
In other words, 0.17 ml of O2 is normally transported in 
the dissolved state to the tissues by each 100 ml of arterial 
blood flow. This value compares with almost 5 ml of O2 
transported by the red blood cell hemoglobin. Therefore, 
the amount of O2 transported to the tissues in the dissolved 
state is normally slight, only about 3% of the total, as com-
pared with 97% transported by the hemoglobin.
During strenuous exercise, when hemoglobin release of 
O2 to the tissues increases by another 3-fold, the relative 
quantity of O2 transported in the dissolved state falls to as 
little as 1.5%. However, if a person breathes O2 at very high 
alveolar Po2 levels, the amount transported in the dissolved 
state can become much greater, sometimes so much so that 
a serious excess of O2 occurs in the tissues, and so-­called O2 
poisoning ensues. This condition often leads to brain con-
vulsions and even death, as discussed in detail in Chapter 
45 in relation to the high-­pressure breathing of O2 among 
deep-­sea divers. 
Combination of Hemoglobin With Carbon 
­Monoxide—Displacement of O2
Carbon monoxide (CO) combines with hemoglobin at the 
same point on the hemoglobin molecule as O2; it can therefore 
displace O2 from the hemoglobin and decrease the O2 carrying 
capacity of blood. Furthermore, it binds with about 250 times 
as much tenacity as O2, which is demonstrated by the CO-­
hemoglobin dissociation curve in Figure 41-12. This curve 
is almost identical to the O2-­hemoglobin dissociation curve 
except that the CO partial pressures, shown on the abscissa, 
are at a level 1⁄250 of those for the O2-­hemoglobin dissociation 
curve of Figure 41-8. Therefore, a CO partial pressure of only 
0.4 mm Hg in the alveoli, 1⁄250 that of normal alveolar O2 (100 
mm Hg Po2), allows the CO to compete equally with the O2 
for combination with the hemoglobin and causes 50% of the 
hemoglobin in the blood to become bound with CO instead of 
with O2. Therefore, a CO pressure of only 0.6 mm Hg (a vol-
ume concentration < one part/1000 in air) can be lethal.
Even though the O2 content of blood is greatly reduced 
in CO poisoning, the Po2 of the blood may be normal. 
This situation makes exposure to CO especially dangerous 
because the blood is bright red, and there are no obvious 
signs of hypoxemia, such as a bluish color of the fingertips 
or lips (cyanosis). Also, Po2 is not reduced, and the feed-
back mechanism that usually stimulates an increased res-
0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
ADP = 11/2 normal
ADP = Normal resting level
ADP = 
3
2
Intracellular PO2 (mmHg)
1
4
1/2 normal
Rate of oxygen usage
(normal resting level)
Figure 41-11  Effect of intracellular adenosine diphosphate (ADP) 
and Po2 on rate of oxygen usage by the cells. Note that as long as 
the intracellular Po2 remains above 1 mm Hg, the controlling factor 
for the rate of oxygen usage is the intracellular concentration of ADP.
0.2
Gas pressure of carbon monoxide (mm Hg)
0
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.1
0.4
0.3
Hemoglobin saturation (%)
Figure 41-12  Carbon monoxide–hemoglobin dissociation curve. 
Note the extremely low carbon monoxide pressures at which carbon 
monoxide combines with hemoglobin.
UNIT VII  Respiration
528
piration rate in response to lack of O2 (usually reflected by 
a low Po2) is absent. Because the brain is one of the first 
organs affected by lack of oxygen, the person may become 
disoriented and unconscious before becoming aware of the 
danger.
A patient severely poisoned with CO can be treated by 
administering pure O2 because O2 at high alveolar pressure 
can displace CO rapidly from its combination with hemo-
globin. The patient can also benefit from simultaneous ad-
ministration of 5% CO2 because this strongly stimulates the 
respiratory center, which increases alveolar ventilation and 
reduces alveolar CO. With intensive O2 and CO2 therapy, 
CO can be removed from the blood as much as 10 times as 
rapidly as without therapy. 
TRANSPORT OF CO2 IN BLOOD
Transport of CO2 by the blood is not nearly as prob-
lematical as transport of O2 is because even in the most 
abnormal conditions, CO2 can usually be transported in 
far greater quantities than can O2. However, the amount 
of CO2 in the blood has a lot to do with the acid–­base 
balance of the body fluids, which is discussed in Chapter 
31. Under normal resting conditions, an average of 4 ml of 
CO2 are transported from the tissues to the lungs in each 
100 ml of blood.
CHEMICAL FORMS IN WHICH CO2 IS 
TRANSPORTED
To begin the process of CO2 transport, CO2 diffuses out 
of the tissue cells in the dissolved molecular CO2 form. 
On entering the tissue capillaries, the CO2 initiates a 
host of almost instantaneous physical and chemical reac-
tions, shown in Figure 41-13, which are essential for CO2 
transport.
Transport of CO2 in a Dissolved State
A small portion of the CO2 is transported in the dissolved 
state to the lungs. Recall that the Pco2 of venous blood 
is 45 mm Hg and that of arterial blood is 40 mm Hg. 
The amount of CO2 dissolved in the fluid of the blood at 
45 mm Hg is about 2.7 ml/dl (2.7 volume percent). The 
amount dissolved at 40 mm Hg is about 2.4 ml, or a dif-
ference of 0.3 ml. Therefore, only about 0.3 ml of CO2 is 
transported in the dissolved form by each 100 ml of blood 
flow. This is about 7% of all the CO2 normally transported. 
Transport of CO2 in the Form of 
Bicarbonate Ion
Carbonic Anhydrase Catalyzes the Reaction of CO2 
With Water in Red Blood Cells. The dissolved CO2 in 
the blood reacts with water to form carbonic acid. This re-
action would occur much too slowly to be of importance 
were it not for the fact that there is an enzyme called 
carbonic anhydrase inside the red blood cells, which 
catalyzes the reaction between CO2 and water and ac-
celerates its reaction rate by about 5000-­fold. Therefore, 
instead of requiring many seconds or minutes to occur, 
as is true in the plasma, the reaction occurs so rapidly in 
red blood cells that it reaches almost complete equilib-
rium within a small fraction of a second. This phenom-
enon allows tremendous amounts of CO2 to react with 
the red blood cell water, even before the blood leaves the 
tissue capillaries. 
Dissociation of Carbonic Acid Into Bicarbonate and 
Hydrogen Ions. In another fraction of a second, the car-
bonic acid formed in red cells (H2CO3) dissociates into 
H+ and bicarbonate ions (H+ and HCO3−). Most of the H+ 
ions then combine with hemoglobin in the red blood cells 
because the hemoglobin protein is a powerful acid–­base 
buffer. In turn, many of the HCO3− ions diffuse from the 
red blood cells into the plasma while chloride ions diffuse 
into the red blood cells to take their place. This diffusion 
is made possible by the presence of a special bicarbonate-­
chloride carrier protein in the red blood cell membrane 
that shuttles these two ions in opposite directions at rapid 
velocities. Thus, the chloride content of venous red blood 
cells is greater than that of arterial red blood cells, a phe-
nomenon called the chloride shift.
The reversible combination of CO2 with water in red 
blood cells under the influence of carbonic anhydrase 
accounts for about 70% of the CO2 transported from the 
tissues to the lungs. Thus, this means of transporting CO2 
is the most important. Indeed, when a carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitor (e.g., acetazolamide) is administered to an 
animal to block the action of carbonic anhydrase in the 
red blood cells, CO2 transport from the tissues becomes 
so poor that the tissue Pco2 may rise to 80 mm Hg instead 
of the normal 45 mm Hg. 
Transport of CO2 in Combination With Hemoglobin 
and Plasma Proteins—Carbaminohemoglobin. In ad-
dition to reacting with water, CO2 reacts directly with 
amine radicals of the hemoglobin molecule to form the 
compound carbaminohemoglobin (CO2Hgb). This com-
bination of CO2 and hemoglobin is a reversible reaction 
Capillary
Red blood cell
Plasma
Carbonic
anhydrase
1. CO2
CO2 transported as:
=    7%
=  23%
=  70%
2. Hgb − CO2
3. 
Hgb
Hgb
Cl
Hgb – H+
Hgb – CO2
H2CO3
H2O
H2O
CO2
CO2
CO2
CO2
Cell
H2O +
+
H+
+
+
HCO3
–
Cl
HCO3
–
HCO3
–
Figure 41-13  Transport of carbon dioxide in the blood. Hgb, Hemo-
globin.
Chapter 41  Transport of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide in Blood and Tissue Fluids
	
529
U N I T  V I I
that occurs with a loose bond, so the CO2 is easily re-
leased into the alveoli, where the Pco2 is lower than in the 
pulmonary capillaries.
A small amount of CO2 also reacts in the same way 
with the plasma proteins in tissue capillaries. This reac-
tion is much less significant for the transport of CO2 
because the quantity of these proteins in the blood is only 
one-fourth as great as the quantity of hemoglobin.
The quantity of CO2 that can be carried from the 
peripheral tissues to the lungs by carbamino combination 
with hemoglobin and plasma proteins is about 30% of the 
total quantity transported—that is, normally about 1.5 ml 
of CO2 in each 100 ml of blood. However, because this 
reaction is much slower than the reaction of CO2 with 
water inside the red blood cells, it is doubtful that under 
normal conditions this carbamino mechanism transports 
more than 20% of the total CO2. 
CARBON DIOXIDE DISSOCIATION CURVE
The curve shown in Figure 41-14, the CO2 dissociation 
curve, depicts the dependence of total blood CO2 in all its 
forms on Pco2. Note that the normal blood Pco2 is within a 
narrow range of 40 mm Hg in arterial blood and 45 mm Hg 
in venous blood. Note also that the normal concentration of 
CO2 in the blood in all its different forms is about 50 volume 
percent, but only 4 volume percent of this is exchanged dur-
ing normal transport of CO2 from the tissues to the lungs. 
That is, the concentration rises to about 52 volume percent 
as the blood passes through the tissues and falls to about 48 
volume percent as it passes through the lungs.
When Oxygen Binds With Hemoglobin, 
CO2 Is Released (the Haldane Effect) to 
Increase CO2 Transport
Earlier in the chapter, we noted that an increase in CO2 in 
the blood causes O2 to be displaced from the hemoglobin 
(the Bohr effect), which is an important factor in increas-
ing O2 transport. The reverse is also true—binding of O2 
with hemoglobin tends to displace CO2 from the blood. 
This effect, called the Haldane effect, is quantitatively far 
more important in promoting CO2 transport than the 
Bohr effect in promoting O2 transport.
The Haldane effect results from the simple fact that the 
combination of O2 with hemoglobin in the lungs causes 
the hemoglobin to become a stronger acid. This displaces 
CO2 from the blood and into the alveoli in two ways. First, 
the more highly acidic hemoglobin has less tendency to 
combine with CO2 to form carbaminohemoglobin, thus 
displacing much of the CO2 that is present in the carb-
amino form from the blood. Second, the increased acidity 
of the hemoglobin also causes it to release an excess of H+, 
and these ions bind with HCO3− to form carbonic acid, 
which then dissociates into water and CO2, and the CO2 
is released from the blood into the alveoli and, finally, into 
the air.
Figure 41-15 demonstrates quantitatively the signifi-
cance of the Haldane effect on the transport of CO2 from 
the tissues to the lungs. This figure shows small portions of 
two CO2 dissociation curves: (1) when the Po2 is 100 mm 
Hg, which is the case in the blood capillaries of the lungs; 
and (2) when the Po2 is 40 mm Hg, which is the case in 
the tissue capillaries. Point A shows that the normal Pco2 
of 45 mm Hg in the tissues causes 52 volume percent of 
CO2 to combine with the blood. On entering the lungs, 
the Pco2 falls to 40 mm Hg, and the Po2 rises to 100 mm 
Hg. If the CO2 dissociation curve did not shift because of 
the Haldane effect, the CO2 content of the blood would fall 
only to 50 volume percent, which would be a loss of only 
2 volume percent of CO2. However, the increase in Po2 in 
the lungs lowers the CO2 dissociation curve from the top 
curve to the lower curve of the figure, so the CO2 con-
tent falls to 48 volume percent (point B). This represents 
an additional two volume percent loss of CO2. Thus, the 
Haldane effect approximately doubles the amount of CO2 
released from the blood in the lungs and approximately 
doubles the amount of CO2 picked up in the tissues. 
Change in Blood Acidity During Co2 Transport
The carbonic acid formed when CO2 enters the blood in 
peripheral tissues decreases blood pH. However, reaction 
of this acid with the acid–­base buffers of the blood pre-
40
0
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
20
10
30
50
70
90
110
60
80
100
120
CO2 in blood (volumes %)
Gas pressure of carbon dioxide (mm Hg)
Normal operating range
Figure 41-14  Carbon dioxide dissociation curve.
35
55
50
45
45
50
40
A
B
PO2 = 40 mm Hg
PO2 = 100 mm Hg
CO2 in blood (volumes %)
PCO2 (mm Hg)
Figure 41-15  Portions of the carbon dioxide dissociation curve when 
the Po2 is 100 or 40 mm Hg. The arrow represents the Haldane effect 
on the transport of carbon dioxide.
UNIT VII  Respiration
530
vents the H+ concentration from rising very much (and 
the pH from falling very much). Ordinarily, arterial blood 
has a pH of about 7.41 and as the blood acquires CO2 
in the tissue capillaries the pH falls to a venous value of 
about 7.37. In other words, a pH change of 0.04 unit takes 
place. The reverse occurs when CO2 is released from the 
blood in the lungs, with the pH rising to the arterial value 
of 7.41 once again. During heavy exercise or other con-
ditions of high metabolic activity, or when blood flow 
through the tissues is sluggish, the decrease in pH in the 
tissue blood (and in the tissues themselves) can be as 
much as 0.50, about 12 times normal, thus causing signifi-
cant tissue acidosis. 
RESPIRATORY EXCHANGE RATIO
The discerning student will have noted that normal trans-
port of O2 from the lungs to the tissues by each 100 ml 
of blood is about 5 ml, whereas normal transport of CO2 
from the tissues to the lungs is about 4 ml. Thus, under 
normal resting conditions, only about 82% as much CO2 
is expired from the lungs as O2 is taken up by the lungs. 
The ratio of CO2 output to O2 uptake is called the respira-
tory exchange ratio (R). That is:
R = Rate of carbon dioxide output
Rate of oxygen uptake
The value for R changes under different metabolic con-
ditions. When a person is using carbohydrates exclusively 
for body metabolism, R rises to 1.00. Conversely, when a 
person is using fats exclusively for metabolic energy, the 
R level falls to as low as 0.7. The reason for this differ-
ence is that when O2 is metabolized with carbohydrates, 
one molecule of CO2 is formed for each molecule of O2 
consumed; when O2 reacts with fats, a large share of 
the O2 combines with hydrogen atoms from the fats to 
form water instead of CO2. In other words, when fats are 
metabolized, the respiratory quotient of the chemical reac-
tions in the tissues is about 0.70 instead of 1.00. (The tis-
sue respiratory quotient is discussed in Chapter 72.) For 
a person on a normal diet consuming average amounts of 
carbohydrates, fats, and proteins, the average value for R 
is considered to be 0.825.
Bibliography
Clanton TL, Hogan MC, Gladden LB: Regulation of cellular gas ex-
change, oxygen sensing, and metabolic control. Compr Physiol 
3:1135, 2013.
Geers C, Gros G: Carbon dioxide transport and carbonic anhydrase in 
blood and muscle. Physiol Rev 80:681, 2000.
Jensen FB: Red blood cell pH, the Bohr effect, and other oxygenation-­
linked phenomena in blood O2 and CO2 transport. Acta Physiol 
Scand 182:215, 2004.
Jensen FB: The dual roles of red blood cells in tissue oxygen deliv-
ery: oxygen carriers and regulators of local blood flow. J Exp Biol 
212:3387, 2009.
Joyner MJ, Casey DP: Regulation of increased blood flow (hyperemia) 
to muscles during exercise: a hierarchy of competing physiological 
needs. Physiol Rev 95:549, 2015.
Maina JN, West JB: Thin and strong! The bioengineering dilemma 
in the structural and functional design of the blood-­gas barrier. 
Physiol Rev 85:811, 2005.
Mairbäurl H, Weber RE: Oxygen transport by hemoglobin. Compr 
Physiol 2:1463, 2012.
Moore LG: Measuring high-­altitude adaptation. J Appl Physiol 
123:1371, 2017.
Poole DC, Jones AM: Oxygen uptake kinetics. Compr Physiol 2:933, 
2012.
Richardson RS: Oxygen transport and utilization: an integration of the 
muscle systems. Adv Physiol Educ 27:183, 2003.
Rossiter HB: Exercise: Kinetic considerations for gas exchange. Compr 
Physiol. 1:203, 2011.
Tsai AG, Johnson PC, Intaglietta M: Oxygen gradients in the microcir-
culation. Physiol Rev 83:933, 2003.
U N I T  V I I
	
531
The nervous system normally adjusts the rate of alveo-
lar ventilation to meet the demands of the body almost 
exactly so that the oxygen partial pressure (Po2) and car-
bon dioxide partial pressure (Pco2) in the arterial blood 
are hardly altered, even during heavy exercise and most 
other types of respiratory stress. This chapter describes 
the function of this neurogenic system for regulation of 
respiration.
RESPIRATORY CENTER
The respiratory center is composed of several groups of 
neurons located bilaterally in the medulla oblongata 
and pons of the brain stem, as shown in Figure 42-­1. It 
is divided into three major collections of neurons: (1) a 
dorsal respiratory group, located in the dorsal portion of 
the medulla, which mainly causes inspiration; (2) a ven-
tral respiratory group, located in the ventrolateral part of 
the medulla, which mainly causes expiration; and (3) the 
pneumotaxic center, located dorsally in the superior por-
tion of the pons, which mainly controls rate and depth of 
breathing.
DORSAL RESPIRATORY GROUP OF 
NEURONS CONTROLS INSPIRATION AND 
RESPIRATORY RHYTHM
The dorsal respiratory group of neurons plays a fundamen-
tal role in the control of respiration and extends most of the 
length of the medulla. Most of its neurons are located in the 
nucleus of the tractus solitarius (NTS), although additional 
neurons in the adjacent reticular substance of the medulla 
also play important roles in respiratory control. The NTS is 
the sensory termination of both the vagal and the glosso-
pharyngeal nerves, which transmit sensory signals into the 
respiratory center from the following: (1) peripheral che-
moreceptors; (2) baroreceptors; (3) receptors in the liver, 
pancreas, and multiple parts of the gastrointestinal tract; 
and (4) several types of receptors in the lungs.
Rhythmical Inspiratory Discharges From the Dorsal 
Respiratory Group. The basic rhythm of respiration is 
generated mainly in the dorsal respiratory group of neu-
rons. Even when all the peripheral nerves entering the 
medulla have been sectioned, and the brain stem has 
been transected above and below the medulla, this group 
of neurons still emits repetitive bursts of inspiratory neu-
ronal action potentials. The basic cause of these repeti-
tive discharges is unknown. In primitive animals, neural 
networks have been found in which activity of one set of 
neurons excites a second set, which in turn inhibits the 
first. Then, after a period of time, the mechanism repeats 
itself, continuing throughout the life of the animal. Similar 
networks of neurons are present in the human being, lo-
cated entirely within the medulla; it probably involves not 
only the dorsal respiratory group but adjacent areas of the 
medulla as well and is responsible for the basic rhythm of 
respiration. 
Inspiratory “Ramp” Signal. The nervous signal that 
is transmitted to the inspiratory muscles, mainly the 
diaphragm, is not an instantaneous burst of action po-
tentials. Instead, it begins weakly and increases steadily 
in a ramp manner for about 2 seconds in normal res-
piration. It then ceases abruptly for approximately the 
next 3 seconds, which turns off the excitation of the dia-
phragm and allows elastic recoil of the lungs and chest 
wall to cause expiration. Next, the inspiratory signal 
begins again for another cycle; this cycle repeats again 
and again, with expiration occurring in between. Thus, 
the inspiratory signal is a ramp signal. The obvious ad-
vantage of the ramp is that it causes a steady increase in 
the volume of the lungs during inspiration, rather than 
inspiratory gasps.
Two qualities of the inspiratory ramp are controlled, 
as follows:
	
1.	 Control of the rate of increase of the ramp signal so 
that during heavy respiration, the ramp increases 
rapidly and therefore fills the lungs rapidly.
	
2.	 Control of the limiting point at which the ramp 
suddenly ceases, which is the usual method for 
controlling the rate of respiration. That is, the ear-
lier the ramp ceases, the shorter the duration of in-
spiration. This method also shortens the duration 
of expiration. Thus, the frequency of respiration is 
increased. 
 Regulation of Respiration
C H A P T E R  4 2
UNIT VII  Respiration
532
PNEUMOTAXIC CENTER LIMITS DURATION 
OF INSPIRATION AND INCREASES 
RESPIRATORY RATE
A pneumotaxic center, located dorsally in the nucleus 
parabrachialis of the upper pons, transmits signals to 
the inspiratory area. The primary effect of this center is 
to control the “switch-­off” point of the inspiratory ramp, 
thereby controlling the duration of the filling phase of the 
lung cycle. When the pneumotaxic signal is strong, inspi-
ration might last for as little as 0.5 second, thus filling the 
lungs only slightly; when the pneumotaxic signal is weak, 
inspiration might continue for 5 or more seconds, thus 
filling the lungs with much greater amounts of air.
The function of the pneumotaxic center is primarily to 
limit inspiration, which has a secondary effect of increasing 
the rate of breathing because limitation of inspiration also 
shortens expiration and the entire period of each respira-
tion. A strong pneumotaxic signal can increase the rate of 
breathing to 30 to 40 breaths/min, whereas a weak pneumo-
taxic signal may reduce the rate to only 3 to 5 breaths/min. 
VENTRAL RESPIRATORY GROUP OF 
NEURONS—FUNCTIONS IN BOTH 
INSPIRATION AND EXPIRATION
Located in each side of the medulla, about 5 millimeters 
anterior and lateral to the dorsal respiratory group of neu-
rons, is the ventral respiratory group of neurons, found in 
the nucleus ambiguus rostrally and the nucleus retroam-
biguus caudally. The function of this neuronal group dif-
fers from that of the dorsal respiratory group in several 
important ways:
	
1.	 The neurons of the ventral respiratory group re-
main almost totally inactive during normal quiet 
respiration. Therefore, normal quiet breathing is 
caused only by repetitive inspiratory signals from 
the dorsal respiratory group transmitted mainly to 
the diaphragm, and expiration results from elastic 
recoil of the lungs and thoracic cage.
	
2.	 The ventral respiratory neurons do not appear to 
participate in the basic rhythmical oscillation that 
controls respiration.
	
3.	 When the respiratory drive for increased pulmo-
nary ventilation becomes greater than normal, res-
piratory signals spill over into the ventral respira-
tory neurons from the basic oscillating mechanism 
of the dorsal respiratory area. As a consequence, the 
ventral respiratory area also contributes extra res-
piratory drive.
	
4.	 Electrical stimulation of a few of the neurons in the 
ventral group causes inspiration, whereas stimula-
tion of others causes expiration. Therefore, these 
neurons contribute to both inspiration and expira-
tion. They are especially important in providing the 
powerful expiratory signals to the abdominal mus-
cles during very heavy expiration. Thus, this area 
operates more or less as an overdrive mechanism 
when high levels of pulmonary ventilation are re-
quired, especially during heavy exercise. 
LUNG INFLATION SIGNALS LIMIT 
INSPIRATION—THE HERING-­BREUER 
INFLATION REFLEX
In addition to the central nervous system respiratory 
control mechanisms operating entirely within the brain 
stem, sensory nerve signals from the lungs also help con-
trol respiration. Most importantly, located in the muscu-
lar portions of the walls of the bronchi and bronchioles 
throughout the lungs are stretch receptors that transmit 
signals through the vagi into the dorsal respiratory group 
of neurons when the lungs become overstretched. These 
signals affect inspiration in much the same way as signals 
from the pneumotaxic center; that is, when the lungs 
become overinflated, the stretch receptors activate an 
appropriate feedback response that “switches off” the 
inspiratory ramp and thus stops further inspiration. This 
mechanism is called the Hering-­Breuer inflation reflex. 
This reflex also increases the rate of respiration, as is true 
for signals from the pneumotaxic center.
In humans, the Hering-­Breuer reflex probably is not 
activated until the tidal volume increases to more than 
three times normal (>≈1.5 L/breath). Therefore, this reflex 
appears to be mainly a protective mechanism for prevent-
ing excess lung inflation rather than an important factor 
in normal control of ventilation. 
CONTROL OF OVERALL RESPIRATORY 
CENTER ACTIVITY
Up to this point, we have discussed the basic mechanisms 
for causing inspiration and expiration, but it is also impor-
tant to know how the intensity of the respiratory control 
signals is increased or decreased to match the ventilatory 
needs of the body. For example, during heavy exercise, 
the rates of oxygen (O2) usage and carbon dioxide (CO2) 
Pneumotaxic
center
Fourth ventricle
Dorsal respiratory
group (inspiration)
Vagus and
glossopharyngeal
? Apneustic center
Inhibits
Ventral respiratory
group (expiration
and inspiration)
Respiratory motor
pathways
Figure 42-­1.  Organization of the respiratory center.
Chapter 42  Regulation of Respiration
	
533
U N I T  V I I
formation are often increased to as much as 20 times 
normal, requiring commensurate increases in pulmonary 
ventilation. The major purpose of the rest of this chapter 
is to discuss this control of ventilation in accord with the 
respiratory needs of the body. 
CHEMICAL CONTROL OF RESPIRATION
The ultimate goal of respiration is to maintain proper 
concentrations of O2, CO2, and H+ in the tissues. It is 
fortunate, therefore, that respiratory activity is highly 
responsive to changes in each of these substances.
Excess CO2 or excess H+ in the blood mainly act directly 
on the respiratory center, causing greatly increased 
strength of both the inspiratory and the expiratory motor 
signals to the respiratory muscles. Oxygen, in contrast, 
does not have a major direct effect on the respiratory cen-
ter of the brain in controlling respiration. Instead, it acts 
almost entirely on peripheral chemoreceptors located in 
the carotid and aortic bodies, and these chemoreceptors 
in turn transmit appropriate nervous signals to the respi-
ratory center for control of respiration.
DIRECT CONTROL OF RESPIRATORY 
CENTER ACTIVITY BY CO2 AND H+
Chemosensitive Area of the Respiratory Center Be-
neath the Medulla’s Ventral Surface. We have mainly 
discussed three areas of the respiratory center—the dor-
sal respiratory group of neurons, the ventral respiratory 
group, and the pneumotaxic center. It is believed that 
none of these is affected directly by changes in blood CO2 
or H+ concentration. Instead, an additional neuronal area, 
a chemosensitive area, shown in Figure 42-­2, is located 
bilaterally, lying only 0.2 millimeter beneath the ventral 
surface of the medulla. This area is highly sensitive to 
changes in either blood Pco2 or H+ concentration, and it 
in turn excites the other portions of the respiratory center. 
Excitation of the Chemosensitive Neurons by H+ Is 
Likely the Primary Stimulus. The sensor neurons in the 
chemosensitive area are especially excited by H+; in fact, 
it is believed that H+ may be the only important direct 
stimulus for these neurons. However, H+ ions do not eas-
ily cross the blood–brain barrier. For this reason, changes 
in H+ concentration in the blood have considerably less 
effect in stimulating the chemosensitive neurons than 
changes in blood CO2, even though CO2 is believed to 
stimulate these neurons secondarily by changing the H+ 
concentration, as explained in the following section. 
CO2 
Indirectly 
Stimulates 
the 
Chemosensitive 
Neurons. Although CO2 has little direct effect in stimu-
lating the neurons in the chemosensitive area, it does have 
a potent indirect effect. It has this effect by reacting with 
the water of the tissues to form carbonic acid, which dis-
sociates into H+ and HCO3−; the H+ then have a potent 
direct stimulatory effect on respiration. These reactions 
are shown in Figure 42-­2.
Why does blood CO2 have a more potent effect in 
stimulating the chemosensitive neurons than blood H+? 
The answer is that the blood–­brain barrier is not very 
permeable to H+, but CO2 passes through this barrier 
almost as if the barrier did not exist. Consequently, when-
ever the blood Pco2 increases, so does the Pco2 of both 
the interstitial fluid of the medulla and the cerebrospinal 
fluid. In both these fluids, the CO2 immediately reacts 
with the water to form new H+. Thus, paradoxically, more 
H+ is released into the respiratory chemosensitive sen-
sory area of the medulla when the blood CO2 concen-
tration increases than when the blood H+ concentration 
increases. For this reason, respiratory center activity is 
increased very strongly by changes in blood CO2, a fact 
that we subsequently discuss quantitatively. 
Attenuated Stimulatory Effect of CO2 After the First 
1 to 2 Days. Excitation of the respiratory center by CO2 is 
great the first few hours after the blood CO2 first increas-
es, but then it gradually declines over the next 1 to 2 days, 
decreasing to about one-­fifth the initial effect. Part of this 
decline results from renal readjustment of the H+ concen-
tration in the circulating blood back toward normal after 
the CO2 first increases the H+ concentration. The kidneys 
achieve this readjustment by increasing the blood HCO3−, 
which binds with H+ in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid 
to reduce their concentrations. But, even more important-
ly, over a period of hours, the HCO3− also slowly diffuses 
through the blood–­brain and blood–cerebrospinal fluid 
barriers and combine directly with H+ adjacent to the res-
piratory neurons as well, thus reducing the H+ back to near 
normal. A change in blood CO2 concentration therefore 
has a potent acute effect on controlling respiratory drive 
but only a weak chronic effect after a few days’ adaptation. 
Chemosensitive
area
Inspiratory area
H+ + HCO3
–
H2CO3
CO2 + H2O
Figure 42-­2.  Stimulation of the brain stem inspiratory area by signals 
from the chemosensitive area located bilaterally in the medulla, lying 
only a fraction of a millimeter beneath the ventral medullary surface. 
Note also that H+ stimulates the chemosensitive area, but carbon di-
oxide in the fluid gives rise to most of the H+.
