================================================================================
HARRISON'S PRINCIPLES OF INTERNAL MEDICINE - 20th EDITION
NEUROLOGY CHAPTERS - EXTRACTED TEXT
================================================================================

CHAPTERS INCLUDED:
  Pages 131-134: Ch13 Headache [Cardinal Manifestations]
  Pages 198-202: Ch25 Dementia [Cardinal Manifestations - Overview]
  Pages 203-211: Ch26 Aphasia Memory Loss and Other Cerebral Disorders
  Pages 2114-2119: Ch300 Coma [Neurologic Critical Care]
  Pages 2120-2129: Ch301 Severe Acute Encephalopathies and Critical Care
  Pages 2130-2134: Ch302 Subarachnoid Hemorrhage [Neurologic Critical Care]
  Pages 1037-1043: Ch132 Encephalitis
  Pages 1044-1052: Ch133 Acute Meningitis
  Pages 1053-1058: Ch134 Chronic and Recurrent Meningitis
  Pages 1059-1064: Ch135 Brain Abscess and Empyema
  Pages 3071-3075: Ch415 Approach to Patient with Neurologic Disease
  Pages 3076-3084: Ch416 Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
  Pages 3085-3095: Ch417 Pathobiology of Neurologic Diseases
  Pages 3096-3113: Ch418 Seizures and Epilepsy
  Pages 3114-3124: Ch419 Cerebrovascular Diseases
  Pages 3125-3136: Ch420 Ischemic Stroke
  Pages 3137-3141: Ch421 Intracranial Hemorrhage
  Pages 3142-3153: Ch422 Migraine and Other Primary Headache Disorders
  Pages 3154-3160: Ch423 Alzheimers Disease
  Pages 3161-3163: Ch424 Frontotemporal Dementia
  Pages 3164-3164: Ch425 Vascular Dementia
  Pages 3165-3165: Ch426 Dementia with Lewy Bodies
  Pages 3166-3177: Ch427 Parkinsons Disease
  Pages 3178-3186: Ch428 Tremor Chorea and Other Movement Disorders
  Pages 3187-3193: Ch429 ALS and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
  Pages 3218-3228: Ch434 Diseases of the Spinal Cord
  Pages 3229-3233: Ch435 Concussion and TBI
  Pages 3234-3247: Ch436 Multiple Sclerosis
  Pages 3248-3249: Ch437 Neuromyelitis Optica
  Pages 3250-3270: Ch438 Peripheral Neuropathy
  Pages 3271-3277: Ch439 Guillain-Barre Syndrome and Immune-Mediated Neuropathies
  Pages 3278-3284: Ch440 Myasthenia Gravis and NMJ Disorders
  Pages 3285-3299: Ch441 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases


================================================================================
Ch13 Headache [Cardinal Manifestations]
Pages 131-134
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 131 ---

CHAPTER 13
Headache
85
computed tomography is preferred to abdominal radiography when 
evaluating non-traumatic acute abdominal pain.
Very rarely, barium or water-soluble contrast study of the upper 
part of the gastrointestinal tract are appropriate radiographic investi-
gations and may demonstrate partial intestinal obstruction that may 
elude diagnosis by other means. If there is any question of obstruc-
tion of the colon, oral administration of barium sulfate should be 
avoided. On the other hand, in cases of suspected colonic obstruc-
tion (without perforation), a contrast enema may be diagnostic.
In the absence of trauma, peritoneal lavage has been replaced as 
a diagnostic tool by CT scanning and laparoscopy. Ultrasonography 
has proved to be useful in detecting an enlarged gallbladder or 
pancreas, the presence of gallstones, an enlarged ovary, or a tubal 
pregnancy. Laparoscopy is especially helpful in diagnosing pelvic 
conditions, such as ovarian cysts, tubal pregnancies, salpingitis, and 
acute appendicitis and other disease processes. Laparoscopy has a 
particular advantage over imaging in that the underlying etiologic 
condition can often be definitively addressed.
Radioisotopic hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid scans (HIDAs) 
may help differentiate acute cholecystitis or biliary colic from acute 
pancreatitis. A CT scan may demonstrate an enlarged pancreas, rup-
tured spleen, or thickened colonic or appendiceal wall and streaking 
of the mesocolon or mesoappendix characteristic of diverticulitis or 
appendicitis.
Sometimes, even under the best circumstances with all available 
aids and with the greatest of clinical skill, a definitive diagnosis 
cannot be established at the time of the initial examination. And, in 
some cases, operation may be indicated based on clinical grounds 
alone. Should that decision be questionable, watchful waiting with 
repeated questioning and examination will often elucidate the true 
nature of the illness and indicate the proper course of action.
Acknowledgment
We gratefully acknowledge the enormous contribution to this chapter and 
the approach it espouses to William Silen, who wrote this chapter for many 
editions.
■
■FURTHER READING
Bhangu A et al: Acute appendicitis: Modern understanding of patho-
genesis, diagnosis and management, Lancet 386:1278, 2015.
Cartwright SL, Knudson MP: Diagnostic imaging of acute abdomi-
nal pain in adults. Am Fam Phys 91: 452, 2015.
Huckins DS et al: Diagnostic performance of a biomarker panel as a 
negative predictor for acute appendicitis in acute emergency depart-
ment patients with abdominal pain. Available from http://dx.doi 
.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2016.11.027. Accessed November 2016.
Nayor J et al: Tracing the cause of abdominal pain. N Engl J Med 
375:e8, 2016.
Phillips MT: Clinical yield of computed tomography scans in the 
emergency department for abdominal pain. J Invest Med 64:542, 2016.
Silen W, Cope Z: Cope’s Early Diagnosis of the Acute Abdomen, 22nd ed. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 2010.
Headache is among the most common reasons patients seek medical 
attention, on a global basis being responsible for more disability than 
any other neurologic problem. Diagnosis and management are based 
on a careful clinical approach augmented by an understanding of the 
anatomy, physiology, and pharmacology of the nervous system path-
ways mediating the various headache syndromes. This chapter will 
13
Headache
Peter J. Goadsby 
focus on the general approach to a patient with headache; migraine and 
other primary headache disorders are discussed in Chap. 422.
■
■GENERAL PRINCIPLES
A classification system developed by the International Headache 
Society (www.ihs-headache.org/ichd-guidelines) characterizes headache as 
primary or secondary (Table 13-1). Primary headaches are those in which 
headache and its associated features are the disorder itself, whereas 
secondary headaches are those caused by exogenous disorders (Head-
ache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society, 
2018). Primary headache often results in considerable disability and 
a decrease in the patient’s quality of life. Mild secondary headache, 
such as that seen in association with upper respiratory tract infections, 
is common but rarely worrisome. Life-threatening headache is rela-
tively uncommon, but vigilance is required in order to recognize and 
appropriately treat such patients.
■
■ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF HEADACHE
Pain usually occurs when peripheral nociceptors are stimulated in 
response to tissue injury, visceral distension, or other factors (Chap. 10). 
In such situations, pain perception is a normal physiologic response 
mediated by a healthy nervous system. Pain can also result when 
pain-producing pathways of the peripheral or central nervous system 
(CNS) are damaged or activated inappropriately. Headache may origi-
nate from either or both mechanisms. Relatively few cranial structures 
are pain-producing; these include the scalp, meningeal arteries, dural 
sinuses, falx cerebri, and proximal segments of the large pial arteries. 
The ventricular ependyma, choroid plexus, pial veins, and much of the 
brain parenchyma are not pain-producing.
The key structures involved in primary headache appear to be the 
following:
• The large intracranial vessels and dura mater and the peripheral 
terminals of the trigeminal nerve that innervate these structures
• The caudal portion of the trigeminal nucleus, which extends into 
the dorsal horns of the upper cervical spinal cord and receives input 
from the first and second cervical nerve roots (the trigeminocervical 
complex)
• Rostral pain-processing regions, such as the ventroposteromedial 
thalamus and the cortex
• The pain-modulatory systems in the brain that modulate input from 
trigeminal nociceptors at all levels of the pain-processing pathways 
and influence vegetative functions, such as hypothalamus and 
brainstem structures
The innervation of the large intracranial vessels and dura mater by 
the trigeminal nerve is known as the trigeminovascular system. Cranial 
autonomic symptoms, such as lacrimation, conjunctival injection, nasal 
congestion, rhinorrhea, periorbital swelling, aural fullness, and ptosis, are 
prominent in the trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias (TACs), including 
cluster headache and paroxysmal hemicrania, and may also be seen 
in migraine, even in children. These autonomic symptoms reflect acti-
vation of cranial parasympathetic pathways, and functional imaging 
studies indicate that vascular changes in migraine and cluster head-
ache, when present, are similarly driven by these cranial autonomic 
systems. Moreover, they can often be mistaken for symptoms or signs 
of cranial sinus inflammation, which is thus overdiagnosed and inap-
propriately managed. Migraine and other primary headache types are 
TABLE 13-1  Common Causes of Headache
PRIMARY HEADACHE
SECONDARY HEADACHE
TYPE
%
TYPE
%
Tension-type
69
Systemic infection
63
Migraine
16
Head injury
4
Idiopathic stabbing
2
Vascular disorders
1
Exertional
1
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
<1
Cluster
0.1
Brain tumor
0.1
Source: After J Olesen et al: The Headaches. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2005.


--- PDF PAGE 132 ---

PART 2
Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases
86
not “vascular headaches”; these disorders do not reliably manifest 
vascular changes, and treatment outcomes cannot be predicted by vas-
cular effects. Migraine is a brain disorder and is best understood and 
managed as such.
■
■CLINICAL EVALUATION OF ACUTE, NEW-ONSET 
HEADACHE
The patient who presents with a new, severe headache has a differ-
ential diagnosis that is quite different from the patient with recurrent 
headaches over many years. In new-onset and severe headache, the 
probability of finding a potentially serious cause is considerably 
greater than in recurrent headache. Patients with recent onset of pain 
require prompt evaluation and appropriate treatment. Serious causes 
to be considered include meningitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage, epi-
dural or subdural hematoma, glaucoma, tumor, and purulent sinusitis. 
When worrisome symptoms and signs are present (Table 13-2), rapid 
diagnosis and management are critical.
A careful neurologic examination is an essential first step in the 
evaluation. In most cases, patients with an abnormal examination or a 
history of recent-onset headache should be evaluated by a computed 
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study of the 
brain. As an initial screening procedure for intracranial pathology in 
this setting, CT and MRI methods appear to be equally sensitive. In 
some circumstances, a lumbar puncture (LP) is also required, unless 
a benign etiology can be otherwise established. A general evaluation 
of acute headache might include cranial arteries by palpation; cervical 
spine by the effect of passive movement of the head and by imaging; 
the investigation of cardiovascular and renal status by blood pressure 
monitoring and urine examination; and eyes by funduscopy, intraocular 
pressure measurement, and refraction.
The psychological state of the patient should also be evaluated 
because a relationship exists between head pain, depression, and anx-
iety. This is intended to identify comorbidity rather than provide an 
explanation for the headache, because troublesome headache is seldom 
simply caused by mood change. Although it is notable that medicines 
with antidepressant actions are also effective in the preventive treat-
ment of both tension-type headache and migraine, each symptom must 
be treated optimally.
Underlying recurrent headache disorders may be activated by 
pain that follows otologic or endodontic surgical procedures. Thus, 
pain about the head as the result of diseased tissue or trauma may 
reawaken an otherwise quiescent migraine syndrome. Treatment of the 
headache is largely ineffective until the cause of the primary problem 
is addressed.
Serious underlying conditions that are associated with headache are 
described below. Brain tumor is a rare cause of headache and even less 
commonly a cause of severe pain. The vast majority of patients present-
ing with severe headache have a benign cause.
SECONDARY HEADACHE
The management of secondary headache focuses on diagnosis and 
treatment of the underlying condition.
TABLE 13-2  Headache Symptoms That Suggest a Serious Underlying 
Disorder
Sudden-onset headache
First severe headache
“Worst” headache ever
Vomiting that precedes headache
Subacute worsening over days or weeks
Pain induced by bending, lifting, cough
Pain that disturbs sleep or presents immediately upon awakening
Known systemic illness
Onset after age 55
Fever or unexplained systemic signs
Abnormal neurologic examination
Pain associated with local tenderness, e.g., region of temporal artery
■
■MENINGITIS
Acute, severe headache with stiff neck and fever suggests meningitis. 
LP is mandatory. Often there is striking accentuation of pain with eye 
movement. Meningitis can be easily mistaken for migraine in that the 
cardinal symptoms of pounding headache, photophobia, nausea, and 
vomiting are frequently present, perhaps reflecting the underlying 
biology of some of the patients.
Meningitis is discussed in Chaps. 133 and 134.
■
■INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE
Acute, maximal in <5 min, severe headache lasting >5 min with stiff 
neck but without fever suggests subarachnoid hemorrhage. A rup-
tured aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, or intraparenchymal 
hemorrhage may also present with headache alone. Rarely, if the 
hemorrhage is small or below the foramen magnum, the head CT scan 
can be normal. Therefore, LP may be required to diagnose definitively 
subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage is discussed in Chap. 302, and intracra-
nial hemorrhage in Chap. 421.
■
■BRAIN TUMOR
Approximately 30% of patients with brain tumors consider headache 
to be their chief complaint. The head pain is usually nondescript—
an intermittent deep, dull aching of moderate intensity, which may 
worsen with exertion or change in position and may be associated with 
nausea and vomiting. This pattern of symptoms results from migraine 
far more often than from brain tumor. The headache of brain tumor 
disturbs sleep in about 10% of patients. Vomiting that precedes the 
appearance of headache by weeks is highly characteristic of posterior 
fossa brain tumors. A history of amenorrhea or galactorrhea should 
lead one to question whether a prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma 
(or the polycystic ovary syndrome) is the source of headache. Head-
ache arising de novo in a patient with known malignancy suggests 
either cerebral metastases or carcinomatous meningitis, or both. Head 
pain appearing abruptly after bending, lifting, or coughing can be due 
to a posterior fossa mass, a Chiari malformation, or low cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) volume.
Brain tumors are discussed in Chap. 86.
■
■TEMPORAL ARTERITIS
(See also Chaps. 28 and 356) Temporal (giant cell) arteritis is an inflam-
matory disorder of arteries that frequently involves the extracranial 
carotid circulation. It is a common disorder of the elderly; its annual 
incidence is 77 per 100,000 individuals aged ≥50. The average age of 
onset is 70 years, and women account for 65% of cases. About half of 
patients with untreated temporal arteritis develop blindness due to 
involvement of the ophthalmic artery and its branches; indeed, the 
ischemic optic neuropathy induced by giant cell arteritis is the major 
cause of rapidly developing bilateral blindness in patients >60 years. 
Because treatment with glucocorticoids is effective in preventing this 
complication, prompt recognition of the disorder is important.
Typical presenting symptoms include headache, polymyalgia rheu-
matica (Chap. 356), jaw claudication, fever, and weight loss. Headache 
is the dominant symptom and often appears in association with mal-
aise and muscle aches. Head pain may be unilateral or bilateral and 
is located temporally in 50% of patients but may involve any and all 
aspects of the cranium. Pain usually appears gradually over a few 
hours before peak intensity is reached; occasionally, it is explosive 
in onset. The quality of pain is infrequently throbbing; it is almost 
invariably described as dull and boring, with superimposed episodic 
stabbing pains similar to the sharp pains that appear in migraine. Most 
patients can recognize that the origin of their head pain is superficial, 
external to the skull, rather than originating deep within the cranium 
(the pain site usually identified migraineurs). Scalp tenderness is pres-
ent, often to a marked degree; brushing the hair or resting the head on 
a pillow may be impossible because of pain. Headache is usually worse 
at night and often aggravated by exposure to cold. Additional findings 
may include reddened, tender nodules or red streaking of the skin 
overlying the temporal arteries, and tenderness of the temporal or, less 
commonly, the occipital arteries.


--- PDF PAGE 133 ---

CHAPTER 13
Headache
87
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is often, although not 
always, elevated; a normal ESR does not exclude giant cell arteritis. 
A temporal artery biopsy followed by immediate treatment with 
prednisone 80 mg daily for the first 4–6 weeks should be initiated 
when clinical suspicion is high. The prevalence of migraine among 
the elderly is substantial, considerably higher than that of giant cell 
arteritis. Migraineurs often report amelioration of their headaches 
with prednisone; thus, caution must be used when interpreting the 
therapeutic response.
■
■GLAUCOMA
Glaucoma may present with a prostrating headache associated with 
nausea and vomiting. The headache often starts with severe eye pain. 
On physical examination, the eye is often red with a fixed, moderately 
dilated pupil.
Glaucoma is discussed in Chap. 28.
PRIMARY HEADACHE DISORDERS
Primary headaches are disorders in which headache and associated 
features occur in the absence of any exogenous cause. The most 
common are migraine, tension-type headache, and the TACs, notably 
cluster headache. These entities are discussed in detail in Chap. 422.
■
■CHRONIC DAILY OR NEAR-DAILY HEADACHE
The broad description of chronic daily headache (CDH) can be applied 
when a patient experiences headache on 15 days or more per month. 
CDH is not a single entity; it encompasses a number of different 
headache syndromes, both primary and secondary (Table 13-3). In 
aggregate, this group presents considerable disability and is thus spe-
cially dealt with here. Population-based estimates suggest that about 
4% of adults have daily or near-daily headache.
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Chronic Daily Headache
The first step in the management of patients with CDH is to diagnose 
any secondary headache and treat that problem (Table 13-3). This 
can sometimes be a challenge where the underlying cause triggers a 
worsening of a primary headache. For patients with primary head-
aches, diagnosis of the headache type will guide therapy. Preventive 
treatments such as tricyclics, either amitriptyline or nortriptyline at 
doses up to 1 mg/kg, are very useful in patients with CDH arising 
from migraine or tension-type headache or where the secondary 
cause has activated the underlying primary headache. Tricyclics are 
started in low doses (10–25 mg) daily and may be given 12 h before 
the expected time of awakening in order to avoid excess morning 
sleepiness. Medicines including topiramate, valproate, propranolol, 
flunarizine (not available in the United States), and candesartan are 
also useful in migraine.
MANAGEMENT OF MEDICALLY INTRACTABLE DISABLING 
PRIMARY CHRONIC DAILY HEADACHE
The management of medically intractable headache is difficult, 
although developments in therapy are at hand. Monoclonal anti-
bodies to calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) or its receptor have 
been reported to be effective and well-tolerated in chronic migraine 
in phase II/III randomized placebo-controlled trials. Non-invasive  
neuromodulatory approaches, such as single pulse transcranial 
magnetic stimulation and non-invasive vagal nerve stimulation, 
which appear to modulate thalamic processing or brainstem mech-
anisms, respectively, in migraine have, or are, entering clinical prac-
tice, respectively. Non-invasive vagal nerve stimulation has also 
shown promise in chronic cluster headache, chronic paroxysmal 
hemicrania, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks 
with cranial autonomic symptoms (SUNA), short-lasting unilateral 
neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tear-
ing (SUNCT), and hemicrania continua (Chap. 422). Other modali-
ties are discussed in Chap. 422.
MEDICATION-OVERUSE HEADACHE
Overuse of analgesic medication for headache can aggravate head-
ache frequency, markedly impair the effect of preventive medicines, 
and induce a state of refractory daily or near-daily headache called 
medication-overuse headache. A proportion of patients who stop taking 
analgesics will experience substantial improvement in the severity 
and frequency of their headache. However, even after cessation of 
analgesic use, many patients continue to have headache, although 
they may feel clinically improved in some way, especially if they 
have been using opioids or barbiturates regularly. The residual 
symptoms probably represent the underlying primary headache 
disorder, and most commonly, this issue occurs in patients prone 
to migraine.
Management of Medication Overuse: Outpatients  For patients 
who overuse medications, it is often helpful that analgesic use be 
reduced and eliminated. One approach is to reduce the medication 
dose by 10% every 1–2 weeks. Immediate cessation of analgesic use 
is possible for some patients, provided there is no contraindication. 
Both approaches are facilitated by the use of a medication diary 
maintained during the month or two before cessation; this helps 
to identify the scope of the problem. A small dose of a nonsteroi-
dal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) such as naproxen, 500 mg 
bid, if tolerated, will help relieve residual pain as analgesic use 
is reduced. NSAID overuse is not usually a problem for patients 
with daily headache when a NSAID with a longer half-life is taken 
once or twice daily; however, overuse problems may develop with 
more frequent dosing schedules or shorter acting NSAIDS. Once 
the patient has substantially reduced analgesic use, a preventive 
medication should be introduced, although another equally widely 
used approach is to commence the preventive at the same time 
as the analgesic reduction is started. It must be emphasized that 
preventives often do not work in the presence of analgesic overuse. The 
most common cause of unresponsiveness to treatment is the use 
of a preventive when analgesics continue to be used regularly. For 
some patients, discontinuing analgesics is very difficult; often the 
best approach is to inform the patient that some degree of pain is 
inevitable during this initial period.
Management of Medication Overuse: Inpatients  Some patients 
will require hospitalization for detoxification. Such patients have 
typically failed efforts at outpatient withdrawal or have a signifi-
cant medical condition, such as diabetes mellitus or epilepsy, which 
would complicate withdrawal as an outpatient. Following admis-
sion to the hospital, acute medications are withdrawn completely 
on the first day, in the absence of a contraindication. Antiemetics 
and fluids are administered as required; clonidine is used for 
TABLE 13-3  Classification of Daily or Near-Daily Headache
Primary
 
 
>4 H DAILY
<4 H DAILY
SECONDARY
Chronic migrainea
Chronic cluster 
headacheb
Posttraumatic
  Head injury
  Iatrogenic
  Postinfectious
Chronic tension-type 
headachea
Chronic paroxysmal 
hemicrania
Inflammatory, such as
  Giant cell arteritis
  Sarcoidosis
  Behçet’s syndrome
Hemicrania continuaa
SUNCT/SUNA
Chronic CNS infection
New daily persistent 
headachea
Hypnic headache
Medication-overuse 
headachea
aMay be complicated by medication overuse. bSome patients may have headache 
>4 h/d.
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; SUNA, short-lasting unilateral 
neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms; SUNCT, short-
lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and 
tearing.


--- PDF PAGE 134 ---

PART 2
Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases
88
opioid withdrawal symptoms. For acute intolerable pain during 
the waking hours, aspirin, 1 g IV (not approved in United States), 
is useful. IM chlorpromazine can be helpful at night; patients must 
be adequately hydrated. Three to five days into the admission, as 
the effect of the withdrawn substance wears off, a course of IV dihy-
droergotamine (DHE) can be used. DHE, administered every 8 h for 
5 consecutive days, can induce a significant remission that allows 
a preventive treatment to be established. Serotonin 5-HT3 receptor 
antagonists, such as ondansetron or granisetron, or the neurokinin 
receptor antagonist, aprepitant, may be required with DHE to 
prevent significant nausea, and domperidone (not approved in the 
United States) orally or by suppository can be very helpful. Avoid-
ing sedating or otherwise side effect–prone antiemetics is helpful.
NEW DAILY PERSISTENT HEADACHE
New daily persistent headache (NDPH) is a clinically distinct syn-
drome with important secondary causes; these are listed in Table 13-4.
Clinical Presentation  The patient with NDPH presents with head-
ache on most if not all days, and the patient can clearly, and often 
vividly, recall the moment of onset. The headache usually begins 
abruptly, but onset may be more gradual; evolution over 3 days 
has been proposed as the upper limit for this syndrome. Patients 
typically recall the exact day and circumstances of the onset of 
headache; the new, persistent head pain does not remit. The first 
priority is to distinguish between a primary and a secondary cause 
of this syndrome. Subarachnoid hemorrhage is the most serious 
of the secondary causes and must be excluded either by history or 
appropriate investigation (Chap. 302).
Secondary NDPH  •  Low CSF Volume Headache 
In these 
syndromes, head pain is positional: it begins when the patient sits 
or stands upright and resolves upon reclining. The pain, which 
is occipitofrontal, is usually a dull ache but may be throbbing. 
Patients with chronic low CSF volume headache typically present 
with a history of headache from 1 day to the next that is generally 
not present on waking but worsens during the day. Recumbency 
usually improves the headache within minutes, and it can take only 
minutes to an hour for the pain to return when the patient resumes 
an upright position.
The most common cause of headache due to persistent low CSF 
volume is CSF leak following LP. Post-LP headache usually begins 
within 48 h but may be delayed for up to 12 days. Its incidence is 
between 10 and 30%. Beverages with caffeine may provide tempo-
rary relief. Besides LP, index events may include epidural injection 
or a vigorous Valsalva maneuver, such as from lifting, straining, 
coughing, clearing the eustachian tubes in an airplane, or multiple 
orgasms. Spontaneous CSF leaks are well recognized, and the diag-
nosis should be considered whenever the headache history is typi-
cal, even when there is no obvious index event. As time passes from 
the index event, the postural nature may become less apparent; cases 
in which the index event occurred several years before the eventual 
diagnosis have been recognized. Symptoms appear to result from 
low volume rather than low pressure: although low CSF pressures, 
typically 0–50 mm CSF, are usually identified, a pressure as high as 
140 mm CSF has been noted with a documented leak.
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS; Chap. 432) 
can present with orthostatic headache similar to low CSF volume 
headache and is a diagnosis that needs consideration in this setting.
When imaging is indicated to identify the source of a presumed 
leak, an MRI with gadolinium is the initial study of choice (Fig. 13-1). 
A striking pattern of diffuse meningeal enhancement is so typical 
that in the appropriate clinical context the diagnosis is established. 
Chiari malformations may sometimes be noted on MRI; in such 
cases, surgery to decompress the posterior fossa is not indicated and 
usually worsens the headache. Spinal MRI with T2 weighting may 
reveal a leak, and spinal MRI may demonstrate spinal meningeal 
cysts whose role in these syndromes is yet to be elucidated. The 
source of CSF leakage may be identified by spinal MRI with appro-
priate sequences, by CT, or increasingly by MR myelography. Less 
used now, 111In-DTPA CSF studies in the absence of a directly identi-
fied site of leakage, may demonstrate early emptying of 111In-DTPA 
tracer into the bladder or slow progress of tracer across the brain 
suggesting a CSF leak.
Initial treatment for low CSF volume headache is bed rest. For 
patients with persistent pain, IV caffeine (500 mg in 500 mL of saline 
administered over 2 h) can be very effective. An electrocardiogram 
(ECG) to screen for arrhythmia should be performed before admin-
istration. It is reasonable to administer at least two infusions of caf-
feine before embarking on additional tests to identify the source of 
the CSF leak. Because IV caffeine is safe and can be curative, it spares 
many patients the need for further investigations. If unsuccessful, 
an abdominal binder may be helpful. If a leak can be identified, an 
autologous blood patch is usually curative. A blood patch is also 
effective for post-LP headache; in this setting, the location is empiri-
cally determined to be the site of the LP. In patients with intractable 
headache, oral theophylline is a useful alternative; however, its effect 
is less rapid than caffeine.
Raised CSF Pressure Headache  Raised CSF pressure is well rec-
ognized as a cause of headache. Brain imaging can often reveal 
the cause, such as a space-occupying lesion. NDPH due to raised 
CSF pressure can be the presenting symptom for patients with 
idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri) without 
visual problems, particularly when the fundi are normal. Persis-
tently raised intracranial pressure can trigger chronic migraine. 
These patients typically present with a history of generalized head-
ache that is present on waking and improves as the day goes on. It is 
generally worse with recumbency. Visual obscurations are frequent. 
The diagnosis is relatively straightforward when papilledema is 
present, but the possibility must be considered even in patients 
without funduscopic changes. Formal visual field testing should 
TABLE 13-4  Differential Diagnosis of New Daily Persistent Headache
PRIMARY
SECONDARY
Migrainous-type
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Featureless (tension-type)
Low cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) volume 
headache
 
Raised CSF pressure headache
 
Posttraumatic headachea
 
Chronic meningitis
aIncludes postinfectious forms.
FIGURE 13-1  Magnetic resonance image showing diffuse meningeal 
enhancement after gadolinium administration in a patient with low cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) volume headache.


================================================================================
Ch25 Dementia [Cardinal Manifestations - Overview]
Pages 198-202
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 198 ---

PART 2
Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases
152
through the globus pallidus and thalamus, and damage to these nodes 
can likewise reproduce the clinical syndrome associated with the cor-
responding cortical or striatal injuries.
■
■THE CAUSES OF DEMENTIA
The single strongest risk factor for dementia is increasing age. The prev-
alence of disabling memory loss increases with each decade for those 
aged >50 and is usually associated with the microscopic changes of AD 
at autopsy. Yet some centenarians have intact memory function and 
no evidence of clinically significant dementia. Whether dementia is an 
inevitable consequence of normal human aging remains controversial.
The many causes of dementia are listed in Table 25-1. The frequency 
of each condition depends on the age group under study, access of the 
group to medical care, country of origin, and perhaps racial or ethnic 
25
Dementia
William W. Seeley, Bruce L. Miller 
Dementia, a syndrome with many causes, affects >5 million people in 
the United States and results in a total annual health care cost in excess 
of $250 billion. Dementia is defined as an acquired deterioration in 
cognitive abilities that impairs the successful performance of activities 
of daily living. Episodic memory, the ability to recall events specific in 
time and place, is the cognitive function most commonly lost; 10% of 
persons aged >70 years and 20–40% of individuals aged >85 years have 
clinically identifiable memory loss. In addition to memory, dementia 
may erode other mental faculties, including language, visuospatial, 
praxis, calculation, judgment, and problem-solving abilities. Neurop-
sychiatric and social deficits also arise in many dementia syndromes, 
manifesting as depression, apathy, anxiety, hallucinations, delusions, 
agitation, insomnia, sleep disturbances, compulsions, or disinhibition. 
The clinical course may be slowly progressive, as in Alzheimer’s disease 
(AD); static, as in anoxic encephalopathy; or may fluctuate from day to 
day or minute to minute, as in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Most 
patients with AD, the most prevalent form of dementia, begin with 
episodic memory impairment, although in other dementias, such as 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD), memory loss is not typically a presenting 
feature. Focal cerebral disorders are discussed in Chap. 26 and illus-
trated in a video library in Chap. V2; detailed discussions of AD can 
be found in Chap. 423; FTD and related disorders in Chap. 424; vas-
cular dementia in Chap. 425; DLB in Chap. 426; Huntington’s disease 
(HD) in Chap. 428; and prion diseases in Chap. 430.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY OF THE DEMENTIAS
Dementia syndromes result from the disruption of specific large-scale 
neuronal networks; the location and severity of synaptic and neuronal 
loss combine to produce the clinical features (Chap. 26). Behavior, 
mood, and attention are modulated by ascending noradrenergic, sero-
tonergic, and dopaminergic pathways, whereas cholinergic signaling 
is critical for attention and memory functions. The dementias differ 
in the relative neurotransmitter deficit profiles; accordingly, accurate 
diagnosis guides effective pharmacologic therapy.
AD begins in the entorhinal region of the medial temporal lobe, 
spreads to the hippocampus, and then moves to lateral and posterior 
temporal and parietal neocortex, eventually causing a more wide-
spread degeneration. Vascular dementia is associated with focal damage 
in a variable patchwork of cortical and subcortical regions or white 
matter tracts that disconnect nodes within distributed networks. In 
keeping with its anatomy, AD typically presents with episodic memory 
loss accompanied later by aphasia, executive dysfunction, or naviga-
tional problems. In contrast, dementias that begin in frontal or subcor-
tical regions, such as FTD or HD, are less likely to begin with memory 
problems and more likely to present with difficulties with judgment, 
mood, executive control, movement, and behavior.
Lesions of frontal-striatal1 pathways produce specific and predict-
able effects on behavior. The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has con-
nections with a central band of the caudate nucleus. Lesions of either 
the caudate or dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, or their connecting white 
matter pathways, may result in executive dysfunction, manifesting 
as poor organization and planning, decreased cognitive flexibility, 
and impaired working memory. The lateral orbital frontal cortex con-
nects with the ventromedial caudate, and lesions of this system cause 
impulsiveness, distractibility, and disinhibition. The anterior cingulate 
cortex and adjacent medial prefrontal cortex project to the nucleus 
accumbens, and interruption of this system produces apathy, poverty 
of speech, emotional blunting, or even akinetic mutism. All corticos-
triatal systems also include topographically organized projections 
1The striatum comprises the caudate/putamen/nucleus accumbens.
TABLE 25-1  Differential Diagnosis of Dementia
Most Common Causes of Dementia
Alzheimer’s disease
Alcoholisma
Vascular dementia
PDD/LBD spectrum
  Multi-infarct
Drug/medication intoxicationa
  Diffuse white matter disease 
(Binswanger’s)
 
Less Common Causes of Dementia
Vitamin deficiencies
  Thiamine (B1): Wernicke’s 
encephalopathya
  B12 (subacute combined 
degeneration)a
  Nicotinic acid (pellagra)a
Endocrine and other organ failure
  Hypothyroidisma
  Adrenal insufficiency and Cushing’s 
syndromea
  Hypo- and hyperparathyroidisma
  Renal failurea
  Liver failurea
  Pulmonary failurea
Chronic infections
  HIV
  Neurosyphilisa
  Papovavirus (JC virus) (progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy)
  Tuberculosis, fungal, and protozoala
  Whipple’s diseasea
Head trauma and diffuse brain 
damage
  Chronic traumatic encephalopathy
  Chronic subdural hematomaa
  Postanoxia
  Postencephalitis
  Normal-pressure hydrocephalusa
Intracranial hypotension
Neoplastic
  Primary brain tumora
  Metastatic brain tumora
  Paraneoplastic/autoimmune limbic 
encephalitisa
Toxic disorders
  Drug, medication, and narcotic 
poisoninga
  Heavy metal intoxicationa
  Organic toxins
Psychiatric
  Depression (pseudodementia)a
  Schizophreniaa
  Conversion disordera
Degenerative disorders
  Huntington’s disease
  Multisystem atrophy
  Hereditary ataxias (some forms)
  Frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
spectrum
  Multiple sclerosis
  Adult Down’s syndrome with 
Alzheimer’s disease
  ALS-parkinsonism-dementia 
complex of Guam
  Prion (Creutzfeldt-Jakob and 
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker 
diseases)
Miscellaneous
  Sarcoidosisa
  Vasculitisa
  CADASIL, etc.
  Acute intermittent porphyriaa
  Recurrent nonconvulsive seizuresa
Additional conditions in children or 
adolescents
  Pantothenate kinase–associated 
neurodegeneration
  Subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis
  Metabolic disorders (e.g., 
Wilson’s and Leigh’s diseases, 
leukodystrophies, lipid storage 
diseases, mitochondrial mutations)
aPotentially reversible dementia.
Abbreviations: ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; CADASIL, cerebral autosomal 
dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; LBD, 
Lewy body disease; PDD, Parkinson’s disease dementia.


--- PDF PAGE 199 ---

CHAPTER 25
Dementia
153
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Dementias
Three major issues should be kept at the forefront: (1) What is the 
best fit for a clinical diagnosis? (2) What component of the demen-
tia syndrome is treatable or reversible? (3) Can the physician help 
to alleviate the burden on caregivers? A broad overview of the 
approach to dementia is shown in Table 25-3. The major degenera-
tive dementias can usually be distinguished by the initial symptoms; 
neuropsychological, neuropsychiatric, and neurologic findings; and 
neuroimaging features (Table 25-4).
HISTORY
The history should concentrate on the onset, duration, and tempo of 
progression. An acute or subacute onset of confusion may be due to 
delirium (Chap. 24) and should trigger the search for intoxication, 
infection, or metabolic derangement. An elderly person with slowly 
progressive memory loss over several years is likely to suffer from 
AD. Nearly 75% of patients with AD begin with memory symp-
toms, but other early symptoms include difficulty with managing 
money, driving, shopping, following instructions, finding words, 
or navigating. Personality change, disinhibition, and weight gain 
or compulsive eating suggest FTD, not AD. FTD is also suggested 
by prominent apathy, compulsivity, loss of empathy for others, or 
progressive loss of speech fluency or single-word comprehension 
and by a relative sparing of memory and visuospatial abilities. 
The diagnosis of DLB is suggested by early visual hallucinations; 
parkinsonism; proneness to delirium or sensitivity to psychoactive 
medications; rapid eye movement (REM) behavior disorder (RBD; 
the loss of skeletal muscle paralysis during dreaming); or Capgras 
syndrome, the delusion that a familiar person has been replaced by 
an impostor.
A history of stroke with irregular stepwise progression suggests 
vascular dementia. Vascular dementia is also commonly seen in 
the setting of hypertension, atrial fibrillation, peripheral vascular 
disease, and diabetes. In patients suffering from cerebrovascular 
disease, it can be difficult to determine whether the dementia is due 
to AD, vascular disease, or a mixture of the two because many of 
the risk factors for vascular dementia, including diabetes, high cho-
lesterol, elevated homocysteine, and low exercise, are also putative 
risk factors for AD. Moreover, many patients with a major vascular 
contribution to their dementia lack a history of stepwise decline. 
Rapid progression with motor rigidity and myoclonus suggests CJD 
(Chap. 430). Seizures may indicate strokes or neoplasm but also 
occur in AD, particularly early-age-of-onset AD. Gait disturbance 
is common in vascular dementia, PD/DLB, or NPH. A history of 
high-risk sexual behaviors or intravenous drug use should trigger a 
search for central nervous system (CNS) infection, especially HIV or 
syphilis. A history of recurrent head trauma could indicate chronic 
subdural hematoma, chronic traumatic encephalopathy (a progres-
sive dementia best characterized in contact sport athletes such as 
TABLE 25-2  The Molecular Basis for Degenerative Dementia
DEMENTIA
MOLECULAR BASIS
CAUSAL GENES (CHROMOSOME)
SUSCEPTIBILITY GENES
PATHOLOGIC FINDINGS
AD
Aβ/tau
APP (21), PS-1 (14), PS-2 (1) (<2% carry 
these mutations, most often in PS-1)
Apo ε4 (19)
Amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and 
neuropil threads
FTD
Tau
MAPT exon and intron mutations (17)  
(about 10% of familial cases)
H1 MAPT haplotype
Tau neuronal and glial inclusions varying in 
morphology and distribution
 
TDP-43
GRN (10% of familial cases), C9ORF72 
(20–30% of familial cases), rare VCP, very 
rare TARDBP, TBK1, TIA1
 
TDP-43 neuronal and glial inclusions varying in 
morphology and distribution
 
FUS
Very rare FUS
 
FUS neuronal and glial inclusions varying in 
morphology and distribution
DLB
α-Synuclein
Very rare SNCA (4)
Unknown
α-Synuclein neuronal inclusions (Lewy bodies)
CJD
PrPSC
PRNP (20) (up to 15% of patients carry 
these dominant mutations)
Codon 129 homozygosity for 
methionine or valine
PrPSC deposition, panlaminar spongiosis
Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; CJD, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; DLB, dementia with Lewy bodies; FTD, frontotemporal dementia.
background. AD is the most common cause of dementia in Western 
countries, accounting for more than half of all patients. Vascular dis-
ease is considered the second most frequent cause for dementia and 
is particularly common in elderly patients or populations with limited 
access to medical care, where vascular risk factors are undertreated. 
Often, vascular brain injury is mixed with neurodegenerative disor-
ders, making it difficult, even for the neuropathologist, to estimate the 
contribution of cerebrovascular disease to the cognitive disorder in 
an individual patient. Dementias associated with Parkinson’s disease 
(PD) are common and may develop years after onset of a parkinsonian 
disorder, as seen with PD-related dementia (PDD), or can occur con-
currently with or preceding the motor syndrome, as in DLB. A mixed 
pathology is common, especially in very old individuals. In patients 
aged <65, FTD rivals AD as the most common cause of dementia. 
Chronic intoxications, including those resulting from alcohol and pre-
scription drugs, are an important and often treatable cause of demen-
tia. Other disorders listed in Table 25-1 are uncommon but important 
because many are reversible. The classification of dementing illnesses 
into reversible and irreversible disorders is a useful approach to differ-
ential diagnosis. When effective treatments for the neurodegenerative 
conditions emerge, this dichotomy will become obsolete.
In a study of 1000 persons attending a memory disorders clinic, 
19% had a potentially reversible cause of the cognitive impairment 
and 23% had a potentially reversible concomitant condition that may 
have contributed to the patient’s impairment. The three most common 
potentially reversible diagnoses were depression, normal pressure 
hydrocephalus (NPH), and alcohol dependence; medication side 
effects are also common and should be considered in every patient 
(Table 25-1).
Subtle cumulative decline in episodic memory is a common part of 
aging. This frustrating experience, often the source of jokes and humor, 
is often referred to as benign forgetfulness of the elderly. Benign means that 
it is not so progressive or serious that it impairs reasonably successful 
and productive daily functioning, although the distinction between 
benign and more significant memory loss can be difficult to make. At 
age 85, the average person is able to learn and recall approximately 
one-half of the items (e.g., words on a list) that he or she could at age 
18. A measurable cognitive problem that does not seriously disrupt 
daily activities is often referred to as mild cognitive impairment (MCI). 
Factors that predict progression from MCI to an AD dementia include 
a prominent memory deficit, family history of dementia, presence of 
an apolipoprotein ε4 (Apo ε4) allele, small hippocampal volumes, an 
AD-like signature of cortical atrophy, low cerebrospinal fluid Aβ, and 
elevated tau or evidence of brain amyloid deposition on positron emis-
sion tomography (PET) imaging.
The major degenerative dementias include AD, DLB, FTD and 
related disorders, HD, and prion diseases, including Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease (CJD). These disorders are all associated with the abnormal 
aggregation of a specific protein: Aβ42 and tau in AD; α-synuclein in 
DLB; tau, TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43), or fused in 
sarcoma (FUS) in FTD; huntingtin in HD; and misfolded prion protein 
(PrPsc) in CJD (Table 25-2).


--- PDF PAGE 200 ---

PART 2
Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases
154
TABLE 25-3  Evaluation of the Patient with Dementia
ROUTINE EVALUATION
OPTIONAL FOCUSED TESTS
OCCASIONALLY 
HELPFUL TESTS
History
Psychometric testing
EEG
Physical examination
Chest x-ray
Parathyroid function
Laboratory tests
Lumbar puncture
Adrenal function
  Thyroid function (TSH)
Liver function
Urine heavy metals
  Vitamin B12
  Complete blood count
  Electrolytes
  CT/MRI
 
 
Renal function
Urine toxin screen
HIV
Apolipoprotein E
RPR or VDRL
 
RBC sedimentation 
rate
Angiogram
Brain biopsy
SPECT
PET
Lab screen for 
autoantibodies
Diagnostic Categories
REVERSIBLE CAUSES
IRREVERSIBLE/
DEGENERATIVE 
DEMENTIAS
PSYCHIATRIC 
DISORDERS
Examples
Examples
Depression
  Hypothyroidism
  Alzheimer’s
Schizophrenia
  Thiamine deficiency
  Frontotemporal dementia
Conversion reaction
  Vitamin B12 deficiency
  Huntington’s
 
  Normal-pressure 
hydrocephalus
  Dementia with Lewy 
bodies
 
  Subdural hematoma
  Vascular
 
  Chronic infection
  Leukoencephalopathies
 
  Brain tumor
  Parkinson’s
 
  Drug intoxication
 
 
  Autoimmune 
encephalopathy
 
 
Associated Treatable Conditions
 
Depression
Agitation
 
Seizures
Caregiver “burnout”
 
Insomnia
Drug side effects
Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; EEG, electroencephalogram; MRI, 
magnetic resonance imaging; PET, positron emission tomography; RBC, red blood 
cell; RPR, rapid plasma reagin (test); SPECT, single-photon emission computed 
tomography; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research 
Laboratory (test for syphilis).
TABLE 25-4  Clinical Differentiation of the Major Dementias
DISEASE
FIRST SYMPTOM
MENTAL STATUS
NEUROPSYCHIATRY
NEUROLOGY
IMAGING
AD
Memory loss
Episodic memory loss
Irritability, anxiety, 
depression
Initially normal
Entorhinal cortex and 
hippocampal atrophy
FTD
Apathy; poor judgment/
insight, speech/language; 
hyperorality
Frontal/executive and/or 
language; spares drawing
Apathy, disinhibition, 
overeating, compulsivity
May have vertical gaze palsy, 
axial rigidity, dystonia, alien 
hand, or MND
Frontal, insular, and/or temporal 
atrophy; usually spares 
posterior parietal lobe
DLB
Visual hallucinations, REM 
sleep behavior disorder, 
delirium, Capgras syndrome, 
parkinsonism
Drawing and frontal/
executive; spares 
memory; delirium-prone
Visual hallucinations, 
depression, sleep 
disorder, delusions
Parkinsonism
Posterior parietal atrophy; 
hippocampi larger than in AD
CJD
Dementia, mood, anxiety, 
movement disorders
Variable, frontal/
executive, focal cortical, 
memory
Depression, anxiety, 
psychosis in some
Myoclonus, rigidity, 
parkinsonism
Cortical ribboning and 
basal ganglia or thalamus 
hyperintensity on diffusion/
FLAIR MRI
Vascular
Often but not always 
sudden; variable; apathy, 
falls, focal weakness
Frontal/executive, 
cognitive slowing; can 
spare memory
Apathy, delusions,  
anxiety
Usually motor slowing, 
spasticity; can be normal
Cortical and/or subcortical 
infarctions, confluent white 
matter disease
Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; CBD, cortical basal degeneration; CJD, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; DLB, dementia with Lewy bodies; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated 
inversion recovery; FTD, frontotemporal dementia; MND, motor neuron disease; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PSP, progressive supranuclear palsy; REM, rapid eye 
movement.
for paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis, especially in a long-term 
smoker or other patients at risk for cancer. Related autoimmune 
conditions, such as voltage-gated potassium channel (VGKC)- 
or N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-receptor antibody-mediated 
encephalopathy, can present with a similar tempo and imaging 
signature with or without characteristic motor manifestations such 
as myokymia (anti-VGKC) and faciobrachial dystonic seizures (anti- 
NMDA) (Chap. 90). Alcohol abuse creates risk for malnutrition and 
thiamine deficiency. Veganism, bowel irradiation, an autoimmune 
diathesis, a remote history of gastric surgery, and chronic antihista-
mine therapy for dyspepsia or gastroesophageal reflux predispose 
to B12 deficiency. Certain occupations, such as working in a battery 
or chemical factory, might indicate heavy metal intoxication. Careful 
review of medication intake, especially for sedatives and analgesics, 
may raise the issue of chronic drug intoxication. An autosomal 
dominant family history is found in HD and in familial forms of 
AD, FTD, DLB, or prion disorders. A history of mood disorders, the 
recent death of a loved one, or depressive signs, such as insomnia 
or weight loss, raise the possibility of depression-related cognitive 
impairments.
PHYSICAL AND NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION
A thorough general and neurologic examination is essential to doc-
ument dementia, to look for other signs of nervous system involve-
ment, and to search for clues suggesting a systemic disease that 
might be responsible for the cognitive disorder. Typical AD spares 
motor systems until later in the course. In contrast, FTD patients 
often develop axial rigidity, supranuclear gaze palsy, or a motor 
neuron disease reminiscent of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). In 
DLB, the initial symptoms may include the new onset of a parkin-
sonian syndrome (resting tremor, cogwheel rigidity, bradykinesia, 
festinating gait), but DLB often starts with visual hallucinations or 
dementia. Symptoms referable to the lower brainstem (RBD, gastro-
intestinal or autonomic problems) may arise years or even decades 
before parkinsonism or dementia. Corticobasal syndrome (CBS) 
features asymmetric akinesia and rigidity, dystonia, myoclonus, 
alien limb phenomena, pyramidal signs, and prefrontal deficits such 
as nonfluent aphasia with or without motor speech impairment, 
executive dysfunction, apraxia, or a behavioral disorder. Progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) is associated with unexplained falls, axial 
rigidity, dysphagia, and vertical gaze deficits. CJD is suggested by 
the presence of diffuse rigidity, an akinetic-mute state, and promi-
nent, often startle-sensitive myoclonus.
Hemiparesis or other focal neurologic deficits suggest vascular 
dementia or brain tumor. Dementia with a myelopathy and periph-
eral neuropathy suggests vitamin B12 deficiency. Peripheral neur-
opathy could also indicate another vitamin deficiency, heavy metal 
boxers and American football players), intracranial hypotension, or 
NPH. Subacute onset of severe amnesia and psychosis with mesial 
temporal T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperin-
tensities on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should raise concern 


--- PDF PAGE 201 ---

CHAPTER 25
Dementia
155
FIGURE 25-1  Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Axial T1-weighted magnetic resonance 
images of a healthy 71-year-old (A) and a 64-year-old with AD (C). Note the reduction 
in medial temporal lobe volume in the patient with AD. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron 
emission tomography scans of the same individuals (B and D) demonstrate 
reduced glucose metabolism in the posterior temporoparietal regions bilaterally 
in AD, a typical finding in this condition. HC, healthy control. (Images courtesy of 
Gil Rabinovici, University of California, San Francisco and William Jagust, University 
of California, Berkeley.)
intoxication, thyroid dysfunction, Lyme disease, or vasculitis. Dry, 
cool skin, hair loss, and bradycardia suggest hypothyroidism. Fluc-
tuating confusion associated with repetitive stereotyped movements 
may indicate ongoing limbic, temporal, or frontal seizures. In the 
elderly, hearing impairment or visual loss may produce confusion and 
disorientation misinterpreted as dementia. Profound bilateral sensori-
neural hearing loss in a younger patient with short stature or myopa-
thy, however, should raise concern for a mitochondrial disorder.
COGNITIVE AND NEUROPSYCHIATRIC EXAMINATION
Brief screening tools such as the Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE), the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA), and Cogni-
stat can be used to capture dementia and follow progression. None 
of these tests is highly sensitive to early-stage dementia or discrimi-
nates between dementia syndromes. The MMSE is a 30-point test of 
cognitive function, with each correct answer being scored as 1 point. 
It includes tests in the areas of: orientation (e.g., identify season/
date/month/year/floor/hospital/town/state/country); 
registra-
tion (e.g., name and restate 3 objects); recall (e.g., remember the 
same three objects 5 min later); and language (e.g., name pencil and 
watch; repeat “no ifs ands or buts”; follow a 3-step command; obey a 
written command; and write a sentence and copy a design). In most 
patients with MCI and some with clinically apparent AD, bedside 
screening tests may be normal, and a more challenging and compre-
hensive set of neuropsychological tests will be required. When the 
etiology for the dementia syndrome remains in doubt, a specially 
tailored evaluation should be performed that includes tasks of work-
ing and episodic memory, executive function, language, and visu-
ospatial and perceptual abilities. In AD, the early deficits involve 
episodic memory, category generation (“name as many animals as 
you can in 1 minute”), and visuoconstructive ability. Usually deficits 
in verbal or visual episodic memory are the first neuropsychological 
abnormalities detected, and tasks that require the patient to recall 
a long list of words or a series of pictures after a predetermined 
delay will demonstrate deficits in most patients. In FTD, the earliest 
deficits on cognitive testing involve executive control or language 
(speech or naming) function, but some patients lack either finding 
despite profound social-emotional deficits. PDD or DLB patients 
have more severe deficits in visuospatial function but do better 
on episodic memory tasks than patients with AD. Patients with 
vascular dementia often demonstrate a mixture of executive control 
and visuospatial deficits, with prominent psychomotor slowing. In 
delirium, the most prominent deficits involve attention, working 
memory, and executive function, making the assessment of other 
cognitive domains challenging and often uninformative.
A functional assessment should also be performed to help the 
physician determine the day-to-day impact of the disorder on the 
patient’s memory, community affairs, hobbies, judgment, dressing, 
and eating. Knowledge of the patient’s functional abilities will help 
the clinician and the family to organize a therapeutic approach.
Neuropsychiatric assessment is important for diagnosis, progno-
sis, and treatment. In the early stages of AD, mild depressive features, 
social withdrawal, and irritability or anxiety are the most prominent 
psychiatric changes, but patients often maintain core social graces 
into the middle or late stages, when delusions, agitation, and sleep 
disturbance may emerge. In FTD, dramatic personality change with 
apathy, overeating, compulsions, disinhibition, euphoria, and loss 
of empathy are early and common. DLB is associated with visual 
hallucinations, delusions related to person or place identity, RBD, 
and excessive daytime sleepiness. Dramatic fluctuations occur not 
only in cognition but also in arousal. Vascular dementia can present 
with psychiatric symptoms such as depression, anxiety, delusions, 
disinhibition, or apathy.
LABORATORY TESTS
The choice of laboratory tests in the evaluation of dementia is com-
plex and should be tailored to the individual patient. The physician 
must take measures to avoid missing a reversible or treatable cause, 
yet no single treatable etiology is common; thus, a screen must use 
multiple tests, each of which has a low yield. Cost/benefit ratios 
are difficult to assess, and many laboratory screening algorithms 
for dementia discourage multiple tests. Nevertheless, even a test 
with only a 1–2% positive rate is worth undertaking if the alterna-
tive is missing a treatable cause of dementia. Table 25-3 lists most 
screening tests for dementia. The American Academy of Neurology 
recommends the routine measurement of a complete blood count, 
electrolytes, renal and thyroid function, a vitamin B12 level, and a 
neuroimaging study (computed tomography [CT] or MRI).
Neuroimaging studies, especially MRI, help to rule out primary 
and metastatic neoplasms, locate areas of infarction or inflamma-
tion, detect subdural hematomas, and suggest NPH or diffuse white 
matter disease. They also help to establish a regional pattern of atro-
phy. Support for the diagnosis of AD includes hippocampal atrophy 
in addition to posterior-predominant cortical atrophy (Fig. 25-1). 
Focal frontal, insular, and/or anterior temporal atrophy suggests 
FTD (Chap. 424). DLB often features less prominent atrophy, with 
greater involvement of amygdala than hippocampus. In CJD, mag-
netic resonance (MR) diffusion-weighted imaging reveals restricted 
diffusion within the cortical ribbon and/or basal ganglia in most 
patients. Extensive multifocal white matter abnormalities suggest a 
vascular etiology (Fig. 25-2). Communicating hydrocephalus with 
FIGURE 25-2  Diffuse white matter disease. Axial fluid-attenuated inversion 
recovery (FLAIR) magnetic resonance image through the lateral ventricles reveals 
multiple areas of hyperintensity (arrows) involving the periventricular white matter 
as well as the corona radiata and striatum. Although seen in some individuals 
with normal cognition, this appearance is more pronounced in patients with 
dementia of a vascular etiology.


--- PDF PAGE 202 ---

PART 2
Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases
156
FIGURE 25-3  Normal-pressure hydrocephalus. A. Sagittal T1-weighted magnetic 
resonance image (MRI) demonstrates dilation of the lateral ventricle and stretching 
of the corpus callosum (arrows), depression of the floor of the third ventricle 
(single arrowhead), and enlargement of the aqueduct (double arrowheads). 
Note the diffuse dilation of the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles with a patent 
aqueduct, typical of communicating hydrocephalus. B. Axial T2-weighted MRIs 
demonstrate dilation of the lateral ventricles. This patient underwent successful 
ventriculoperitoneal shunting.
vertex effacement (crowding of dorsal convexity gyri/sulci), gaping 
Sylvian fissures despite minimal cortical atrophy, and additional 
features shown in Fig. 25-3 suggest NPH. Single-photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT) and PET scanning show tempo-
ral-parietal hypoperfusion or hypometabolism in AD and fronto-
temporal deficits in FTD, but these changes often reflect atrophy 
and can therefore be detected with MRI alone in many patients. 
Recently, amyloid imaging has shown promise for the diagnosis 
of AD, and Pittsburgh Compound-B (PiB) (not available outside of 
research settings) and 18F-AV-45 (florbetapir; approved by the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration in 2013) are reliable radioligands 
for detecting brain amyloid associated with amyloid angiopathy or 
neuritic plaques of AD (Fig. 25-4). Because these abnormalities can 
be seen in cognitively normal older persons (~25% of individuals at 
age 65), however, amyloid imaging may also detect preclinical or 
incidental AD in patients lacking an AD-like dementia syndrome. 
Currently, the main clinical value of amyloid imaging is to exclude 
AD as the likely cause of dementia in patients who have negative 
scans. Once disease-modifying therapies become available, use of 
these biomarkers may help to identify treatment candidates before 
irreversible brain injury has occurred. In the meantime, the prog-
nostic value of detecting brain amyloid in an asymptomatic elder 
remains a topic of vigorous investigation. Similarly, MRI perfusion 
and structural/functional connectivity methods are being explored 
as potential treatment-monitoring strategies.
Lumbar puncture need not be done routinely in the evaluation of 
dementia, but it is indicated when CNS infection or inflammation 
FIGURE 25-4  Positron emission tomography (PET) images obtained with the amyloid-imaging agent Pittsburgh Compound-B ([11C]PIB) in a normal control (left); 
three different patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI; center); and a patient with mild Alzheimer’s disease (AD; right). Some MCI patients have control-like levels 
of amyloid, some have AD-like levels of amyloid, and some have intermediate levels. (Images courtesy of William Klunk and Chester Mathis, University of Pittsburgh.)
are credible diagnostic possibilities. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels 
of Aβ42 and tau proteins show differing patterns with the various 
dementias, and the presence of low Aβ42 and mildly elevated CSF 
tau is highly suggestive of AD. The routine use of lumbar puncture 
in the diagnosis of dementia is debated, but the sensitivity and 
specificity of AD diagnostic measures are not yet high enough to 
warrant routine use. Formal psychometric testing helps to document 
the severity of cognitive disturbance, suggest psychogenic causes, 
and provide a more formal method for following the disease course. 
Electroencephalogram (EEG) is not routinely used but can help 
to suggest CJD (repetitive bursts of diffuse high-amplitude sharp 
waves, or “periodic complexes”) or an underlying nonconvulsive 
seizure disorder (epileptiform discharges). Brain biopsy (including 
meninges) is not advised except to diagnose vasculitis, potentially 
treatable neoplasms, or unusual infections when the diagnosis is 
uncertain. Systemic disorders with CNS manifestations, such as 
sarcoidosis, can usually be confirmed through biopsy of lymph 
node or solid organ rather than brain. MR angiography should be 
considered when cerebral vasculitis or cerebral venous thrombosis 
is a possible cause of the dementia.
■
■GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
Vascular dementia (Chap. 425) is more common in Asian coun-
tries, due to the higher prevalence of intracranial atherosclerosis. 
Rates of vascular dementia are also on the rise in developing 
countries as vascular risk factors such as hypertension, hypercholester-
olemia, and diabetes mellitus become more widespread. CNS infections, 
particularly with HIV (and associated opportunistic infections), syphilis, 
and tuberculosis, likewise represent major contributors to dementia in the 
developing world. Isolated populations have also contributed to our 
understanding of neurodegenerative dementia. Kuru, the cannibalism- 
associated rapidly progressive dementia seen in tribal New Guinea, 
played a role in the discovery of human prion disease. Amyotrophic lat-
eral sclerosis-parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam (or, Lytico-Bodig 
disease) is a poly-proteinopathy, often with tau, TDP-43, and alpha- 
synuclein aggregation. The root cause of the disease remains uncertain, 
but its incidence has declined sharply over the past 60 years.
TREATMENT
Dementia
The major goals of dementia management are to treat reversible 
causes and to provide comfort and support to the patient and care-
givers. Treatment of underlying causes includes thyroid replacement 
for hypothyroidism; vitamin therapy for thiamine or B12 deficiency 
or for elevated serum homocysteine; antimicrobials for opportu-
nistic infections or antiretrovirals for HIV; ventricular shunting for 
NPH; or appropriate surgical, radiation, and/or chemotherapeu-
tic treatment for CNS neoplasms. Removal of cognition-impairing 


================================================================================
Ch26 Aphasia Memory Loss and Other Cerebral Disorders
Pages 203-211
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 203 ---

CHAPTER 26
Aphasia, Memory Loss, Hemispatial Neglect, Frontal Syndromes, and Other Cerebral Disorders  
157
drugs or medications is frequently useful. If the patient’s cognitive 
complaints stem from a psychiatric disorder, vigorous treatment of 
this condition should seek to eliminate the cognitive complaint or 
confirm that it persists despite adequate resolution of the mood or 
anxiety symptoms. Patients with degenerative diseases may also 
be depressed or anxious, and those aspects of their condition often 
respond to therapy. Antidepressants, such as selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors (SNRIs) (Chap. 443), which feature anxiolytic properties 
but few cognitive side effects, provide the mainstay of treatment 
when necessary. Anticonvulsants are used to control seizures. Leve-
tiracetam may be particularly useful, but there have as yet been no 
randomized trials for treatment of AD-associated seizures.
Agitation, hallucinations, delusions, and confusion are difficult 
to treat. These behavioral problems represent major causes for 
nursing home placement and institutionalization. Before treating 
these behaviors with medications, the clinician should aggressively 
seek out modifiable environmental or metabolic factors. Hunger, 
lack of exercise, toothache, constipation, urinary tract or respiratory 
infection, electrolyte imbalance, and drug toxicity all represent easily 
correctable causes that can be remedied without psychoactive drugs. 
Drugs such as phenothiazines and benzodiazepines may ameliorate 
the behavior problems but have untoward side effects such as seda-
tion, rigidity, dyskinesia, and occasionally paradoxical disinhibition 
(benzodiazepines). Despite their unfavorable side effect profile, 
second-generation antipsychotics such as quetiapine (starting dose, 
12.5–25 mg daily) can be used for patients with agitation, aggres-
sion, and psychosis, although the risk profile for these compounds 
is significant. When patients do not respond to treatment, it is usu-
ally a mistake to advance to higher doses or to use anticholinergic 
drugs or sedatives (such as barbiturates or benzodiazepines). It is 
important to recognize and treat depression; treatment can begin 
with a low dose of an SSRI (e.g., escitalopram, starting dose 5 mg 
daily, target dose 5–10 mg daily) while monitoring for efficacy and 
toxicity. Sometimes apathy, visual hallucinations, depression, and 
other psychiatric symptoms respond to the cholinesterase inhibitors, 
especially in DLB, obviating the need for other more toxic therapies.
Cholinesterase inhibitors are being used to treat AD (donepezil, 
rivastigmine, galantamine) and PDD (rivastigmine). Recent work 
has focused on developing antibodies against Aβ42 as a treatment 
for AD. Although the initial randomized controlled trials failed, 
there was some evidence for efficacy in the mildest patient groups. 
Therefore, researchers have begun to focus on patients with very 
mild disease and asymptomatic individuals at risk for AD, such as 
those who carry autosomal dominantly inherited genetic mutations 
or healthy elders with CSF or amyloid imaging biomarker evidence 
supporting presymptomatic AD. Memantine proves useful when 
treating some patients with moderate to severe AD; its major benefit 
relates to decreasing caregiver burden, most likely by decreasing 
resistance to dressing and grooming support. In moderate to severe 
AD, the combination of memantine and a cholinesterase inhibitor 
delayed nursing home placement in several studies, although other 
studies have not supported the efficacy of adding memantine to the 
regimen.
A proactive strategy has been shown to reduce the occurrence 
of delirium in hospitalized patients. This strategy includes fre-
quent orientation, cognitive activities, sleep-enhancement measures, 
vision and hearing aids, and correction of dehydration.
Nondrug behavior therapy has an important place in dementia 
management. The primary goals are to make the patient’s life com-
fortable, uncomplicated, and safe. Preparing lists, schedules, calen-
dars, and labels can be helpful in the early stages. It is also useful 
to stress familiar routines, walks, and simple physical exercises. For 
many demented patients, memory for events is worse than their 
ability to carry out routine activities, and they may still be able to 
take part in activities such as walking, bowling, dancing, singing, 
bingo, and golf. Demented patients often object to losing control 
over familiar tasks such as driving, cooking, and handling finances. 
Attempts to help or take over may be greeted with complaints, 
depression, or anger. Hostile responses on the part of the caregiver 
are counterproductive and sometimes even harmful. Reassurance, 
distraction, and calm positive statements are more productive in 
this setting. Eventually, tasks such as finances and driving must be 
assumed by others, and the patient will conform and adjust. Safety 
is an important issue that includes not only driving but controlling 
the kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area environments, as well as 
stairways. These areas need to be monitored, supervised, and made 
as safe as possible. A move to a retirement complex, assisted-living 
center, or nursing home can initially increase confusion and agita-
tion. Repeated reassurance, reorientation, and careful introduction 
to the new personnel will help to smooth the process. Providing 
activities that are known to be enjoyable to the patient can be of 
considerable benefit.
The clinician must pay special attention to frustration and depres-
sion among family members and caregivers. Caregiver guilt and 
burnout are common. Family members often feel overwhelmed and 
helpless and may vent their frustrations on the patient, each other, 
and health care providers. Caregivers should be encouraged to take 
advantage of day-care facilities and respite services. Education and 
counseling about dementia are important. Local and national sup-
port groups, such as the Alzheimer’s Association (www.alz.org), can 
provide considerable help.
■
■FURTHER READING
Barton C et al: Non-pharmacological management of behavioral 
symptoms in frontotemporal and other dementias. Curr Neurol Neu-
rosci Rep 16:14, 2016.
Griem J et al: Psychologic/functional forms of memory disorder. 
Handb Clin Neurol 139:407, 2017.
The cerebral cortex of the human brain contains ~20 billion neurons 
spread over an area of 2.5 m2. The primary sensory and motor areas 
constitute 10% of the cerebral cortex. The rest is subsumed by modality- 
selective, heteromodal, paralimbic, and limbic areas collectively known 
as the association cortex (Fig. 26-1). The association cortex mediates 
the integrative processes that subserve cognition, emotion, and com-
portment. A systematic testing of these mental functions is necessary 
for the effective clinical assessment of the association cortex and its 
diseases. According to current thinking, there are no centers for “hear-
ing words,” “perceiving space,” or “storing memories.” Cognitive 
and behavioral functions (domains) are coordinated by intersecting 
large-scale neural networks that contain interconnected cortical and 
subcortical components. Five anatomically defined large-scale networks 
are most relevant to clinical practice: (1) a left-dominant perisylvian 
network for language, (2) a right-dominant parietofrontal network 
for spatial orientation, (3) an occipitotemporal network for face and 
object recognition, (4) a limbic network for explicit episodic memory, 
and (5) a prefrontal network for the executive control of cognition and 
comportment. Investigations based on functional imaging have also 
identified a default mode network, which becomes activated when the 
person is not engaged in a specific task requiring attention to external 
events. The clinical consequences of damage to this network are not 
yet fully defined.
26
Aphasia, Memory Loss, 
Hemispatial Neglect,  
Frontal Syndromes, and  
Other Cerebral Disorders
M.-Marsel Mesulam 


--- PDF PAGE 204 ---

PART 2
Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases
158
THE LEFT PERISYLVIAN NETWORK FOR 
LANGUAGE AND APHASIAS
The production and comprehension of words and sentences is depen-
dent on the integrity of a distributed network located along the peri-
sylvian region of the language-dominant (usually left) hemisphere. 
One hub, situated in the inferior frontal gyrus, is known as Broca’s 
area. Damage to this region impairs fluency of verbal output and the 
grammatical structure of sentences. The location of a second hub, 
critical for language comprehension, is less clearly settled. Accounts 
of patients with focal cerebrovascular lesions identified Wernicke’s area, 
located at the parietotemporal junction, as a critical hub for word and 
sentence comprehension. Occlusive or embolic strokes involving this 
area interfere with the ability to understand spoken or written lan-
guage as well as the ability to express thoughts through meaningful 
words and statements. However, investigations of patients with the 
neurodegenerative syndrome of primary progressive aphasia (PPA) 
have shown that sentence comprehension is a widely distributed fac-
ulty jointly subserved by Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas, and that the 
areas critical for word comprehension are more closely associated with 
the anterior temporal lobe rather than Wernicke’s area. All components 
of the language network are interconnected with each other and with 
surrounding parts of the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes. Damage 
to this network gives rise to language impairments known as aphasia. 
Aphasia should be diagnosed only when there are deficits in the formal 
aspects of language, such as word finding, word choice, comprehen-
sion, spelling, or grammar. Dysarthria, apraxia of speech and mutism 
do not by themselves lead to a diagnosis of aphasia. In ~90% of right-
handers and 60% of left-handers, aphasia occurs only after lesions of 
the left hemisphere.
■
■CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The clinical examination of language should include the assessment 
of naming, spontaneous speech, comprehension, repetition, reading, 
and writing. A deficit of naming (anomia) is the single most common 
finding in aphasic patients. When asked to name a common object, 
the patient may fail to come up with the appropriate word, may 
provide a circumlocutious description of the object (“the thing for 
writing”), or may come up with the wrong word (paraphasia). If the 
patient offers an incorrect but related word (“pen” for “pencil”), the 
naming error is known as a semantic paraphasia; if the word approxi-
mates the correct answer but is phonetically inaccurate (“plentil” for 
“pencil”), it is known as a phonemic paraphasia. In most anomias, the 
patient cannot retrieve the appropriate name when shown an object 
but can point to the appropriate object when the name is provided by 
the examiner. This is known as a one-way (or retrieval-based) naming 
deficit. A two-way (comprehension-based or semantic) naming deficit 
exists if the patient can neither provide nor recognize the correct name. 
Spontaneous speech is described as “fluent” if it maintains appropriate 
output volume, phrase length, and melody or as “nonfluent” if it is 
sparse and halting and average utterance length is below four words. 
The examiner also should note the integrity of grammar as manifested 
by word order (syntax), tenses, suffixes, prefixes, plurals, and posses-
sives. Comprehension can be tested by assessing the patient’s ability to 
follow conversation, asking yes-no questions (“Can a dog fly?” “Does 
it snow in summer?”), asking the patient to point to appropriate objects 
(“Where is the source of illumination in this room?”), or asking for 
verbal definitions of single words. Repetition is assessed by asking the 
patient to repeat single words, short sentences, or strings of words such 
as “No ifs, ands, or buts.” The testing of repetition with tongue twisters 
such as “hippopotamus” and “Irish constabulary” provides a better 
assessment of dysarthria and palilalia than of aphasia. It is important 
to make sure that the number of words does not exceed the patient’s 
attention span. Otherwise, the failure of repetition becomes a reflection 
of the narrowed attention span (auditory working memory) rather than 
an indication of an aphasic deficit caused by dysfunction of a hypo-
thetical phonological loop in the language network. Reading should be 
assessed for deficits in reading aloud as well as comprehension. Alexia 
describes an inability to either read aloud or comprehend written 
words and sentences; agraphia (or dysgraphia) is used to describe an 
acquired deficit in spelling.
Aphasias can arise acutely in cerebrovascular accidents (CVAs) or 
gradually in neurodegenerative diseases. In CVAs damage encom-
passes cerebral cortex as well as deep white matter pathways inter-
connecting otherwise unaffected cortical areas. The syndromes listed 
in Table 26-1 are most applicable to this group, where gray matter 
and white matter at the lesion site are abruptly and jointly destroyed. 
Progressive neurodegenerative diseases can have cellular, laminar, and 
regional specificity for the cerebral cortex, giving rise to a different set 
of aphasias that will be described separately.
Wernicke’s Aphasia  Comprehension is impaired for spoken 
and written words and sentences. Language output is fluent but is 
highly paraphasic and circumlocutious. Paraphasic errors may lead to 
strings of neologisms, which lead to “jargon aphasia.” Speech contains 
few substantive nouns. The output is therefore voluminous but unin-
formative. For example, a patient attempts to describe how his wife 
accidentally threw away something important, perhaps his dentures: 
“We don’t need it anymore, she says. And with it when that was down-
stairs was my teeth-tick … a … den … dentith … my dentist. And they 
FIGURE 26-1  Lateral (top) and medial (bottom) views of the cerebral 
hemispheres. The numbers refer to the Brodmann cyto-architectonic 
designations. Area 17 corresponds to the primary visual cortex, 41–42 to the 
primary auditory cortex, 1–3 to the primary somatosensory cortex, and 4 to the 
primary motor cortex. The rest of the cerebral cortex contains association areas. 
AG, angular gyrus; B, Broca’s area; CC, corpus callosum; CG, cingulate gyrus; 
DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; FEF, frontal eye fields (premotor cortex); 
FG, fusiform gyrus; IPL, inferior parietal lobule; ITG, inferior temporal gyrus; LG, 
lingual gyrus; MPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; MTG, middle temporal gyrus; OFC, 
orbitofrontal cortex; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; PPC, posterior parietal cortex; 
PSC, peristriate cortex; SC, striate cortex; SMG, supramarginal gyrus; SPL, 
superior parietal lobule; STG, superior temporal gyrus; STS, superior temporal 
sulcus; TP, temporopolar cortex; W, Wernicke’s area.


--- PDF PAGE 205 ---

CHAPTER 26
Aphasia, Memory Loss, Hemispatial Neglect, Frontal Syndromes, and Other Cerebral Disorders  
159
happened to be in that bag … see? …Where my two … two little pieces 
of dentist that I use … that I … all gone. If she throws the whole thing 
away … visit some friends of hers and she can’t throw them away.”
Gestures and pantomime do not improve communication. The 
patient may not realize that his or her language is incomprehensible 
and may appear angry and impatient when the examiner fails to 
decipher the meaning of a severely paraphasic statement. In some 
patients this type of aphasia can be associated with severe agitation 
and paranoia. The ability to follow commands aimed at axial mus-
culature may be preserved. The dissociation between the failure to 
understand simple questions (“What is your name?”) in a patient who 
rapidly closes his or her eyes, sits up, or rolls over when asked to do 
so is characteristic of Wernicke’s aphasia and helps differentiate it from 
deafness, psychiatric disease, or malingering. Patients with Wernicke’s 
aphasia cannot express their thoughts in meaning-appropriate words 
and cannot decode the meaning of words in any modality of input. 
This aphasia therefore has expressive as well as receptive components. 
Repetition, naming, reading, and writing also are impaired.
The lesion site most commonly associated with Wernicke’s aphasia 
caused by CVAs is the posterior portion of the language network. An 
embolus to the inferior division of the middle cerebral artery (MCA), 
to the posterior temporal or angular branches in particular, is the most 
common etiology (Chap. 419). Intracerebral hemorrhage, head trauma, 
and neoplasm are other causes of Wernicke’s aphasia. A coexisting 
right hemianopia or superior quadrantanopia is common, and mild 
right nasolabial flattening may be found, but otherwise, the exami-
nation is often unrevealing. The paraphasic, neologistic speech in an 
agitated patient with an otherwise unremarkable neurologic examina-
tion may lead to the suspicion of a primary psychiatric disorder such 
as schizophrenia or mania, but the other components characteristic of 
acquired aphasia and the absence of prior psychiatric disease usually 
settle the issue. Prognosis for recovery of language function is guarded.
Broca’s Aphasia  Speech is nonfluent, labored, interrupted by 
many word-finding pauses, and usually dysarthric. It is impoverished 
in function words but enriched in meaning-appropriate nouns. Abnor-
mal word order and the inappropriate deployment of bound morphemes 
(word endings used to denote tenses, possessives, or plurals) lead to a 
characteristic agrammatism. Speech is telegraphic and pithy but quite 
informative. In the following passage, a patient with Broca’s aphasia 
describes his medical history: “I see … the dotor, dotor sent me … 
Bosson. Go to hospital. Dotor … kept me beside. Two, tee days, doctor 
send me home.”
Output may be reduced to a grunt or single word (“yes” or “no”), 
which is emitted with different intonations in an attempt to express 
approval or disapproval. In addition to fluency, naming and repetition 
are impaired. Comprehension of spoken language is intact except 
for syntactically difficult sentences with a passive voice structure 
or embedded clauses, indicating that Broca’s aphasia is not just an 
“expressive” or “motor” disorder and that it also may involve a com-
prehension deficit in decoding syntax. Patients with Broca’s aphasia 
can be tearful, easily frustrated, and profoundly depressed. Insight 
into their condition is preserved, in contrast to Wernicke’s aphasia. 
Even when spontaneous speech is severely dysarthric, the patient 
may be able to display a relatively normal articulation of words when 
singing. This dissociation has been used to develop specific therapeutic 
approaches (melodic intonation therapy) for Broca’s aphasia. Addi-
tional neurologic deficits include right facial weakness, hemiparesis 
or hemiplegia, and a buccofacial apraxia characterized by an inability 
to carry out motor commands involving oropharyngeal and facial 
musculature (e.g., patients are unable to demonstrate how to blow out 
a match or suck through a straw). The cause is most often infarction 
of Broca’s area (the inferior frontal convolution; “B” in Fig. 26-1) and 
surrounding anterior perisylvian and insular cortex due to occlu-
sion of the superior division of the MCA (Chap. 419). Mass lesions, 
including tumor, intracerebral hemorrhage, and abscess, also may be 
responsible. When the cause of Broca’s aphasia is stroke, recovery of 
language function generally peaks within 2–6 months, after which time 
further progress is limited. Speech therapy is more successful than in 
Wernicke’s aphasia.
Conduction Aphasia  Speech output is fluent but contains many 
phonemic paraphasias, comprehension of spoken language is intact, 
and repetition is severely impaired. Naming elicits phonemic parapha-
sias, and spelling is impaired. Reading aloud is impaired, but reading 
comprehension is preserved. The responsible lesion, usually a CVA in 
the temporoparietal or dorsal perisylvian region, interferes with the 
function of the phonological loop interconnecting Broca’s area with 
Wernicke’s area. Occasionally, a transient Wernicke’s aphasia may 
rapidly resolve into a conduction aphasia. The paraphasic output in 
conduction aphasia interferes with the ability to express meaning, but 
this deficit is not nearly as severe as the one displayed by patients with 
Wernicke’s aphasia. Associated neurologic signs in conduction aphasia 
vary according to the primary lesion site.
Transcortical Aphasias: Fluent and Nonfluent  Clinical 
features of fluent (posterior) transcortical aphasia are similar to those of 
Wernicke’s aphasia, but repetition is intact. The lesion site disconnects 
the intact core of the language network from other temporoparietal 
association areas. Associated neurologic findings may include hemian-
opia. Cerebrovascular lesions (e.g., infarctions in the posterior water-
shed zone) and neoplasms that involve the temporoparietal cortex 
posterior to Wernicke’s area are common causes. The features of nonflu-
ent (anterior) transcortical aphasia are similar to those of Broca’s aphasia, 
but repetition is intact and agrammatism is less pronounced. The neu-
rologic examination may be otherwise intact, but a right hemiparesis 
also can exist. The lesion site disconnects the intact language network 
from prefrontal areas of the brain and usually involves the anterior 
watershed zone between anterior and MCA territories or the supple-
mentary motor cortex in the territory of the anterior cerebral artery.
Global and Isolation Aphasias  Global aphasia represents the 
combined dysfunction of Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas and usually 
results from strokes that involve the entire MCA distribution in the 
left hemisphere. Speech output is nonfluent, and comprehension of 
TABLE 26-1  Clinical Features of Aphasias and Related Conditions Commonly Seen in Cerebrovascular Accidents
 
COMPREHENSION
REPETITION OF SPOKEN  
LANGUAGE
NAMING
FLUENCY
Wernicke’s
Impaired
Impaired
Impaired
Preserved or increased
Broca’s
Preserved (except grammar)
Impaired
Impaired
Decreased
Global
Impaired
Impaired
Impaired
Decreased
Conduction
Preserved
Impaired
Impaired
Preserved
Nonfluent (anterior) transcortical
Preserved
Preserved
Impaired
Impaired
Fluent (posterior) transcortical
Impaired
Preserved
Impaired
Preserved
Isolation
Impaired
Echolalia
Impaired
No purposeful speech
Anomic
Preserved
Preserved
Impaired
Preserved except for word-
finding pauses
Pure word deafness
Impaired only for spoken  
language
Impaired
Preserved
Preserved
Pure alexia
Impaired only for reading
Preserved
Preserved
Preserved


--- PDF PAGE 206 ---

PART 2
Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases
160
language is severely impaired. Related signs include right hemiplegia, 
hemisensory loss, and homonymous hemianopia. Isolation aphasia 
represents a combination of the two transcortical aphasias. Compre-
hension is severely impaired, and there is no purposeful speech output. 
The patient may parrot fragments of heard conversations (echolalia), 
indicating that the neural mechanisms for repetition are at least par-
tially intact. This condition represents the pathologic function of the 
language network when it is isolated from other regions of the brain. 
Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas tend to be spared, but there is damage 
to the surrounding frontal, parietal, and temporal cortex. Lesions are 
patchy and can be associated with anoxia, carbon monoxide poisoning, 
or complete watershed zone infarctions.
Anomic Aphasia  This form of aphasia may be considered the 
“minimal dysfunction” syndrome of the language network. Articu-
lation, comprehension, and repetition are intact, but confrontation 
naming, word finding, and spelling are impaired. Word-finding 
pauses are uncommon, so language output is fluent but paraphasic, 
circumlocutious, and uninformative. The lesion sites can be anywhere 
within the left hemisphere language network, including the middle 
and inferior temporal gyri. Anomic aphasia is the single most common 
language disturbance seen in head trauma, metabolic encephalopathy, and 
Alzheimer’s disease.
Pure Word Deafness  The most common causes are either bilat-
eral or left-sided MCA strokes affecting the superior temporal gyrus. 
The net effect of the underlying lesion is to interrupt the flow of 
information from the auditory association cortex to the language 
network. Patients have no difficulty understanding written language 
and can express themselves well in spoken or written language. They 
have no difficulty interpreting and reacting to environmental sounds 
if the primary auditory cortex and auditory association areas of the 
right hemisphere are spared. Because auditory information cannot 
be conveyed to the language network, however, it cannot be decoded 
into neural word representations, and the patient reacts to speech as if 
it were in an alien tongue that cannot be deciphered. Patients cannot 
repeat spoken language but have no difficulty naming objects. In time, 
patients with pure word deafness teach themselves lipreading and may 
appear to have improved. There may be no additional neurologic find-
ings, but agitated paranoid reactions are common in the acute stages. 
Cerebrovascular lesions are the most common cause.
Pure Alexia Without Agraphia  This is the visual equivalent 
of pure word deafness. The lesions (usually a combination of dam-
age to the left occipital cortex and to a posterior sector of the corpus 
callosum—the splenium) interrupt the flow of visual input into the 
language network. There is usually a right hemianopia, but the core 
language network remains unaffected. The patient can understand and 
produce spoken language, name objects in the left visual hemifield, 
repeat, and write. However, the patient acts as if illiterate when asked 
to read even the simplest sentence because the visual information 
from the written words (presented to the intact left visual hemifield) 
cannot reach the language network. Objects in the left hemifield may 
be named accurately because they activate nonvisual associations in 
the right hemisphere, which in turn can access the language network 
through transcallosal pathways anterior to the splenium. Patients with 
this syndrome also may lose the ability to name colors, although they 
can match colors. This is known as a color anomia. The most common 
etiology of pure alexia is a vascular lesion in the territory of the poste-
rior cerebral artery or an infiltrating neoplasm in the left occipital cor-
tex that involves the optic radiations as well as the crossing fibers of the 
splenium. Because the posterior cerebral artery also supplies medial 
temporal components of the limbic system, a patient with pure alexia 
also may experience an amnesia, but this is usually transient because 
the limbic lesion is unilateral.
Apraxia and Aphemia 
Apraxia designates a complex motor 
deficit that cannot be attributed to pyramidal, extrapyramidal, cerebel-
lar, or sensory dysfunction and that does not arise from the patient’s 
failure to understand the nature of the task. Apraxia of speech is used to 
designate articulatory abnormalities in the duration, fluidity, and stress 
of syllables that make up words. It can arise with CVAs in the posterior 
part of Broca’s area or in the course of frontotemporal lobar degenera-
tion (FTLD) with tauopathy. Aphemia is a severe form of acute speech 
apraxia that presents with severely impaired fluency (often mutism). 
Recovery is the rule and involves an intermediate stage of hoarse 
whispering. Writing, reading, and comprehension are intact, and so 
this is not a true aphasic syndrome. CVAs in parts of Broca’s area or 
subcortical lesions that undercut its connections with other parts of 
the brain may be present. Occasionally, the lesion site is on the medial 
aspects of the frontal lobes and may involve the supplementary motor 
cortex of the left hemisphere. Ideomotor apraxia is diagnosed when com-
mands to perform a specific motor act (“cough,” “blow out a match”) 
or pantomime the use of a common tool (a comb, hammer, straw, or 
toothbrush) in the absence of the real object cannot be followed. The 
patient’s ability to comprehend the command is ascertained by demon-
strating multiple movements and establishing that the correct one can 
be recognized. Some patients with this type of apraxia can imitate the 
appropriate movement when it is demonstrated by the examiner and 
show no impairment when handed the real object, indicating that the 
sensorimotor mechanisms necessary for the movement are intact. Some 
forms of ideomotor apraxia represent a disconnection of the language 
network from pyramidal motor systems so that commands to execute 
complex movements are understood but cannot be conveyed to the 
appropriate motor areas. Buccofacial apraxia involves apraxic deficits 
in movements of the face and mouth. Ideomotor limb apraxia encom-
passes apraxic deficits in movements of the arms and legs. Ideomotor 
apraxia almost always is caused by lesions in the left hemisphere and 
is commonly associated with aphasic syndromes, especially Broca’s 
aphasia and conduction aphasia. Because the handling of real objects 
is not impaired, ideomotor apraxia by itself causes no major limitation 
of daily living activities. Patients with lesions of the anterior corpus 
callosum can display ideomotor apraxia confined to the left side of the 
body, a sign known as sympathetic dyspraxia. A severe form of sympa-
thetic dyspraxia, known as the alien hand syndrome, is characterized 
by additional features of motor disinhibition on the left hand. Ideational 
apraxia refers to a deficit in the sequencing of goal-directed movements 
in patients who have no difficulty executing the individual compo-
nents of the sequence. For example, when the patient is asked to pick 
up a pen and write, the sequence of uncapping the pen, placing the 
cap at the opposite end, turning the point toward the writing surface, 
and writing may be disrupted, and the patient may be seen trying to 
write with the wrong end of the pen or even with the removed cap. 
These motor sequencing problems usually are seen in the context of 
confusional states and dementias rather than focal lesions associated 
with aphasic conditions. Limb-kinetic apraxia involves clumsiness in the 
use of tools or objects that cannot be attributed to sensory, pyramidal, 
extrapyramidal, or cerebellar dysfunction. This condition can emerge 
in the context of focal premotor cortex lesions or corticobasal degenera-
tion and can interfere with the use of tools and utensils.
Gerstmann’s Syndrome  The combination of acalculia (impair-
ment of simple arithmetic), dysgraphia (impaired writing), finger anomia 
(an inability to name individual fingers such as the index and thumb), 
and right-left confusion (an inability to tell whether a hand, foot, or arm 
of the patient or examiner is on the right or left side of the body) is 
known as Gerstmann’s syndrome. In making this diagnosis, it is impor-
tant to establish that the finger and left-right naming deficits are not 
part of a more generalized anomia and that the patient is not otherwise 
aphasic. When Gerstmann’s syndrome arises acutely and in isolation, 
it is commonly associated with damage to the inferior parietal lobule 
(especially the angular gyrus) in the left hemisphere.
Pragmatics and Prosody  Pragmatics refers to aspects of lan-
guage that communicate attitude, affect, and the figurative rather than 
literal aspects of a message (e.g., “green thumb” does not refer to the 
actual color of the finger). One component of pragmatics, prosody, refers 
to variations of melodic stress and intonation that influence attitude 
and the inferential aspect of verbal messages. For example, the two 


--- PDF PAGE 207 ---

CHAPTER 26
Aphasia, Memory Loss, Hemispatial Neglect, Frontal Syndromes, and Other Cerebral Disorders  
161
statements “He is clever.” and “He is clever?” contain an identical word 
choice and syntax but convey vastly different messages because of dif-
ferences in the intonation with which the statements are uttered. Dam-
age to right hemisphere regions corresponding to Broca’s area impairs 
the ability to introduce meaning-appropriate prosody into spoken 
language. The patient produces grammatically correct language with 
accurate word choice, but the statements are uttered in a monotone 
that interferes with the ability to convey the intended stress and effect. 
Patients with this type of aprosodia give the mistaken impression of 
being depressed or indifferent. Other aspects of pragmatics, especially 
the ability to infer the figurative aspect of a message, become impaired 
by damage to the right hemisphere or frontal lobes.
Subcortical Aphasia  Damage to subcortical components of the 
language network (e.g., the striatum and thalamus of the left hemi-
sphere) also can lead to aphasia. The resulting syndromes contain 
combinations of deficits in the various aspects of language but rarely 
fit the specific patterns described in Table 26-1. In a patient with a CVA, 
an anomic aphasia accompanied by dysarthria or a fluent aphasia with 
hemiparesis should raise the suspicion of a subcortical lesion site.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF PPA  Aphasias caused by 
CVAs start suddenly and display maximal deficits at the onset. These 
are the “classic” aphasias described above. Aphasias caused by neu-
rodegenerative diseases have an insidious onset and relentless progres-
sion. The neuropathology can be selective not only for gray matter but 
also for specific layers and cell types. The clinico-anatomic patterns are 
therefore different from those described in Table 26-1.
Several neurodegenerative syndromes, such as typical Alzheimer-
type (amnestic; Chap. 423) and frontotemporal (behavioral; Chap. 
424) dementias, can also include language impairments as the disease 
progresses. In these cases, the aphasia is an ancillary component of the 
overall syndrome. A diagnosis of PPA is justified only if the language 
disorder (i.e., aphasia) arises in relative isolation, becomes the primary 
concern that brings the patient to medical attention, and remains the 
most salient deficit for 1–2 years. PPA can be caused by either FTLD 
or Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathology. Rarely, an identical syndrome 
can be caused by Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease (CJD) but with a more rapid 
progression (Chap. 430).
LANGUAGE IN PPA  The impairments of language in PPA have slightly 
different patterns from those seen in CVA-caused aphasias. For exam-
ple, the full syndrome of Wernicke’s aphasia is almost never seen in 
PPA, confirming the view that sentence comprehension and word com-
prehension are controlled by different regions of the language network. 
Three major subtypes of PPA can be recognized.
Agrammatic PPA  The agrammatic variant is characterized by 
consistently low fluency and impaired grammar but intact word 
comprehension. It most closely resembles Broca’s aphasia or anterior 
transcortical aphasia but usually lacks the right hemiparesis or dys-
arthria and may have more profound impairments of grammar. Peak 
sites of neuronal loss (gray matter atrophy) include the left inferior fron-
tal gyrus where Broca’s area is located. The neuropathology is usually a 
FTLD with tauopathy but can also be an atypical form of AD pathology.
Semantic PPA  The semantic variant is characterized by preserved 
fluency and syntax but poor single-word comprehension and profound 
two-way naming impairments. This kind of aphasia is not seen with 
CVAs. It differs from Wernicke’s aphasia or posterior transcortical 
aphasia because speech is usually informative and repetition is intact. 
Comprehension of sentences is relatively preserved if the meaning is 
not too dependent on words that fail to be understood allowing the 
patient to surmise the gist of the conversation through contextual cues. 
Such patients may appear unimpaired in the course of casual small talk 
but become puzzled upon encountering an undecipherable word such 
as “pumpkin” or “umbrella.” Peak atrophy sites are located in the left 
anterior temporal lobe, indicating that this part of the brain plays a crit-
ical role in the comprehension of words, especially words that denote 
concrete objects. This is a part of the brain that was not included within 
the classic language network, probably because it is not a common 
site for focal CVAs. The neuropathology is frequently an FTLD with 
abnormal precipitates of the 43-kDa transactive response DNA-binding 
protein TDP-43 of type C.
Logopenic PPA  The logopenic variant is characterized by preserved 
syntax and comprehension but frequent and severe word-finding 
pauses, anomia, circumlocutions, and simplifications during sponta-
neous speech. Repetition is usually impaired. Peak atrophy sites are 
located in the temporoparietal junction and posterior temporal lobe, 
partially overlapping with traditional location of Wernicke’s area. 
However, the comprehension impairment of Wernicke’s aphasia is 
absent probably because the underlying deep white matter, frequently 
damaged by CVAs, remains relatively intact in PPA. The repetition 
impairment suggests that parts of Wernicke’s area are critical for pho-
nological loop functionality. In contrast to Broca’s aphasia or agram-
matic PPA, the interruption of fluency is variable so that speech may 
appear entirely normal if the patient is allowed to engage in small talk. 
Logopenic PPA resembles the anomic aphasia of Table 26-1 but usually 
has longer and more frequent word-finding pauses. When repetition is 
impaired the aphasia resembles the conduction aphasia in Table 26-1. Of 
all PPA subtypes, this is the one most commonly associated with the 
pathology of AD, but FTLD can also be the cause. In addition to these 
three major subtypes, there is also a mixed type of PPA where grammar, 
fluency and word comprehension are jointly impaired. This is most like 
the global aphasia of Table 26-1. Rarely, PPA can present with patterns 
reminiscent of pure word deafness or Gerstmann’s syndrome.
THE PARIETOFRONTAL NETWORK FOR 
SPATIAL ORIENTATION
Adaptive spatial orientation is subserved by a large-scale network con-
taining three major cortical components. The cingulate cortex provides 
access to a motivational mapping of the extrapersonal space, the posterior 
parietal cortex to a sensorimotor representation of salient extrapersonal 
events, and the frontal eye fields to motor strategies for attentional behav-
iors (Fig. 26-2). Subcortical components of this network include the 
striatum and the thalamus. Damage to this network can undermine the 
distribution of attention within the extrapersonal space, giving rise to 
hemispatial neglect, simultanagnosia and object finding failures. The 
integration of egocentric (self-centered) with allocentric (object-centered) 
coordinates can also be disrupted, giving rise to impairments in route 
finding, the ability to avoid obstacles, and the ability to dress.
■
■HEMISPATIAL NEGLECT
Contralesional hemispatial neglect represents one outcome of damage 
to the cortical or subcortical components of this network. The traditional 
view that hemispatial neglect always denotes a parietal lobe lesion is inaccu-
rate. According to one model of spatial cognition, the right hemisphere 
directs attention within the entire extrapersonal space, whereas the 
left hemisphere directs attention mostly within the contralateral right 
hemispace. Consequently, left hemisphere lesions do not give rise to 
much contralesional neglect because the global attentional mechanisms 
of the right hemisphere can compensate for the loss of the contralaterally 
directed attentional functions of the left hemisphere. Right hemisphere 
lesions, however, give rise to severe contralesional left hemispatial 
neglect because the unaffected left hemisphere does not contain ipsi-
lateral attentional mechanisms. This model is consistent with clinical 
experience, which shows that contralesional neglect is more common, 
more severe, and longer lasting after damage to the right hemisphere 
than after damage to the left hemisphere. Severe neglect for the right 
hemispace is rare, even in left-handers with left hemisphere lesions.
Clinical Examination  Patients with severe neglect may fail to 
dress, shave, or groom the left side of the body; fail to eat food placed 
on the left side of the tray; and fail to read the left half of sentences. 
When asked to copy a simple line drawing, the patient fails to copy 
detail on the left, and when the patient is asked to write, there is a ten-
dency to leave an unusually wide margin on the left. Two bedside tests 
that are useful in assessing neglect are simultaneous bilateral stimulation 
and visual target cancellation. In the former, the examiner provides either 
unilateral or simultaneous bilateral stimulation in the visual, auditory, 


--- PDF PAGE 208 ---

PART 2
Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases
162
and tactile modalities. After right hemisphere injury, patients who 
have no difficulty detecting unilateral stimuli on either side experience 
the bilaterally presented stimulus as coming only from the right. This 
phenomenon is known as extinction and is a manifestation of the sen-
sory-representational aspect of hemispatial neglect. In the target detec-
tion task, targets (e.g., A’s) are interspersed with foils (e.g., other letters 
of the alphabet) on a 21.5- to 28.0-cm (8.5–11 in.) sheet of paper, and the 
patient is asked to circle all the targets. A failure to detect targets on the 
left is a manifestation of the exploratory (motor) deficit in hemispatial 
neglect (Fig. 26-3A). Hemianopia is not by itself sufficient to cause the 
target detection failure because the patient is free to turn the head and 
eyes to the left. Target detection failures therefore reflect a distortion of 
spatial attention, not just of sensory input. Some patients with neglect 
also may deny the existence of hemiparesis and may even deny owner-
ship of the paralyzed limb, a condition known as anosognosia.
■
■BÁLINT’S SYNDROME, SIMULTANAGNOSIA, 
DRESSING APRAXIA, CONSTRUCTION APRAXIA,  
AND ROUTE FINDING IMPAIRMENTS
Bilateral involvement of the network for spatial attention, especially 
its parietal components, leads to a state of severe spatial disorientation 
known as Bálint’s syndrome. Bálint’s syndrome involves deficits in the 
orderly visuomotor scanning of the environment (oculomotor apraxia), 
accurate manual reaching toward visual targets (optic ataxia), and the 
ability to integrate visual information in the center of gaze with more 
peripheral information (simultanagnosia). A patient with simultana-
gnosia “misses the forest for the trees.” For example, a patient who 
is shown a table lamp and asked to name the object may look at its 
circular base and call it an ashtray. Some patients with simultanagnosia 
report that objects they look at may vanish suddenly, probably indicat-
ing an inability to compute the oculomotor return to the original point 
of gaze after brief saccadic displacements. Movement and distracting 
stimuli greatly exacerbate the difficulties of visual perception. Simul-
tanagnosia can occur without the other two components of Bálint’s 
syndrome especially in association with Alzheimer’s disease.
A modification of the letter cancellation task described above can 
be used for the bedside diagnosis of simultanagnosia. In this modifica-
tion, some of the targets (e.g., A’s) are made to be much larger than the 
others (7.5–10 cm vs 2.5 cm [3–4 in. vs 1 in.] in height), and all targets 
are embedded among foils. Patients with simultanagnosia display a 
counterintuitive but characteristic tendency to miss the larger targets 
(Fig. 26-3B). This occurs because the information needed for the identi-
fication of the larger targets cannot be confined to the immediate line of 
gaze and requires the integration of visual information across multiple 
fixation points. The greater difficulty in the detection of the larger tar-
gets also indicates that poor acuity is not responsible for the impairment 
of visual function and that the problem is central rather than peripheral. 
The test shown in Fig. 26-3B is not by itself sufficient to diagnose simul-
tanagnosia because some patients with a frontal network syndrome 
may omit the strange looking large letters, perhaps because they lack 
the mental flexibility needed to realize that the two types of targets are 
symbolically identical despite being superficially different.
Bilateral parietal lesions can impair the integration of egocentric 
with allocentric spatial coordinates. One manifestation is dressing 
apraxia. A patient with this condition is unable to align the body axis 
with the axis of the garment and can be seen struggling as he or she 
holds a coat from its bottom or extends his or her arm into a fold of the 
garment rather than into its sleeve. Lesions that involve the posterior 
parietal cortex also lead to severe difficulties in copying simple line 
drawings. This is known as a construction apraxia and is much more 
severe if the lesion is in the right hemisphere. In some patients with 
right hemisphere lesions, the drawing difficulties are confined to the 
left side of the figure and represent a manifestation of hemispatial 
neglect; in others, there is a more universal deficit in reproducing con-
tours and three-dimensional perspective. Impairments of route finding 
can be included in this group of disorders, which reflect an inability to 
orient the self with respect to external objects and landmarks.
Causes of Spatial Disorientation and the Posterior Corti-
cal Atrophy Syndrome  Cerebrovascular lesions and neoplasms 
in the right hemisphere are common causes of hemispatial neglect. 
Depending on the site of the lesion, a patient with neglect also may 
have hemiparesis, hemihypesthesia, and hemianopia on the left, but 
these are not invariant findings. The majority of these patients display 
considerable improvement of hemispatial neglect, usually within the 
first several weeks. Bálint’s syndrome, dressing apraxia, and route 
finding impairments are more likely to result from bilateral dorsal 
parietal lesions; common settings for acute onset include watershed 
infarction between the middle and posterior cerebral artery territories, 
hypoglycemia, and sagittal sinus thrombosis.
A progressive form of spatial disorientation, known as the posterior 
cortical atrophy (PCA) syndrome, most commonly represents a variant 
of AD with unusual concentrations of neurofibrillary degeneration in 
the parieto-occipital cortex and the superior colliculus (Fig. 26-4). Lewy 
body disease (LBD), CJD, and FTLD (corticobasal degeneration type) 
are other possible causes. The patient displays progressive hemispatial 
neglect, Bálint’s syndrome, and route finding impairments, usually 
accompanied by dressing and construction apraxia.
THE OCCIPITOTEMPORAL NETWORK FOR 
FACE AND OBJECT RECOGNITION
A patient with prosopagnosia cannot recognize familiar faces, including, 
sometimes, the reflection of his or her own face in the mirror. This 
is not a perceptual deficit because prosopagnosic patients easily can 
tell whether two faces are identical. Furthermore, a prosopagnosic 
patient who cannot recognize a familiar face by visual inspection alone 
can use auditory cues to reach appropriate recognition if allowed to 
FIGURE 26-2  Functional magnetic resonance imaging of language and spatial 
attention in neurologically intact subjects. The red and black areas show regions 
of task-related significant activation. (Top) The subjects were asked to determine 
if two words were synonymous. This language task led to the simultaneous 
activation of the two components of the language network, Broca’s area (B) 
and Wernicke’s area (W). The activations are exclusively in the left hemisphere. 
(Bottom) The subjects were asked to shift spatial attention to a peripheral 
target. This task led to the simultaneous activation of the three epicenters of 
the attentional network: the posterior parietal cortex (P), the frontal eye fields 
(F), and the cingulate gyrus (CG). The activations are predominantly in the right 
hemisphere. (Courtesy of Darren Gitelman, MD; with permission.)


--- PDF PAGE 209 ---

CHAPTER 26
Aphasia, Memory Loss, Hemispatial Neglect, Frontal Syndromes, and Other Cerebral Disorders  
163
A
B
FIGURE 26-3  A. A 47-year-old man with a large frontoparietal lesion in the right hemisphere was asked to circle all the ‘A’s. Only targets on the right are circled. This 
is a manifestation of left hemispatial neglect. B. A 70-year-old woman with a 2-year history of degenerative dementia was able to circle most of the small targets but 
ignored the larger ones. This is a manifestation of simultanagnosia.
listen to the person’s voice. The deficit in prosopagnosia is therefore 
modality-specific and reflects the existence of a lesion that prevents 
the activation of otherwise intact multimodal associative templates by 
relevant visual input. Prosopagnosic patients characteristically have 
no difficulty with the generic identification of a face as a face or a car 
as a car, but may not recognize the identity of an individual face or 
the make of an individual car. This reflects a visual recognition deficit 
for proprietary features that characterize individual members of an 
object class. When recognition problems become more generalized and 
extend to the generic identification of common objects, the condition is 
known as visual object agnosia. A patient with anomia cannot name the 
object but can describe its use. In contrast, a patient with visual agno-
sia is unable either to name a visually presented object or to describe 
its use. Face and object recognition disorders also can result from the 
simultanagnosia of Bálint’s syndrome, in which case they are known as 
apperceptive agnosias as opposed to the associative agnosias that result 
from inferior temporal lobe lesions.
■
■CAUSES AND RELATION TO SEMANTIC DEMENTIA
The characteristic lesions in prosopagnosia and visual object agnosia of 
acute onset consist of bilateral infarctions in the territory of the poste-
rior cerebral arteries that involve the fusiform gyrus. Associated deficits 
can include visual field defects (especially superior quadrantanopias) 
and a centrally based color blindness known as achromatopsia. Rarely, 
the responsible lesion is unilateral. In such cases, prosopagnosia is 
associated with lesions in the right hemisphere, and object agnosia with 
lesions in the left. Degenerative diseases of anterior and inferior tempo-
ral cortex can cause progressive associative prosopagnosia and object 
agnosia. The combination of progressive associative agnosia and a flu-
ent aphasia with word comprehension impairment is known as seman-
tic dementia. Patients with semantic dementia fail to recognize faces and 
objects and cannot understand the meaning of words denoting objects. 
This needs to be differentiated from the semantic type of PPA where 
there is severe impairment in understanding words that denote objects 
and in naming faces and objects but a relative preservation of face 


--- PDF PAGE 210 ---

PART 2
Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases
164
and object recognition. The anterior temporal lobe atrophy is usually 
bilateral in semantic dementia whereas it tends to affect mostly the left 
hemisphere in semantic PPA. Acute onset of the semantic dementia 
syndrome can be associated with herpes simplex encephalitis.
LIMBIC NETWORK FOR EXPLICIT MEMORY 
AND AMNESIA
Limbic and paralimbic areas (such as the hippocampus, amygdala, 
and entorhinal cortex), the anterior and medial nuclei of the thalamus, 
the medial and basal parts of the striatum, and the hypothalamus col-
lectively constitute a distributed network known as the limbic system. 
The behavioral affiliations of this network include the coordination 
of emotion, motivation, autonomic tone, and endocrine function. 
An additional area of specialization for the limbic network and the 
one that is of most relevance to clinical practice is that of declarative 
(explicit) memory for recent episodes and experiences. A disturbance 
in this function is known as an amnestic state. In the absence of deficits 
in motivation, attention, language, or visuospatial function, the clinical 
diagnosis of a persistent global amnestic state is always associated with 
bilateral damage to the limbic network, usually within the hippocam-
po-entorhinal complex or the thalamus. Damage to the limbic network 
does not necessarily destroy memories but interferes with their con-
scious recall in coherent form. The individual fragments of information 
remain preserved despite the limbic lesions and can sustain what is 
known as implicit memory. For example, patients with amnestic states 
can acquire new motor or perceptual skills even though they may have 
no conscious knowledge of the experiences that led to the acquisition 
of these skills.
The memory disturbance in the amnestic state is multimodal and 
includes retrograde and anterograde components. The retrograde amnesia 
involves an inability to recall experiences that occurred before the onset 
of the amnestic state. Relatively recent events are more vulnerable to 
retrograde amnesia than are more remote and more extensively consol-
idated events. A patient who comes to the emergency room complain-
ing that he cannot remember his or her identity but can remember the 
events of the previous day almost certainly does not have a neurologic 
cause of memory disturbance. The second and most important com-
ponent of the amnestic state is the anterograde amnesia, which indicates 
an inability to store, retain, and recall new knowledge. Patients with 
amnestic states cannot remember what they ate a few hours ago or 
the details of an important event they may have experienced in the 
recent past. In the acute stages, there also may be a tendency to fill 
in memory gaps with inaccurate, fabricated, and often implausible 
information. This is known as confabulation. Patients with the amnestic 
syndrome forget that they forget and tend to deny the existence of a 
memory problem when questioned. Confabulation is more common 
in cases where the underlying lesion also interferes with parts of the 
frontal network, as in the case of the Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome or 
traumatic head injury.
■
■CLINICAL EXAMINATION
A patient with an amnestic state is almost always disoriented, espe-
cially to time, and has little knowledge of current news. The antero-
grade component of an amnestic state can be tested with a list of four 
to five words read aloud by the examiner up to five times or until the 
patient can immediately repeat the entire list without an intervening 
delay. The next phase of the recall occurs after a period of 5–10 min 
during which the patient is engaged in other tasks. Amnestic patients 
fail this phase of the task and may even forget that they were given a 
list of words to remember. Accurate recognition of the words by mul-
tiple choice in a patient who cannot recall them indicates a less severe 
memory disturbance that affects mostly the retrieval stage of memory. 
The retrograde component of an amnesia can be assessed with ques-
tions related to autobiographical or historic events. The anterograde 
component of amnestic states is usually much more prominent than 
the retrograde component. In rare instances, occasionally associated 
with temporal lobe epilepsy or herpes simplex encephalitis, the retro-
grade component may dominate. Confusional states caused by toxic- 
metabolic encephalopathies and some types of frontal lobe damage 
lead to secondary memory impairments, especially at the stages of 
encoding and retrieval, even in the absence of limbic lesions. This sort 
of memory impairment can be differentiated from the amnestic state 
by the presence of additional impairments in the attention-related tasks 
described below in the section on the frontal lobes.
■
■CAUSES, INCLUDING ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
Neurologic diseases that give rise to an amnestic state include tumors 
(of the sphenoid wing, posterior corpus callosum, thalamus, or medial 
temporal lobe), infarctions (in the territories of the anterior or pos-
terior cerebral arteries), head trauma, herpes simplex encephalitis, 
Wernicke-Korsakoff encephalopathy, autoimmune limbic encephalitis, 
and degenerative dementias such as AD and Pick’s disease. The one 
common denominator of all these diseases is the presence of bilat-
eral lesions within one or more components in the limbic network. 
Occasionally, unilateral left-sided hippocampal lesions can give rise 
to an amnestic state, but the memory disorder tends to be transient. 
Depending on the nature and distribution of the underlying neurologic 
disease, the patient also may have visual field deficits, eye movement 
limitations, or cerebellar findings. 
The most common cause of progressive memory impairments in the 
elderly is AD. This is why a predominantly amnestic dementia is also 
known as a dementia of the Alzheimer-type (DAT). A prodromal stage 
AMNESTIC 
(Dementia of the Alzheimer-type-DAT)
AD>>>FTLD 
VISUO-SPATIAL 
(Posterior cortical atrophy-PCA) 
AD>>LBD>FTLD 
APHASIC 
(Primary progressive aphasia- PPA) 
FTLD>AD 
BEHAVIORAL 
(Frontotemporal dementia- bvFTD) 
FTLD>>AD 
LATERAL VIEW 
MEDIAL VIEW 
FIGURE 26-4  Four focal dementia syndromes and their most likely neuropathologic correlates. AD, Alzheimer’s disease; bvFTD, behavioral variant frontotemporal 
dementia; DAT, amnestic dementia of the Alzheimer-type; FTLD, frontotemporal lobar degeneration (tau or TDP-43 type); LBD, Lewy body disease; PCA, posterior cortical 
atrophy syndrome; PPA, primary progressive aphasia.


--- PDF PAGE 211 ---

CHAPTER 26
Aphasia, Memory Loss, Hemispatial Neglect, Frontal Syndromes, and Other Cerebral Disorders  
165
of DAT, when daily living activities are generally preserved, is known 
as amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI). The predilection of the 
entorhinal cortex and hippocampus for early neurofibrillary degener-
ation by typical AD pathology is responsible for the initially selective 
impairment of episodic memory. In time, additional impairments in 
language, attention, and visuospatial skills emerge as the neurofibril-
lary degeneration spreads to additional neocortical areas. Less fre-
quently, amnestic dementias can also be caused by FTLD.
Transient global amnesia is a distinctive syndrome usually seen in late 
middle age. Patients become acutely disoriented and repeatedly ask 
who they are, where they are, and what they are doing. The spell is 
characterized by anterograde amnesia (inability to retain new informa-
tion) and a retrograde amnesia for relatively recent events that occurred 
before the onset. The syndrome usually resolves within 24–48 h and 
is followed by the filling in of the period affected by the retrograde 
amnesia, although there is persistent loss of memory for the events that 
occurred during the ictus. Recurrences are noted in ~20% of patients. 
Migraine, temporal lobe seizures, and perfusion abnormalities in the 
posterior cerebral territory have been postulated as causes of transient 
global amnesia. The absence of associated neurologic findings occa-
sionally may lead to the incorrect diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder.
THE PREFRONTAL NETWORK FOR 
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND BEHAVIOR
The frontal lobes can be subdivided into motor-premotor, dorsolateral 
prefrontal, medial prefrontal, and orbitofrontal components. The terms 
frontal lobe syndrome and prefrontal cortex refer only to the last three of 
these four components. These are the parts of the cerebral cortex that 
show the greatest phylogenetic expansion in primates, especially in 
humans. The dorsolateral prefrontal, medial prefrontal, and orbitofron-
tal areas, along with the subcortical structures with which they are 
interconnected (i.e., the head of the caudate and the dorsomedial 
nucleus of the thalamus), collectively make up a large-scale network 
that coordinates exceedingly complex aspects of human cognition 
and behavior. The term salience network has been introduced to desig-
nate parts of the frontal network and their interactions with adjacent 
paralimbic cortices of the insula and cingulate gyrus. Impairments of 
social conduct and empathy seen in neurodegenerative frontal demen-
tias are attributed to pathology of the salience network.
The prefrontal network plays an important role in behaviors that 
require multitasking and the integration of thought with emotion. 
Cognitive operations impaired by prefrontal cortex lesions often 
are referred to as “executive functions.” The most common clinical 
manifestations of damage to the prefrontal network take the form of 
two relatively distinct syndromes. In the frontal abulic syndrome, the 
patient shows a loss of initiative, creativity, and curiosity and displays 
a pervasive emotional blandness, apathy, and lack of empathy. In the 
frontal disinhibition syndrome, the patient becomes socially disinhibited 
and shows severe impairments of judgment, insight, foresight, and the 
ability to mind rules of conduct. The dissociation between intact intel-
lectual function and a total lack of even rudimentary common sense 
is striking. Despite the preservation of all essential memory functions, 
the patient cannot learn from experience and continues to display inap-
propriate behaviors without appearing to feel emotional pain, guilt, 
or regret when those behaviors repeatedly lead to disastrous conse-
quences. The impairments may emerge only in real-life situations when 
behavior is under minimal external control and may not be apparent 
within the structured environment of the medical office. Testing judg-
ment by asking patients what they would do if they detected a fire in a 
theater or found a stamped and addressed envelope on the road is not 
very informative because patients who answer these questions wisely 
in the office may still act very foolishly in real-life settings. The phy-
sician must therefore be prepared to make a diagnosis of frontal lobe 
disease based on historic information alone even when the mental state 
is quite intact in the office examination.
■
■CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The emergence of developmentally primitive reflexes, also known as 
frontal release signs, such as grasping (elicited by stroking the palm) 
and sucking (elicited by stroking the lips) are seen primarily in patients 
with large structural lesions that extend into the premotor components 
of the frontal lobes or in the context of metabolic encephalopathies. 
The vast majority of patients with prefrontal lesions and frontal lobe 
behavioral syndromes do not display these reflexes. Damage to the 
frontal lobe disrupts a variety of attention-related functions, including 
working memory (the transient online holding and manipulation of 
information), concentration span, the effortful scanning and retrieval 
of stored information, the inhibition of immediate but inappropriate 
responses, and mental flexibility. Digit span (which should be seven 
forward and five reverse) is decreased, reflecting poor working mem-
ory; the recitation of the months of the year in reverse order (which 
should take <15 s) is slowed as another indication of poor working 
memory; and the fluency in producing words starting with the letter 
a, f, or s that can be generated in 1 min (normally ≥12 per letter) is 
diminished even in nonaphasic patients, indicating an impairment in 
the ability to search and retrieve information from long-term stores. In 
“go–no go” tasks (where the instruction is to raise the finger upon hear-
ing one tap but keep it still upon hearing two taps), the patient shows a 
characteristic inability to inhibit the response to the “no go” stimulus. 
Mental flexibility (tested by the ability to shift from one criterion to 
another in sorting or matching tasks) is impoverished; distractibility by 
irrelevant stimuli is increased; and there is a pronounced tendency for 
impersistence and perseveration. The ability for abstracting similarities 
and interpreting proverbs is also undermined.
The attentional deficits disrupt the orderly registration and retrieval 
of new information and lead to secondary deficits of explicit memory. 
The distinction of the underlying neural mechanisms is illustrated by 
the observation that severely amnestic patients who cannot remember 
events that occurred a few minutes ago may have intact if not superior 
working memory capacity as shown in tests of digit span. The use of 
the term “memory” to designate two completely different mental fac-
ulties is confusing. Working memory depends on the on-line holding of 
information for brief periods of time whereas explicit memory depends 
on the off-line storage and subsequent retrieval of the information.
■
■CAUSES: TRAUMA, NEOPLASM, AND 
FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA
The abulic syndrome tends to be associated with damage in dorsolat-
eral or dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, and the disinhibition syndrome 
with damage in orbitofrontal or ventromedial cortex. These syndromes 
tend to arise almost exclusively after bilateral lesions. Unilateral 
lesions confined to the prefrontal cortex may remain silent until the 
pathology spreads to the other side; this explains why thromboem-
bolic CVA is an unusual cause of the frontal lobe syndrome. When 
behavioral syndromes of the frontal network arise in conjunction with 
asymmetric disease, the lesion tends to be predominantly on the right 
side of the brain. Common settings for frontal lobe syndromes include 
head trauma, ruptured aneurysms, hydrocephalus, tumors (including 
metastases, glioblastoma, and falx or olfactory groove meningiomas), 
and focal degenerative diseases, especially FTLD. The most prominent 
neurodegenerative frontal syndrome is known as the behavioral vari-
ant of frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD). In many patients with bvFTD 
the atrophy extends into the anterior temporal lobes. Occasionally, atro-
phy prodominantly in the right anterior temporal lobe presents with 
the bvFTD syndrome. The behavioral changes in these patients can 
range from apathy to shoplifting, compulsive gambling, sexual indis-
cretions, remarkable lack of common sense, new ritualistic behaviors, 
and alterations in dietary preferences, usually leading to increased taste 
for sweets or rigid attachment to specific food items. In many patients 
with AD, neurofibrillary degeneration eventually spreads to prefrontal 
cortex and gives rise to components of the frontal lobe syndrome, but 
almost always on a background of severe memory impairment. Rarely, 
the bvFTD syndrome can arise in isolation in the context of an atypical 
form of AD pathology.
Lesions in the caudate nucleus or in the dorsomedial nucleus of the 
thalamus (subcortical components of the prefrontal network) also can 
produce a frontal lobe syndrome affecting mostly executive functions. 
This is one reason why the changes in mental state associated with 


================================================================================
Ch300 Coma [Neurologic Critical Care]
Pages 2114-2119
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 2114 ---

PART 8
Critical Care Medicine
2068 elevated compared to the general population, the absolute SCD risk in 
patients with CHD or HF who have an LVEF >35% is not high enough 
to warrant consideration of ICD therapy. While the incidence of SCD is 
lower in patients with preserved LVEF, SCD accounts for a greater pro-
portion of cardiac deaths, and active efforts are being made to advance 
SCD risk stratification in this segment of the population. However, 
at the present time, SCD prevention primarily involves cardiac risk 
factor modification and standard medical therapy for the underlying 
condition.
Preventing Sudden Death in the General Population  Only 
about half of men and a third of women who suffer SCA are recognized 
to have heart disease prior to the event, and only half have warning 
symptoms prior to the event. SCD often occurs without warning as the 
first manifestation of cardiac disease. In order to prevent these SCDs, 
preventive interventions would need to be employed broadly to the 
general population. Although several risk scores have recently been 
developed with the intent to stratify SCD risk in low-risk populations, 
the clinical utility to date is limited by the low absolute incidence of 
SCD which is estimated to be only 50–90 per 100,000 in the general 
adult population. Therefore, current efforts aimed at preventing SCD 
in general populations primarily focus on modification of the SCD 
risk factors outlined previously. Individuals who adhere to a low 
risk, healthy lifestyle that includes avoidance of smoking, maintain-
ing a healthy body weight, participating in moderate exercise, and a 
Mediterranean-type dietary pattern have markedly lower rates of SCD. 
A substantial number of SCDs are likely to be preventable thorough 
lifestyle modifications and treatment of risk factors.
Acknowledgment
The authors gratefully acknowledge the prior contributions of Agustin 
Castellanos and Robert J. Myerburg.
■
■FURTHER READING
Al-Khatib SM et al: 2017 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for management 
of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sud-
den cardiac death: A report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guide-
lines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Heart Rhythm Oct 26. pii: S1547-
5271(17)31250-X. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2017.10.036. [Epub ahead of 
print], 2017.
Callaway CW et al: Part 8: Post-Cardiac Arrest Care: 2015 American 
Heart Association Guidelines Update for Cardiopulmonary Resus-
citation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation 132:S465, 
2015.
Deo R, Albert CM: Epidemiology and genetics of sudden cardiac 
death. Circulation 125:620, 2012.
Fishman GI et al: Sudden cardiac death prediction and prevention 
report from a National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and Heart 
Rhythm Society workshop. Circulation 122:2335, 2010.
Hayashi M et al: The spectrum of epidemiology underlying sudden 
cardiac death. Circ Res 116:1887, 2015.
Link MS et al: Part 7: Adult advanced cardiovascular life support: 2015 
American Heart Association guidelines update for cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation 
132:S444, 2015.
Myerburg RJ et al: Pulseless electric activity: Definition, causes, mech-
anisms, management, and research priorities for the next decade: 
Report from a National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Workshop. 
Circulation 128:2532, 2013.
Neumar RW et al: Part 1: Executive summary. 2015 American Heart 
Association guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and 
emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation 132:S315, 2015.
Stecker EC et al: Public health burden of sudden cardiac death in the 
united states. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 7:212, 2014.
Zipes DP et al: ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 Guidelines for management of 
patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden 
cardiac death: A report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force and the European Society of 
Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines (writing committee 
to develop guidelines for management of patients with ventricular 
arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death): Developed 
in collaboration with the European Heart Rhythm Association and 
the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation 114:e385, 2006.
Section 3  Neurologic Critical Care
300 Coma
S. Andrew Josephson, Allan H. Ropper,  
Stephen L. Hauser 
Coma is among the most common neurologic emergencies encountered 
general medicine and requires an organized approach. It accounts for 
a substantial portion of admissions to emergency wards and occurs on 
all hospital services.
There exists a continuum of states of reduced alertness, the most 
severe form being coma, defined as a deep sleeplike state with eyes 
closed from which the patient cannot be aroused. Stupor refers to a 
higher degree of arousability in which the patient can be transiently 
awakened by vigorous stimuli, accompanied by motor behavior that 
leads to avoidance or withdrawal from uncomfortable or aggravating 
stimuli. Drowsiness simulates light sleep and is characterized by easy 
arousal and the persistence of alertness for brief periods. Stupor and 
drowsiness are usually accompanied by some degree of confusion 
(Chap. 24). A precise narrative description of the level of arousal and 
of the type of responses evoked by various stimuli as observed at the 
bedside is preferable to use of ambiguous terms such as lethargy, semi-
coma, or obtundation.
Several conditions that render patients unresponsive and simulate 
coma are considered separately because of their special significance. 
The vegetative state signifies an awake-appearing but nonresponsive 
state often in a patient who has emerged from coma. In the vegetative 
state, the eyelids may open periodically, giving the appearance of 
wakefulness. Respiratory and autonomic functions are retained. Yawning, 
coughing, swallowing, and limb and head movements persist, but 
there are few, if any, meaningful responses to the external and inter-
nal environment. There are always accompanying signs that indicate 
extensive damage in both cerebral hemispheres, e.g., decerebrate or 
decorticate limb posturing and absent responses to visual stimuli (see 
below). In the closely related but less severe minimally conscious state, 
the patient displays rudimentary vocal or motor behaviors, often spon-
taneous, but some in response to touch, visual stimuli, or command. 
Cardiac arrest with cerebral hypoperfusion and head trauma are the 
most common causes of the vegetative and minimally conscious states 
(Chap. 301).
The prognosis for regaining mental faculties once the vegetative 
state has supervened for several months is very poor, and after a year, 
almost nil; hence the term persistent vegetative state. Most reports of 
dramatic recovery, when investigated carefully, are found to yield to 
the usual rules for prognosis, but there have been rare instances in 
which recovery has occurred to a severely disabled condition and, in 
rare childhood cases, to an even better state. Patients in the minimally 
conscious state carry a better prognosis for some recovery compared 
to those in a persistent vegetative state, but even in these patients, dra-
matic recovery after 12 months is unusual.
The possibility of incorrectly attributing meaningful behavior to 
patients in the vegetative and minimally conscious states creates 
inordinate problems and anguish for families and physicians. On the 
other hand, the question of whether these patients lack any capability 
for cognition has been reopened by functional MRI studies that have 
demonstrated, in a small proportion of usually posttraumatic cases, 
meaningful cerebral activation in response to verbal and other stimuli 


--- PDF PAGE 2115 ---

CHAPTER 300 Coma
2069
of herniation (Fig. 300-1). They are in essence “false localizing” signs 
because they derive from compression of brain structures at a distance 
from the mass lesion that is the direct cause of coma.
In the most common form of herniation, brain tissue is displaced 
from the supratentorial to the infratentorial compartment through 
the tentorial opening; this is referred to as transtentorial herniation. 
Uncal transtentorial herniation refers specifically to impaction of the 
anterior medial temporal gyrus (the uncus) into the tentorial opening 
just anterior to and adjacent to the midbrain (Fig. 300-1A). The uncus 
compresses the third nerve as the nerve traverses the subarachnoid 
space, causing enlargement of the ipsilateral pupil as the first sign 
(the fibers subserving parasympathetic pupillary function are located 
peripherally in the nerve). The coma that follows is due to compression 
of the midbrain (and therefore the RAS) against the opposite tentorial 
edge by the displaced parahippocampal gyrus (Fig. 300-2). Lateral 
displacement of the midbrain may compress the opposite cerebral 
peduncle against the tentorial edge, producing a Babinski sign and 
hemiparesis contralateral to the hemiparesis that resulted from the 
mass (the Kernohan-Woltman sign). Herniation may also compress the 
anterior and posterior cerebral arteries as they pass over the tentorial 
as discussed in more detail below. This finding suggests at a minimum 
that some of these patients could in the future be able to communicate 
their needs using technological advances and that further research 
could shed light on treatment approaches targeting areas of the brain 
and their connections that seem to be preserved in individual patients.
Apart from the above conditions, several syndromes that affect 
alertness are prone to be misinterpreted as stupor or coma. Clinicians 
should be aware of these pitfalls when diagnosing coma at the bedside. 
Akinetic mutism refers to a partially or fully awake state in which the 
patient is able to form impressions and think, as demonstrated by later 
recounting of events, but remains virtually immobile and mute. The 
condition results from damage in the regions of the medial thalamic 
nuclei or the frontal lobes (particularly lesions situated deeply or on the 
orbitofrontal surfaces) or from extreme hydrocephalus. The term abulia 
describes a milder form of akinetic mutism characterized by mental 
and physical slowness and diminished ability to initiate activity. It is 
also usually the result of damage to the medial frontal lobes and their 
connections (Chap. 26).
Catatonia is a hypomobile and mute syndrome that occurs usually 
as part of a major psychosis, typically schizophrenia or major depres-
sion. Catatonic patients make few voluntary or responsive movements, 
although they blink, swallow, and may not appear distressed. There 
are nonetheless signs that the patient is responsive, although it may 
take a careful examination to demonstrate them. For example, eyelid 
elevation is actively resisted, blinking occurs in response to a visual 
threat, and the eyes move concomitantly with head rotation, all of 
which are inconsistent with the presence of a brain lesion causing 
unresponsiveness. It is characteristic but not invariable in catatonia 
for the limbs to retain the postures in which they have been placed by 
the examiner (“waxy flexibility,” or catalepsy). With recovery, patients 
often have some memory of events that occurred during their catatonic 
stupor. Catatonia is superficially similar to akinetic mutism, but clinical 
evidence of cerebral damage such as hyperreflexia and hypertonicity 
of the limbs is lacking. The special problem of coma in brain death is 
discussed below.
The locked-in state describes an important type of pseudocoma in 
which an awake patient has no means of producing speech or voli-
tional limb movement but retains voluntary vertical eye movements 
and lid elevation, thus allowing the patient to signal with a clear mind. 
The pupils are normally reactive. The usual cause is an infarction (e.g., 
basilar artery thrombosis) or hemorrhage of the ventral pons that tran-
sects all descending motor (corticospinal and corticobulbar) pathways. 
Another awake but de-efferented state occurs as a result of total paraly-
sis of the musculature in severe cases of neuromuscular weakness such 
as in Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chap. 439), critical illness neuropathy 
(Chap. 301), and pharmacologic neuromuscular blockade.
■
■THE ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF COMA
Almost all instances of coma can be traced to either (1) widespread 
abnormalities of the cerebral hemispheres or to (2) reduced activity of 
a special thalamocortical alerting system termed the reticular activating 
system (RAS) which is diffusely located in the brainstem. The proper 
functioning of this system, its ascending projections to the cortex, 
and the cortex itself are required to maintain alertness and coherence 
of thought. In addition to structural damage of these two systems, 
suppression of reticulocerebral function can occur by drugs, toxins, or 
metabolic derangements such as hypoglycemia, anoxia, uremia, and 
hepatic failure; these types of metabolic causes of coma are far more 
common than structural injuries.
Coma Due to Cerebral Mass Lesions and Herniation 
Syndromes 
In addition to the fixed restriction of the skull, 
the cranial cavity is separated into compartments by infoldings of the 
dura. The two cerebral hemispheres are separated by the falx, and the 
anterior and posterior fossae by the tentorium. Herniation refers to 
displacement of brain tissue by an overlying or adjacent mass into a 
contiguous compartment that it normally does not occupy. Coma and 
many of its associated signs can be attributed to these tissue shifts, 
and certain clinical features are characteristic of specific configurations 
A
B
D
C
FIGURE 300-1  Types of cerebral herniation: (A) uncal; (B) central; (C) transfalcial; 
and (D) foraminal.
A
B
FIGURE 300-2  Coronal (A) and axial (B) magnetic resonance images from a 
stuporous patient with a left third nerve palsy as a result of a large left-sided 
subdural hematoma (seen as a gray-white rim). The upper midbrain and lower 
thalamic regions are compressed and displaced horizontally away from the mass, 
and there is transtentorial herniation of the medial temporal lobe structures, 
including the uncus anteriorly. The lateral ventricle opposite to the hematoma has 
become enlarged as a result of compression of the third ventricle.


--- PDF PAGE 2116 ---

PART 8
Critical Care Medicine
2070 reflections, with resultant brain infarction. These distortions may also 
entrap portions of the ventricular system, resulting in hydrocephalus.
Central transtentorial herniation denotes a symmetric downward 
movement of the thalamic structures through the tentorial opening 
with compression of the upper midbrain (Fig. 300-1B). Miotic pupils 
and drowsiness are the heralding signs, in contrast to a unilaterally 
enlarged pupil of the uncal syndrome. Both uncal and central transten-
torial herniations cause progressive compression of the brainstem and 
RAS, with initial damage to the midbrain, then the pons, and finally 
the medulla. The result is an approximate sequence of neurologic signs 
that corresponds to each affected level, with respiratory centers in the 
brainstem often spared until late in the herniation syndrome. Other 
forms of herniation include transfalcial herniation (displacement of the 
cingulate gyrus under the falx and across the midline, Fig. 300-1C) and 
foraminal herniation (downward forcing of the cerebellar tonsils into 
the foramen magnum, Fig. 300-1D), which causes early compression of 
the medulla, respiratory arrest, and death.
A direct relationship between the various configurations of transten-
torial herniation and coma is not always found. Drowsiness and stupor 
can occur with moderate horizontal displacement of the diencephalon 
(thalamus), before transtentorial herniation is evident. This lateral shift 
may be quantified on axial images of computed tomography (CT) 
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans (Fig. 300-2). In cases 
of acutely enlarging masses, horizontal displacement of the pineal 
gland (often calcified in adults) of 3–5 mm is generally associated with 
drowsiness, 6–8 mm with stupor, and >9 mm with coma. Intrusion of 
the medial temporal lobe into the tentorial opening is also apparent 
on MRI and CT scans as obliteration of the cisterna that surrounds the 
upper brainstem.
Coma Due to Metabolic Disorders and Toxins (including 
Drug-induced) 
Many systemic metabolic abnormalities cause 
coma by interrupting the delivery of energy substrates (e.g., oxygen, 
glucose) or by altering neuronal excitability (drugs and alcohol, anes-
thesia, and epilepsy). These are some of the most common causes of 
coma in large case series. The metabolic abnormalities that produce 
coma may, in milder forms, induce an acute confusional state. Thus, 
in metabolic encephalopathies, clouded consciousness and coma are 
in a continuum.
Cerebral neurons are fully dependent on cerebral blood flow (CBF) 
and the delivery of oxygen and glucose. CBF is ~75 mL per 100 g/min 
in gray matter and 30 mL per 100 g/min in white matter (mean ~55 mL 
per 100 g/min); oxygen consumption is 3.5 mL per 100 g/min, and 
glucose utilization is 5 mg per 100 g/min. Brain stores of glucose are 
able to provide energy for ~2 min after blood flow is interrupted, and 
oxygen stores last 8–10 s after the cessation of blood flow. Simultaneous 
hypoxia and ischemia exhaust glucose more rapidly. The electroen-
cephalogram (EEG) rhythm in these circumstances becomes diffusely 
slowed, typical of metabolic encephalopathies, and as substrate deliv-
ery worsens, eventually brain electrical activity ceases.
Unlike hypoxia-ischemia, which causes neuronal destruction, most 
metabolic disorders such as hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, hyperos-
molarity, hypercapnia, hypercalcemia, and hepatic and renal failure 
cause only minor neuropathologic changes. The reversible effects of 
these conditions on the brain are not fully understood but may result 
from impaired energy supplies, changes in ion fluxes across neuronal 
membranes, and neurotransmitter abnormalities. In hepatic encephal-
opathy (HE), high ammonia concentrations lead to increased synthe-
sis of glutamine in astrocytes with osmotic swelling, mitochondrial 
energy failure, production of reactive nitrogen and oxygen species, 
increases in the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA, and synthesis of 
putative “false” neurotransmitters. Other factors, including coexisting 
inflammation and metabolic abnormalities, also contribute to the coma 
in some patients. Over time, development of a diffuse astrocytosis is 
typical of chronic HE. The mechanism of the encephalopathy of renal 
failure is also multifactorial. Unlike ammonia, urea does not produce 
central nervous system (CNS) toxicity, and contributors to uremic 
encephalopathy may include accumulation of neurotoxic substances 
such as creatinine, guanidine, and related compounds, depletion of 
catecholamines, altered glutamate and GABA tone, increases in brain 
calcium, inflammation with disruption of the blood brain barrier, and 
frequent coexisting vascular disease.
Coma and seizures are common accompaniments of large shifts in 
sodium and water balance in the brain. These changes in osmolarity 
arise from systemic medical disorders, including diabetic ketoacidosis, 
the nonketotic hyperosmolar state, and hyponatremia from any cause 
(e.g., water intoxication, excessive secretion of antidiuretic hormone, 
or atrial natriuretic peptides). Sodium levels <125 mmol/L induce 
confusion, and levels <119 mmol/L are typically associated with coma 
and convulsions, especially when these levels are achieved quickly. In 
hyperosmolar coma, the serum osmolarity is generally >350 mosmol/L. 
Hypercapnia depresses the level of consciousness in proportion to 
the rise in carbon dioxide (CO2) in the blood. In all of these metabolic 
encephalopathies, the degree of neurologic change depends to a large 
extent on the rapidity with which the serum changes occur. The patho-
physiology of other metabolic encephalopathies such as those due 
to hypercalcemia, hypothyroidism, vitamin B12 deficiency, and hypo-
thermia are incompletely understood but must reflect derangements of 
CNS biochemistry, membrane function, or neurotransmitters.
Coma due to drugs and toxins are typically in large measure revers-
ible and leave no residual damage provided there has not been cardi-
orespiratory failure. Many drugs and toxins are capable of depressing 
nervous system function. Some produce coma by affecting both the 
RAS and the cerebral cortex. The combination of cortical and brainstem 
signs, which occurs in certain drug overdoses, may lead to an incorrect 
diagnosis of structural brainstem disease. Overdose of medications that 
have atropinic actions produces signs such as dilated pupils, tachycar-
dia, and dry skin; opiate overdose produces pinpoint pupils <1 mm 
in diameter. Some drug intoxications, such as with barbiturates, can 
mimic all of the signs of brain death, thus toxic etiologies must always 
be excluded prior to making a diagnosis of brain death.
Epileptic Coma  Generalized electrical seizures are associated 
with coma, even in the absence of motor convulsions (nonconvulsive 
status epilepticus). As a result, consideration of EEG monitoring is 
essential in the workup of coma to exclude this treatable etiology. The 
self-limited coma that follows a seizure, the postictal state, may be due to 
exhaustion of energy reserves or effects of locally toxic molecules that 
are the by-product of seizures. The postictal state produces continuous, 
generalized slowing of the background EEG activity similar to that of 
metabolic encephalopathies. It typically lasts for a few minutes, but in 
some cases can be prolonged for hours or even rarely for days.
Coma Due to Widespread Damage to the Cerebral 
Hemispheres  This category, comprising a number of unrelated 
disorders, results from extensive bilateral structural cerebral damage 
that simulates a metabolic disorder. Hypoxia-ischemia is perhaps the 
best characterized and one in which it is not possible initially to dis-
tinguish the acute reversible effects of oxygen deprivation of the brain 
from the subsequent effects of anoxic neuronal damage. Similar cere-
bral damage may be produced by disorders that occlude widespread 
small blood vessels throughout the brain; examples include cerebral 
malaria, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, and hyperviscosity. 
Diffuse white matter damage from cranial trauma or inflammatory 
demyelinating diseases can cause a similar coma syndrome.
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Coma
A video examination of the comatose patient is shown in Chap. V4. 
Acute respiratory and cardiovascular problems should be attended 
to prior to neurologic assessment. In most instances, a complete 
medical evaluation, except for vital signs, funduscopy, and exami-
nation for nuchal rigidity, may be deferred until the neurologic 
evaluation has established the severity and nature of coma. The 
approach to the patient with coma from cranial trauma is dis-
cussed in Chap. 435.


--- PDF PAGE 2117 ---

CHAPTER 300 Coma
2071
HISTORY
The cause of coma may be immediately evident as in cases of 
trauma, cardiac arrest, or observed drug ingestion. In the remainder, 
certain points are useful: (1) the circumstances and rapidity with 
which neurologic symptoms developed; (2) antecedent symptoms 
(confusion, weakness, headache, fever, seizures, dizziness, double 
vision, or vomiting); (3) the use of medications, drugs, or alcohol; 
and (4) chronic liver, kidney, lung, heart, or other medical disease. 
Direct interrogation of family, observers, and ambulance technicians 
on the scene, in person or by telephone, is an important part of the 
evaluation when possible.
GENERAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Fever suggests a systemic infection, bacterial meningitis, encephali-
tis, heat stroke, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, malignant hyper-
thermia due to anesthetics, or anticholinergic drug intoxication. 
Only rarely is fever attributable to a lesion that has disturbed hypo-
thalamic temperature-regulating centers (“central fever”) and this 
diagnosis should only be considered after an exhaustive search for 
other causes fails to reveal an explanation for fever. A slight eleva-
tion in temperature may follow vigorous convulsions. Hypothermia 
is observed with alcohol, barbiturate, sedative, or phenothiazine 
intoxication; hypoglycemia; peripheral circulatory failure; or 
extreme hypothyroidism. Hypothermia itself causes coma when the 
temperature is <31°C (87.8°F) regardless of the underlying etiology. 
Tachypnea may indicate systemic acidosis or pneumonia. Aberrant 
respiratory patterns that reflect brainstem disorders are discussed 
below. Marked hypertension suggests hypertensive encephalopa-
thy, cerebral hemorrhage, large cerebral infarction, or head injury. 
Hypotension is characteristic of coma from alcohol or barbiturate 
intoxication, internal hemorrhage or myocardial infarction causing 
poor delivery of blood to the brain, sepsis, profound hypothyroid-
ism, or Addisonian crisis. The funduscopic examination can detect 
increased intracranial pressure (ICP) (papilledema), subarachnoid 
hemorrhage (subhyaloid hemorrhages), and hypertensive enceph-
alopathy (exudates, hemorrhages, vessel-crossing changes, papille-
dema). Cutaneous petechiae suggest thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, meningococcemia, or a bleeding diathesis associated with 
an intracerebral hemorrhage. Cyanosis and reddish or anemic skin 
coloration are other indications of an underlying systemic disease or 
carbon monoxide as responsible for the coma.
NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION
The patient should first be observed without intervention by the 
examiner. Tossing about in the bed, reaching up toward the face, 
crossing legs, yawning, swallowing, coughing, or moaning reflect 
a drowsy state that is close to normal awakeness. Lack of restless 
movements on one side or an outturned leg suggests hemiplegia. 
Subtle, intermittent twitching movements of a foot, finger, or facial 
muscle may be the only sign of seizures. Multifocal myoclonus 
almost always indicates a metabolic disorder, particularly uremia, 
anoxia, drug intoxication, or rarely a prion disease (Chap. 430). In a 
drowsy and confused patient, bilateral asterixis is a sign of metabolic 
encephalopathy or drug intoxication.
Decorticate rigidity and decerebrate rigidity, or “posturing,” 
describe stereotyped arm and leg movements occurring spontane-
ously or elicited by sensory stimulation. Flexion of the elbows and 
wrists and supination of the arm (decorticate posturing) suggests 
bilateral damage rostral to the midbrain, whereas extension of the 
elbows and wrists with pronation (decerebrate posturing) indicates 
damage to motor tracts caudal to the midbrain. These localizations 
have been adapted from animal work and cannot be applied with 
precision to coma in humans. In fact, acute and widespread disorders 
of any type, regardless of location, frequently cause limb extension.
LEVEL OF AROUSAL
A sequence of increasingly intense stimuli is first used to determine 
the threshold for arousal and the motor response of each side of the 
body. The results of testing may vary from minute to minute, and 
serial examinations are useful. Tickling the nostrils with a cotton 
wisp is a moderate stimulus to arousal—all but deeply stuporous 
and comatose patients will move the head away and arouse to some 
degree. An even greater degree of responsiveness is present if the 
patient uses his hand to remove an offending stimulus. Pressure 
on the knuckles or bony prominences and pinprick stimulation are 
humane forms of noxious stimuli; pinching the skin causes unsightly 
ecchymoses and is generally not necessary but may be useful in 
eliciting abduction withdrawal movements of the limbs. Posturing 
in response to noxious stimuli indicates severe damage to the corti-
cospinal system, whereas abduction-avoidance movement of a limb 
is usually purposeful and denotes an intact corticospinal system. 
Posturing may also be unilateral and coexist with purposeful limb 
movements, reflecting incomplete damage to the motor system.
BRAINSTEM REFLEXES
Given that the nuclei of the cranial nerves and the RAS are both 
located in the brainstem, assessment of brainstem function is essen-
tial to localization of the lesion in coma (Fig. 300-3). Patients 
with preserved brainstem reflexes typically have a bihemispheric 
localization to coma, including toxic or drug intoxication, whereas 
patients with abnormal brainstem reflexes either have an RAS local-
ization to their coma or are suffering from a herniation syndrome 
impacting the brainstem remotely from a cerebral mass lesion. The 
most important brainstem reflexes that are examined are pupillary 
size and reaction to light, spontaneous and elicited eye movements, 
corneal responses, and the respiratory pattern.
Pupillary light reflex
Reflex conjugate
eye movements
Medulla
Pons
M
L
F
III
V
Vll
Vl
Vlll
III
Respiratory
neurons
Corneal-blink
reflex
FIGURE 300-3  Examination of brainstem reflexes in coma. Midbrain and third 
nerve function are tested by pupillary reaction to light, pontine function by 
spontaneous and reflex eye movements and corneal responses, and medullary 
function by respiratory and pharyngeal responses. Reflex conjugate, horizontal 
eye movements are dependent on the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) 
interconnecting the sixth and contralateral third nerve nuclei. Head rotation 
(oculocephalic reflex) or caloric stimulation of the labyrinths (oculovestibular 
reflex) elicits contraversive eye movements (for details see text).


--- PDF PAGE 2118 ---

PART 8
Critical Care Medicine
2072
Pupillary Signs  Pupillary reactions are examined with a bright, dif-
fuse light. Reactive and round pupils of midsize (2.5–5 mm) essen-
tially exclude upper midbrain damage, either primary or secondary 
to compression. A response to light may be difficult to appreciate in 
pupils <2 mm in diameter, and bright room lighting mutes pupil-
lary reactivity. One enlarged and poorly reactive pupil (>6 mm) sig-
nifies compression or stretching of the third nerve from the effects 
of a cerebral mass above. Enlargement of the pupil contralateral 
to a hemispheral mass may occur but is infrequent. An oval and 
slightly eccentric pupil is a transitional sign that accompanies early  
midbrain–third nerve compression. The most extreme pupillary 
sign, bilaterally dilated and unreactive pupils, indicates severe 
midbrain damage, usually from compression by a supratentorial 
mass. Ingestion of drugs with anticholinergic activity, the use of 
mydriatic eye drops, nebulizer treatments, and direct ocular trauma 
are among the causes of misleading pupillary enlargement.
Reactive and bilaterally small (1–2.5 mm) but not pinpoint pupils 
are seen in metabolic encephalopathies or in deep bilateral hemi-
spheral lesions such as hydrocephalus or thalamic hemorrhage. Even 
smaller reactive pupils (<1 mm) characterize narcotic or barbiturate 
overdoses but also occur with extensive pontine hemorrhage. The 
response to naloxone and the presence of reflex eye movements (see 
below) assist in distinguishing between these. Unilateral miosis in 
coma has been attributed to dysfunction of sympathetic efferents orig-
inating in the posterior hypothalamus and descending in the tegmen-
tum of the brainstem to the cervical cord. It is an occasional finding 
in patients with a large cerebral hemorrhage that affects the thalamus.
Ocular Movements  The eyes are first observed by elevating the 
lids and observing the resting position and spontaneous move-
ments of the globes. Horizontal divergence of the eyes at rest is nor-
mal in drowsiness. As coma deepens, the ocular axes may become 
parallel again.
Spontaneous eye movements in coma often take the form of 
conjugate horizontal roving. This finding alone exonerates extensive 
damage in the midbrain and pons and has the same significance 
as normal reflex eye movements (see below). Conjugate horizontal 
ocular deviation to one side indicates damage to the frontal lobe 
on the same side or less commonly the pons on the opposite side. 
This phenomenon is summarized by the following maxim: The eyes 
look toward a hemispheral lesion and away from a brainstem lesion. Sei-
zures involving the frontal lobe drive the eyes to the opposite side, 
simulating a pontine destructive lesion. The eyes may occasionally 
turn paradoxically away from the side of a deep hemispheral lesion 
(“wrong-way eyes”). The eyes turn down and inward with tha-
lamic and upper midbrain lesions, typically thalamic hemorrhage.  
“Ocular bobbing” describes brisk downward and slow upward 
movements of the eyes associated with loss of horizontal eye 
movements and is diagnostic of bilateral pontine damage, usually 
from thrombosis of the basilar artery. “Ocular dipping” is a slower, 
arrhythmic downward movement followed by a faster upward 
movement in patients with normal reflex horizontal gaze; it usually 
indicates diffuse cortical anoxic damage.
The oculocephalic reflexes, elicited by moving the head from side 
to side or vertically and observing eye movements in the direction 
opposite to the head movement, depend on the integrity of the ocu-
lar motor nuclei and their interconnecting tracts that extend from 
the midbrain to the pons and medulla (Fig. 300-3). The movements, 
called somewhat inappropriately “doll’s eyes,” are normally sup-
pressed in the awake patient with intact frontal lobes. The ability 
to elicit them therefore reflects both reduced cortical influence on 
the brainstem and intact brainstem pathways. The opposite, an 
absence of reflex eye movements, usually signifies damage within 
the brainstem but can result from overdoses of certain drugs. In this 
circumstance, normal pupillary size and light reaction distinguishes 
most drug-induced comas from structural brainstem damage. 
Oculocephalic reflexes should never be elicited in patients with 
possible head or neck trauma, as vigorous head movements can 
precipitate or worsen a spinal cord injury.
Thermal, or “caloric,” stimulation of the vestibular apparatus 
(oculovestibular response) provides a more intense stimulus for the 
oculocephalic reflex but provides essentially the same information. 
The test is performed by irrigating the external auditory canal with 
cold water in order to induce convection currents in the labyrinths. 
After a brief latency, the result is tonic deviation of both eyes to the 
side of cold-water irrigation. In comatose patients, nystagmus in the 
opposite direction may not occur. The acronym “COWS” has been 
used to remind generations of medical students of the direction 
of nystagmus—cold water opposite, warm water same—but since 
nystagmus is often absent in the opposite direction due to frontal 
lobe dysfunction in coma, this mnemonic does not often hold true.
When touching the cornea with a wisp of cotton, a response 
consisting of brief bilateral lid closure is normally observed. The 
corneal reflex depends on the integrity of pontine pathways between 
the fifth (afferent) and both seventh (efferent) cranial nerves; in 
conjunction with reflex eye movements, it is a useful test of pontine 
function. CNS-depressant drugs diminish or eliminate the corneal 
responses soon after reflex eye movements are paralyzed but before 
the pupils become unreactive to light. The corneal response may be 
lost for a time on the side of an acute hemiplegia.
Respiratory Patterns  These are of less localizing value in compar-
ison to other brainstem signs. Shallow, slow, but regular breathing 
suggests metabolic or drug depression. Cheyne-Stokes respiration 
in its typical cyclic form, ending with a brief apneic period, signifies 
bihemispheral damage or metabolic suppression and commonly 
accompanies light coma. Rapid, deep (Kussmaul) breathing usually 
implies metabolic acidosis but may also occur with pontomesen-
cephalic lesions. Agonal gasps are the result of lower brainstem 
(medullary) damage and are recognized as the terminal respiratory 
pattern of severe brain damage. A number of other cyclic breathing 
variations have been described but are of lesser significance.
■
■LABORATORY STUDIES AND IMAGING
The studies that are most useful in the diagnosis of coma are chemi-
cal-toxicologic analysis of blood and urine, cranial CT or MRI, EEG, 
and CSF examination. Arterial blood gas analysis is helpful in patients 
with lung disease and acid-base disorders. The metabolic aberrations 
commonly encountered in clinical practice are usually revealed by 
measurement of electrolytes, glucose, calcium, magnesium, osmolarity, 
and renal (blood urea nitrogen) and hepatic (NH3) function. Toxicologic 
analysis may be necessary in any case of acute coma where the diag-
nosis is not immediately clear. However, the presence of exogenous 
drugs or toxins, especially alcohol, does not exclude the possibility 
that other factors, particularly head trauma, are also contributing to 
the clinical state. An ethanol level of 43 mmol/L (0.2 g/dL) in nonhab-
ituated patients generally causes impaired mental activity; a level of 
>65 mmol/L (0.3 g/dL) is associated with stupor. The development of 
tolerance may allow some chronic alcoholics to remain awake at levels 
>87 mmol/L (0.4 g/dL).
The availability of CT and MRI has focused attention on causes 
of coma that are detectable by imaging (e.g., hemorrhage, tumor, or 
hydrocephalus). Resorting primarily to this approach, although at 
times expedient, is imprudent because most cases of coma (and con-
fusion) are metabolic or toxic in origin. A normal CT scan does not 
exclude an anatomic lesion as the cause of coma; early bilateral hemi-
sphere infarction, acute brainstem infarction, encephalitis, meningitis, 
mechanical shearing of axons as a result of closed head trauma, sagittal 
sinus thrombosis, hypoxic injury and subdural hematoma isodense 
to adjacent brain are some of the disorders that may not be detected. 
Sometimes imaging results can be misleading such as when small 
subdural hematomas or old strokes are found, but the patient’s coma 
is due to intoxication.
The EEG (Chap. 418) provides clues in metabolic or drug-induced 
states but is rarely diagnostic. However, it is the essential test to reveal 
coma due to nonconvulsive seizures, and shows fairly characteristic 
patterns in herpesvirus encephalitis and prion (Creutzfeldt-Jakob) dis-
ease. The EEG may be further helpful in disclosing generalized slowing 


--- PDF PAGE 2119 ---

CHAPTER 300 Coma
2073
of the background activity, a reflection of the severity of an encepha-
lopathy. Predominant high-voltage slowing (δ or triphasic waves) in 
the frontal regions is typical of metabolic coma, as from hepatic failure, 
and widespread fast (β) activity implicates sedative drugs (e.g., benzo-
diazepines). A special pattern of “alpha coma,” defined by widespread, 
variable 8- to 12-Hz activity, superficially resembles the normal α 
rhythm of waking but, unlike normal α activity, is not altered by envi-
ronmental stimuli. Alpha coma results from pontine or diffuse cortical 
damage and is associated with a poor prognosis. Normal α activity on 
the EEG, which is suppressed by stimulating the patient, also alerts the 
clinician to the locked-in syndrome or to hysteria or catatonia.
Lumbar puncture should be performed if no cause is readily appar-
ent, as examination of the CSF remains indispensable in the diagnosis 
of various forms of meningitis and encephalitis. An imaging study 
should be performed prior to lumbar puncture to exclude a large intra-
cranial mass lesion which could lead to herniation with lumbar punc-
ture. Blood cultures and administration of antibiotics should precede 
the imaging study if infectious meningitis is suspected (Chap. 133).
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF COMA
(Table 300-1) The causes of coma can be divided into three broad cat-
egories: cases without focal neurologic signs (e.g., metabolic and toxic 
encephalopathies); cases with prominent focal signs (e.g., stroke, cere-
bral hemorrhage); and meningitis syndromes, characterized by fever or 
stiff neck and an excess of cells in the spinal fluid (e.g., bacterial menin-
gitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage, encephalitis). Causes of sudden coma 
include drug ingestion, cerebral hemorrhage, trauma, cardiac arrest, 
epilepsy, and basilar artery occlusion. Coma that appears subacutely is 
usually related to a preexisting medical or neurologic problem or, less 
often, to secondary brain swelling surrounding a mass such as tumor 
or cerebral infarction.
The diagnosis of coma due to cerebrovascular disease can be diffi-
cult (Chap. 419). The most common diseases are (1) basal ganglia and 
thalamic hemorrhage (acute but not instantaneous onset, vomiting, 
headache, hemiplegia, and characteristic eye signs); (2) pontine hemor-
rhage (sudden onset, pinpoint pupils, loss of reflex eye movements and 
corneal responses, ocular bobbing, posturing, and hyperventilation); 
(3) cerebellar hemorrhage (occipital headache, vomiting, gaze paresis, 
and inability to stand and walk); (4) basilar artery thrombosis (neuro-
logic prodrome or warning spells, diplopia, dysarthria, vomiting, eye 
movement and corneal response abnormalities, and asymmetric limb 
paresis); and (5) subarachnoid hemorrhage (precipitous coma after 
sudden severe headache and vomiting). The most common stroke, 
infarction in the territory of the middle cerebral artery, does not cause 
coma, but edema surrounding large infarctions may expand over sev-
eral days and cause coma from mass effect.
The syndrome of acute hydrocephalus accompanies many intracra-
nial diseases, particularly subarachnoid hemorrhage. It is characterized 
by headache and sometimes vomiting that may progress quickly to 
coma with extensor posturing of the limbs, bilateral Babinski signs, 
small unreactive pupils, and impaired oculocephalic movements in the 
vertical direction. At times, the coma may be featureless without later-
alizing signs, although papilledema is often present.
■
■BRAIN DEATH
This is a state of irreversible cessation of all cerebral and brainstem 
function with preservation of cardiac activity and maintenance of 
respiratory and somatic function by artificial means. Brain death is the 
only type of brain damage recognized as morally, ethically, and legally 
equivalent to death. Criteria have been advanced for the diagnosis of 
brain death, and it is essential to adhere to consensus standards as 
multiple studies have shown variability in local practice. Given the 
implications of such a diagnosis, clinicians must be thorough and pre-
cise in determining brain death. Established criteria are simple, can be 
assessed at the bedside, and allow no chance of diagnostic error. They 
contain two essential elements, after assuring that no confounding fac-
tors (e.g., hypothermia, drug intoxication) are present: (1) widespread 
cortical destruction that is reflected by deep coma and unresponsive-
ness to all forms of stimulation; (2) global brainstem damage demon-
strated by absent pupillary light reaction, absent corneal reflexes, loss 
of oculovestibular reflexes, and destruction of the medulla, manifested 
by complete and irreversible apnea. Diabetes insipidus is usually pres-
ent, but may only develop hours or days after the other clinical signs 
of brain death appear. The pupils are usually midsized but may be 
enlarged. Loss of deep tendon reflexes is not required because the spi-
nal cord remains functional. Occasionally other reflexes that originate 
from the spine may be present and should not preclude a diagnosis of 
brain death.
Demonstration that apnea is due to medullary damage requires 
that the Pco2 be high enough to stimulate respiration during a test 
of spontaneous breathing. Apnea testing can be done safely by the use 
of preoxygenation with 100% oxygen prior to and following removal of 
the ventilator. CO2 tension increases ~0.3–0.4 kPa/min (2–3 mmHg/min) 
during apnea. Apnea is confirmed if no respiratory effort has been 
observed in the presence of a sufficiently elevated Pco2. The apnea test 
is usually stopped if there is serious cardiovascular instability.
An isoelectric EEG may be used as an optional confirmatory test 
for total cerebral damage. Radionuclide brain scanning, cerebral angi-
ography, or transcranial Doppler measurements may also be included 
to demonstrate the absence of blood flow when a confirmatory study 
is desired.
Some period of observation, usually 6–24 h, is recommended, dur-
ing which the clinical signs of brain death are sustained. It is advisable 
to delay clinical testing for at least 24 h if a cardiac arrest has caused 
brain death or if the inciting disease is not known.
It is largely accepted in Western society that the ventilator can be 
disconnected from a brain-dead patient and that organ donation is 
subsequently possible. Good communication between the physician 
and the family is important with appropriate preparation of the family 
for brain death testing and diagnosis.
TABLE 300-1  Differential Diagnosis of Coma
1.  Diseases that cause no focal brainstem or lateralizing neurologic signs  
(CT scan is often normal)
a.  Intoxications: alcohol, sedative drugs, opiates, etc.
b.  Metabolic disturbances: anoxia, hyponatremia, hypernatremia, 
hypercalcemia, diabetic acidosis, nonketotic hyperosmolar 
hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, uremia, hepatic coma, hypercarbia, 
Addisonian crisis, hypo- and hyperthyroid states, profound nutritional 
deficiency
c.  Severe systemic infections: pneumonia, septicemia, typhoid fever, 
malaria, Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome
d.  Shock from any cause
e.  Status epilepticus, nonconvulsive status epilepticus, postictal states
f.  Hyperperfusion syndromes including hypertensive encephalopathy, 
eclampsia, posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES)
g.  Severe hyperthermia, hypothermia
h.  Concussion
i.  Acute hydrocephalus
2.  Diseases that cause focal brainstem or lateralizing cerebral signs (CT scan 
is typically abnormal)
a.  Hemispheral hemorrhage (basal ganglionic, thalamic) or infarction (large 
middle cerebral artery territory) with secondary brainstem compression
b.  Brainstem infarction due to basilar artery thrombosis or embolism
c.  Brain abscess, subdural empyema
d.  Epidural and subdural hemorrhage, brain contusion
e.  Brain tumor with surrounding edema
f.  Cerebellar and pontine hemorrhage and infarction
g.  Widespread traumatic brain injury
h.  Metabolic coma (see above) in the setting of preexisting focal damage
3.  Diseases that cause meningeal irritation with or without fever, and with an 
excess of WBCs or RBCs in the CSF
a.  Subarachnoid hemorrhage from ruptured aneurysm, arteriovenous 
malformation, trauma
b.  Infectious meningitis and meningoencephalitis
c.  Paraneoplastic and autoimmune meningitis
d.  Carcinomatous and lymphomatous meningitis


================================================================================
Ch301 Severe Acute Encephalopathies and Critical Care
Pages 2120-2129
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 2120 ---

PART 8
Critical Care Medicine
2074
TREATMENT
Coma
The immediate goal in a comatose patient is prevention of further 
nervous system damage. Hypotension, hypoglycemia, hypercalce-
mia, hypoxia, hypercapnia, and hyperthermia should be corrected 
rapidly. An oropharyngeal airway is adequate to keep the pharynx 
open in a drowsy patient who is breathing normally. Tracheal intuba-
tion is indicated if there is apnea, upper airway obstruction, hypoven-
tilation, or emesis, or if the patient is at risk for aspiration. Mechanical 
ventilation is required if there is hypoventilation or a need to induce 
hypocapnia in order to lower ICP. IV access is established, and nalox-
one and dextrose are administered if narcotic overdose or hypogly-
cemia is a possibility; thiamine is given along with glucose to avoid 
provoking Wernicke’s encephalopathy in malnourished patients. In 
cases of suspected ischemic stroke including basilar thrombosis with 
brainstem ischemia, IV tissue plasminogen activator or mechanical 
embolectomy is often used after cerebral hemorrhage has been 
excluded and when the patient presents within established time 
windows for these interventions (Chap. 420). Physostigmine may 
awaken patients with anticholinergic-type drug overdose but should 
be used only with careful monitoring; many physicians believe that 
it should only be used to treat anticholinergic overdose–associated 
cardiac arrhythmias. The use of benzodiazepine antagonists offers 
some prospect of improvement after overdose; however, these drugs 
are not commonly used empirically in part due to their tendency to 
provoke seizures. Certain other toxic and drug-induced comas have 
specific treatments such as fomepizole for ethylene glycol ingestion.
Administration of hypotonic intravenous solutions should be 
monitored carefully in any serious acute brain illness because of 
the potential for exacerbating brain swelling. Cervical spine injuries 
must not be overlooked, particularly before attempting intubation 
or evaluation of oculocephalic responses. Fever and meningismus 
indicate an urgent need for examination of the CSF to diagnose men-
ingitis. Whenever acute bacterial meningitis is suspected, antibiotics 
including vancomycin and a third-generation cephalosporin should 
be administered along with dexamethasone, preferably after obtain-
ing blood cultures (see Chap. 133). The management of raised ICP 
is discussed in Chap. 301.
■
■PROGNOSIS
Some patients, especially children and young adults, may have omi-
nous early clinical findings such as abnormal brainstem reflexes and 
yet recover; ultra-early prognostication outside of brain death therefore 
is unwise. Metabolic comas have a far better prognosis than traumatic 
ones. All systems for estimating prognosis in adults should be taken 
as approximations, and medical judgments must be tempered by 
factors such as age, underlying systemic disease, and general medical 
condition. In an attempt to collect prognostic information from large 
numbers of patients with head injury, the Glasgow Coma Scale was 
devised; empirically, it has predictive value in cases of brain trauma 
(see Chap. 435). For anoxic coma, clinical signs such as the pupillary 
and motor responses after 1 day, 3 days, and 1 week have been shown 
to have predictive value; however, some of these prediction rules are 
less reliable in the setting of therapeutic hypothermia and therefore 
serial examinations are advised in this setting. The absence of the cor-
tical responses of the somatosensory evoked potentials has also been 
shown to be a strong indicator of poor outcome following hypoxic 
injury.
The uniformly poor outcome of persistent vegetative state has 
already been mentioned, but recent reports of a number of such 
patients displaying consistent cortical activation on functional MRI in 
response to salient stimuli have begun to alter the perception of such 
individuals. In one series, about 10% of vegetative patients (mainly 
following traumatic brain injury) could activate their frontal or tem-
poral lobes in response to requests by an examiner to imagine certain 
visuospatial tasks. In one case, a rudimentary form of communication 
could be established. There are also reports in exceptional patients of 
improvement in cognitive function with the implantation of thalamic-
stimulating electrodes or the use of novel activating agents including 
zolpidem. It is prudent to avoid generalizations from these findings, 
but the need for future studies of novel techniques to help communica-
tion and possibly recovery is needed.
■
■FURTHER READING
Edlow JA et al: Diagnosis of reversible causes of coma. Lancet 384:2064, 
2014.
Greer DM et al: Variability of brain death policies in the United States. 
JAMA Neurol 73:213, 2016.
Monti MM et al: Willful modulation of brain activity in disorders of 
consciousness. N Engl J Med 362:579, 2010.
Posner JB et al: Plum and Posner’s Diagnosis of Stupor and Coma, 4th ed. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 2007.
Rossetti AO et al: Neurologic prognostication of outcome in patients 
in coma after cardiac arrest. Lancet Neurol 15:597, 2016.
Life-threatening neurologic illness may be caused by a primary disor-
der affecting any region of the neuraxis or may occur as a consequence 
of a systemic disorder such as hepatic failure, multisystem organ 
failure, or cardiac arrest (Table 301-1). Neurologic critical care focuses 
on preservation of neurologic tissue and prevention of secondary 
brain injury caused by ischemia, hemorrhage, edema, herniation, and 
elevated intracranial pressure (ICP). Encephalopathy is a general term 
describing brain dysfunction that is diffuse, global, or multi-focal. 
Severe acute encephalopathies represent a group of various disorders 
due to different neurological or systemic etiologies, but that share the 
common themes of primary and secondary brain injury.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Brain Edema  Swelling, or edema, of brain tissue occurs with many 
types of brain injury. The two principal types of edema are vasogenic 
and cytotoxic. Vasogenic edema refers to the influx of fluid and solutes 
into the brain through an incompetent blood-brain barrier (BBB). In 
the normal cerebral vasculature, endothelial tight junctions associated 
with astrocytes create an impermeable barrier (the BBB), through 
which access into the brain interstitium is dependent upon specific 
transport mechanisms. The BBB may be compromised in ischemia, 
trauma, infection, and metabolic derangements. Vasogenic edema results 
from abnormal permeability of the BBB, and typically develops rapidly 
following injury. Cytotoxic edema results from cellular swelling, mem-
brane breakdown, and ultimately cell death. Clinically significant brain 
edema usually represents a combination of vasogenic and cytotoxic 
components. Edema can lead to increased ICP as well as tissue shifts 
and brain displacement or herniation from focal processes (Chap. 300). 
These tissue shifts can cause injury by mechanical distention and com-
pression in addition to the ischemia of impaired perfusion consequent 
to the elevated ICP.
Ischemic Cascade and Cellular Injury  When delivery of 
substrates, principally oxygen and glucose, is inadequate to sustain 
cellular function, a series of interrelated biochemical reactions known 
as the ischemic cascade is initiated (see Fig. 419-2). The release of exci-
tatory amino acids, especially glutamate, leads to influx of calcium 
301 Severe Acute  
Encephalopathies and  
Critical Care Weakness
J. Claude Hemphill, III,  Wade S. Smith,  
S. Andrew Josephson,  Daryl R. Gress 


--- PDF PAGE 2121 ---

CHAPTER 301 Severe Acute Encephalopathies and Critical Care Weakness  
2075
TABLE 301-1  Neurologic Disorders in Critical Illness
LOCALIZATION ALONG 
NEUROAXIS
SYNDROME
Central Nervous System
Brain: Cerebral hemispheres
Global encephalopathy
  Delirium
  Sepsis
  Organ failure—hepatic, renal
  Medication related—sedatives, hypnotics, 
analgesics, H2 blockers, antihypertensives
  Drug overdose
  Electrolyte disturbance—hyponatremia, 
hypoglycemia
  Hypotension/hypoperfusion
  Hypoxia
  Meningitis
  Subarachnoid hemorrhage
  Wernicke’s disease
  Seizure—postictal or nonconvulsive status 
epilepticus
  Hypertensive encephalopathy
  Hypothyroidism—myxedema
Focal deficits
  Ischemic stroke
  Tumor
  Abscess, subdural empyema
  Intraparenchymal hemorrhage
  Subdural/epidural hematoma
Brainstem/cerebellum
Mass effect and compression
Basilar artery thrombosis
Intraparenchymal hemorrhage
Central pontine myelinolysis
Spinal cord
Mass effect and compression
  Disk herniation
  Epidural hematoma
  Ischemia—hypotension/embolic
  Epidural abscess
Trauma
Myelitis
Peripheral Nervous System
Peripheral nerve
  Axonal
Critical illness polyneuropathy
Neuromuscular blocking agent complications
Metabolic disturbances, uremia, hyperglycemia
Medication effects—chemotherapeutic, 
antiretroviral
  Demyelinating
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy
Neuromuscular junction
Prolonged effect of neuromuscular blockade
Medication effects—aminoglycosides
Myasthenia gravis, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, 
botulism
Muscle
Critical illness myopathy
  Cachectic myopathy
  Acute necrotizing myopathy
  Thick-filament myopathy
Electrolyte disturbances—hypokalemia/
hyperkalemia, hypophosphatemia
Rhabdomyolysis
and sodium ions, which disrupt cellular homeostasis. An increased 
intracellular calcium concentration may activate proteases and lipases, 
which then lead to lipid peroxidation and free radical–mediated cell 
membrane injury. Cytotoxic edema ensues, and ultimately necrotic 
cell death and tissue infarction occur. This pathway to irreversible 
cell death is common to ischemic stroke, global cerebral ischemia, and 
traumatic brain injury.
Penumbra refers to areas of ischemic brain tissue that have not yet 
undergone irreversible infarction, implying that these regions are 
potentially salvageable if ischemia can be reversed. Factors that may 
exacerbate ischemic brain injury include systemic hypotension and 
hypoxia, which further reduce substrate delivery to vulnerable brain 
tissue, and fever, seizures, and hyperglycemia, which can increase 
cellular metabolism, outstripping compensatory processes. Clinically, 
these events are known as secondary brain insults because they lead to 
exacerbation of the primary brain injury. Prevention, identification, 
and treatment of secondary brain insults are fundamental goals of 
management.
An alternative pathway of cellular injury is apoptosis. This process 
implies programmed cell death, which may occur in the setting of 
ischemic stroke, global cerebral ischemia, traumatic brain injury, and 
possibly intracerebral hemorrhage. Apoptotic cell death can be distin-
guished histologically from the necrotic cell death of ischemia and is 
mediated through a different set of biochemical pathways; apoptotic 
cell death occurs without cerebral edema and therefore is often not 
seen on brain imaging. At present, interventions for prevention and 
treatment of apoptotic cell death remain less well defined than those 
for ischemia.
Cerebral Perfusion and Autoregulation  Brain tissue requires 
constant perfusion in order to ensure adequate delivery of substrate. 
The hemodynamic response of the brain has the capacity to preserve 
perfusion across a wide range of systemic blood pressures. Cerebral 
perfusion pressure (CPP), defined as the mean systemic arterial pres-
sure (MAP) minus the ICP, provides the driving force for circulation 
across the capillary beds of the brain. Autoregulation refers to the phys-
iologic response whereby cerebral blood flow (CBF) is regulated via 
alterations in cerebrovascular resistance in order to maintain perfusion 
over wide physiologic changes such as neuronal activation or changes 
in hemodynamic function. If systemic blood pressure drops, cerebral 
perfusion is preserved through vasodilation of arterioles in the brain; 
likewise, arteriolar vasoconstriction occurs at high systemic pressures 
to prevent hyperperfusion, resulting in fairly constant perfusion across 
a wide range of systemic blood pressures (Fig. 301-1). At the extreme 
limits of MAP or CPP (high or low), flow becomes directly related to 
perfusion pressure. These autoregulatory changes occur in the micro-
circulation and are mediated by vessels below the resolution of those 
seen on angiography. CBF is also strongly influenced by pH and Paco2. 
CBF increases with hypercapnia and acidosis and decreases with 
hypocapnia and alkalosis because of pH related changes in cerebral 
vascular resistance. This forms the basis for the use of hyperventilation 
to lower ICP, and this effect on ICP is mediated through a decrease in 
both CBF and intracranial blood volume. Cerebral autoregulation is a 
complex process critical to the normal homeostatic functioning of the 
brain, and this process may be disordered focally and unpredictably in 
disease states such as traumatic brain injury and severe focal cerebral 
ischemia.
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) and ICP  The cranial contents con-
sist essentially of brain, CSF, and blood. CSF is produced principally 
in the choroid plexus of each lateral ventricle, exits the brain via the 
foramens of Luschka and Magendie, and flows over the cortex to be 
absorbed into the venous system along the superior sagittal sinus. In 
adults, ~150 mL of CSF are contained within the ventricles and sur-
rounding the brain and spinal cord; the cerebral blood volume is also 
~150 mL. The bony skull offers excellent protection for the brain but 
allows little tolerance for additional volume. Significant increases in 
volume eventually result in increased ICP. Obstruction of CSF outflow, 
edema of cerebral tissue, or increases in volume from tumor or hema-
toma may increase ICP. Elevated ICP diminishes cerebral perfusion and 


--- PDF PAGE 2122 ---

PART 8
Critical Care Medicine
2076
Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP), mmHg
Cerebral Blood Flow (CBF), ml/100 g/min
50
150
55
),
g
B
Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP), mmHg
Cerebral Blood Flow (CBF), ml/100 g/min
0
50
150
55
F), ml/100 g/min
),
g
A
FIGURE 301-1  Pressure autoregulation of cerebral blood flow. In the normal state where autoregulation is intact A, cerebral perfusion is constant over a wide range of 
systemic blood pressures (BP). This is mediated by dilation and constriction of small cerebral arterioles (round circles). Below the blood pressure threshold for maximal 
dilation, cerebral blood flow becomes pressure-dependent and decreases whereas above the threshold for maximum constriction cerebral blood flow increases 
with increasing systemic blood pressure. In severe brain injury, autoregulatory mechanisms may be impaired and cerebral blood flow becomes pressure-dependent 
throughout (B). At the extremes of BP there may be vascular collapse (very low BP) or forced vasodilation (very high BP).
can lead to tissue ischemia. Ischemia in turn may lead to vasodilation 
via autoregulatory mechanisms designed to restore cerebral perfusion. 
However, vasodilation also increases cerebral blood volume, which in 
turn then increases ICP, lowers CPP, and provokes further ischemia. 
This vicious cycle is commonly seen in traumatic brain injury, massive 
intracerebral hemorrhage, and large hemispheric infarcts with signifi-
cant tissue shifts.
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Severe Brain Dysfunction
Critically ill patients with severe central nervous system (CNS) dys-
function require rapid evaluation and intervention in order to limit 
primary and secondary brain injury. Initial neurologic evaluation 
should be performed concurrent with stabilization of basic respi-
ratory, cardiac, and hemodynamic parameters. Significant barriers 
may exist to neurologic assessment in the critical care unit, including 
endotracheal intubation and the use of sedative or paralytic agents 
to facilitate procedures.
An impaired level of consciousness is common in critically 
ill patients. The essential first task in assessment is to determine 
whether the cause of dysfunction is related to a diffuse, usually 
metabolic, process or whether a focal, usually structural, process is 
implicated. Examples of diffuse processes include metabolic enceph-
alopathies related to organ failure, drug overdose, or hypoxia- 
ischemia. Focal processes include ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke 
and traumatic brain injury, especially with intracranial hemato-
mas. Because these two categories of disorders have fundamentally 
different causes, treatments, and prognoses, the initial focus is on 
making this distinction rapidly and accurately. The approach to the 
comatose patient is discussed in Chap. 300; etiologies are listed in 
Table 300-1.
Minor focal deficits may be present on the neurologic examination 
in patients with metabolic encephalopathies. However, the finding 
of prominent focal signs such as pupillary asymmetry, hemiparesis, 
gaze palsy, or visual field deficit should suggest the possibility of a 
structural lesion. All patients with a decreased level of consciousness 
associated with focal findings should undergo an urgent neuroim-
aging procedure, as should all patients with coma of unknown 
etiology. Computed tomography (CT) scanning is usually the most 
appropriate initial study because it can be performed quickly in criti-
cally ill patients and demonstrates hemorrhage, hydrocephalus, and 
intracranial tissue shifts well. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
may provide more specific information in some situations, such as 
acute ischemic stroke (diffusion-weighted imaging [DWI]). Any sug-
gestion of trauma from the history or examination should alert the 
examiner to the possibility of cervical spine injury and prompt an 
imaging evaluation using CT or MRI. Neurovascular imaging using 
CT or MRI angiography or venography is increasingly available and 
may suggest arterial occlusion or cerebral venous thrombosis.
Acute brainstem ischemia due to basilar artery thrombosis may 
cause brief episodes of spontaneous extensor posturing superficially 


--- PDF PAGE 2123 ---

CHAPTER 301 Severe Acute Encephalopathies and Critical Care Weakness  
2077
resembling generalized seizures. Coma of sudden onset, accompanied 
by these movements and cranial nerve abnormalities, necessitates 
emergency imaging. A noncontrast CT scan of the brain may reveal 
a hyperdense basilar artery indicating thrombus in the vessel, and 
subsequent CT or MR angiography can assess basilar artery patency.
Other diagnostic studies are best used in specific circumstances, 
usually when neuroimaging studies fail to reveal a structural lesion 
and the etiology of the altered mental state remains uncertain. 
Electroencephalography (EEG) can be important in the evaluation 
of critically ill patients with severe brain dysfunction. The EEG of 
metabolic encephalopathy typically reveals generalized slowing. 
One of the most important uses of EEG is to help exclude inappar-
ent seizures, especially nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Untreated 
continuous or frequently recurrent seizures may cause neuronal 
injury, making the diagnosis and treatment of seizures crucial in 
this patient group. Lumbar puncture (LP) may be necessary to 
exclude infectious or inflammatory processes, and an elevated 
opening pressure may be an important clue to cerebral venous sinus 
thrombosis. In patients with coma or profound encephalopathy, it is 
preferable to perform a neuroimaging study prior to LP. If bacterial 
meningitis is suspected, an LP may be performed first or antibiotics 
may be empirically administered before the diagnostic studies are 
completed. Standard laboratory evaluation of critically ill patients 
should include assessment of serum electrolytes (especially sodium 
and calcium), glucose, renal and hepatic function, complete blood 
count, and coagulation. Serum or urine toxicology screens should 
be performed in patients with encephalopathy of unknown cause. 
EEG and LP are most useful when the mechanism of the altered level 
of consciousness is uncertain; they are not routinely performed for 
diagnosis in clear-cut cases of stroke or traumatic brain injury.
Monitoring of ICP can be an important tool in selected patients. In 
general, patients who should be considered for ICP monitoring are 
those with primary neurologic disorders, such as stroke or traumatic 
brain injury, who are at significant risk for secondary brain injury 
due to elevated ICP and decreased CPP. Included are patients with 
the following: severe traumatic brain injury (Glasgow Coma Scale 
[GCS] score ≤8 [Table 435-2]); large tissue shifts from supratentorial 
ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke; or hydrocephalus from subarach-
noid hemorrhage (SAH), intraventricular hemorrhage, or posterior 
fossa stroke. An additional disorder in which ICP monitoring can 
add important information is fulminant hepatic failure, in which 
elevated ICP may be treated with barbiturates or, eventually, liver 
transplantation. In general, ventriculostomy is preferable to ICP 
monitoring devices that are placed in the brain parenchyma, because 
ventriculostomy allows CSF drainage as a method of treating ele-
vated ICP. However, parenchymal ICP monitoring is most appro-
priate for patients with diffuse edema and small ventricles (which 
may make ventriculostomy placement more difficult) or any degree 
of coagulopathy (in which ventriculostomy carries a higher risk of 
hemorrhagic complications) (Fig 301-2).
TREATMENT OF ELEVATED ICP
Elevated ICP may occur in a wide range of disorders, including head 
trauma, intracerebral hemorrhage, SAH with hydrocephalus, and 
fulminant hepatic failure. Because CSF and blood volume can be 
redistributed initially, by the time elevated ICP occurs, intracranial 
compliance is severely impaired. At this point, any small increase 
in the volume of CSF, intravascular blood, edema, or a mass lesion 
may result in a significant increase in ICP and a decrease in cerebral 
perfusion. This is a fundamental mechanism of secondary ischemic 
brain injury and constitutes an emergency that requires immediate 
attention. In general, ICP should be maintained at <20 mmHg and 
CPP should be maintained at ≥60 mmHg.
Interventions to lower ICP are ideally based on the underlying 
mechanism responsible for the elevated ICP (Table 301-2). For exam-
ple, in hydrocephalus from SAH, the principal cause of elevated ICP 
is impairment of CSF drainage. In this setting, ventricular drainage 
of CSF is likely to be sufficient and most appropriate. In head trauma 
and stroke, cytotoxic edema may be most responsible, and the use 
of osmotic agents such as mannitol or hypertonic saline becomes an 
appropriate early step. As described above, elevated ICP may cause 
tissue ischemia, and, if cerebral autoregulation is intact, the resulting 
vasodilation can lead to a cycle of worsening ischemia. Paradoxi-
cally, administration of vasopressor agents to increase mean arterial 
pressure may actually lower ICP by improving perfusion, thereby 
allowing autoregulatory vasoconstriction as ischemia is relieved and 
ultimately decreasing intracranial blood volume.
Early signs of elevated ICP include drowsiness and a diminished 
level of consciousness. Neuroimaging studies may reveal evidence 
of edema and mass effect. Hypotonic IV fluids should be avoided, 
and elevation of the head of the bed is recommended. Patients 
must be carefully observed for risk of aspiration and compromise 
of the airway as the level of alertness declines. Coma and unilateral 
Ventriculostomy
Fiberoptic
intraparenchymal
ICP monitor
Brain tissue
oxygen probe
Lateral ventricle
FIGURE 301-2  Intracranial pressure (ICP) and brain tissue oxygen monitoring. 
A ventriculostomy allows for drainage of cerebrospinal fluid to treat elevated 
ICP. Fiberoptic ICP and brain tissue oxygen monitors are usually secured using 
a screw-like skull bolt. Cerebral blood flow and microdialysis probes (not shown) 
may be placed in a manner similar to the brain tissue oxygen probe.
TABLE 301-2  Stepwise Approach to Treatment of Elevated 
Intracranial Pressure (ICP)a
Insert ICP monitor—ventriculostomy versus parenchymal device
General goals: maintain ICP <20 mmHg and CPP ≥60 mmHg. For ICP  
>20–25 mmHg for >5 min:
1.  Elevate head of the bed; midline head position
2.  Drain CSF via ventriculostomy (if in place)
3.  Osmotherapy—mannitol 25–100 g q4h as needed (maintain serum 
osmolality <320 mosmol) or hypertonic saline (30 mL, 23.4% NaCl bolus)
4.  Glucocorticoids—dexamethasone 4 mg q6h for vasogenic edema from 
tumor, abscess (avoid glucocorticoids in head trauma, ischemic and 
hemorrhagic stroke)
5.  Sedation (e.g., morphine, propofol, or midazolam); add neuromuscular 
paralysis if necessary (patient will require endotracheal intubation and 
mechanical ventilation at this point, if not before)
6.  Hyperventilation—to Paco2 30–35 mmHg (short-term use or skip this step)
7.  Pressor therapy—phenylephrine, dopamine, or norepinephrine to maintain 
adequate MAP to ensure CPP ≥60 mmHg (maintain euvolemia to minimize 
deleterious systemic effects of pressors). May adjust target CPP in 
individual patients based on autoregulation status.
8.  Consider second-tier therapies for refractory elevated ICP
a.  Decompressive craniectomy
b.  High-dose barbiturate therapy (“pentobarb coma”)
c.  Hypothermia to 33°C
aThroughout ICP treatment algorithm, consider repeat head computed tomography 
to identify mass lesions amenable to surgical evacuation. May alter order of 
steps based on directed treatment to specific cause of elevated ICP.
Abbreviations: CPP, cerebral perfusion pressure; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MAP, 
mean arterial pressure; PaCO2, arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide.


--- PDF PAGE 2124 ---

PART 8
Critical Care Medicine
2078
pupillary changes are late signs and require immediate intervention. 
Emergent treatment of elevated ICP is most quickly achieved by 
intubation and hyperventilation, which causes vasoconstriction and 
reduces cerebral blood volume. To avoid provoking or worsening 
cerebral ischemia, hyperventilation, if used at all, is best adminis-
tered only for short periods of time until a more definitive treatment 
can be instituted. Furthermore, the effects of hyperventilation on 
ICP are short-lived, often lasting only for several hours because 
of the buffering capacity of the cerebral interstitium, and rebound 
elevations of ICP may accompany abrupt discontinuation of hyper-
ventilation. As the level of consciousness declines to coma, the 
ability to follow the neurologic status of the patient by examination 
lessens and measurement of ICP assumes greater importance. If a 
ventriculostomy device is in place, direct drainage of CSF to reduce 
ICP is possible. Finally, high-dose barbiturates, decompressive hemi-
craniectomy, and hypothermia are sometimes used for refractory 
elevations of ICP, although these have significant side effects and 
only decompressive hemicraniectomy has been shown to improve 
outcome in select patients.
SECONDARY BRAIN INSULTS
Patients with primary brain injuries, whether due to trauma or 
stroke, are at risk for ongoing secondary ischemic brain injury. 
Because secondary brain injury can be a major determinant of a 
poor outcome, strategies for minimizing secondary brain insults are 
an integral part of the critical care of all patients. Although elevated 
ICP may lead to secondary ischemia, most secondary brain injury is 
mediated through other clinical events that exacerbate the ischemic 
cascade already initiated by the primary brain injury. Episodes of 
secondary brain insults are usually not associated with apparent 
neurologic worsening. Rather, they lead to cumulative injury limit-
ing eventual recovery, which manifests as a higher mortality rate or 
worsened long-term functional outcome. Thus, close monitoring of 
vital signs is important, as is early intervention to prevent secondary 
ischemia. Avoiding hypotension and hypoxia is critical, as signifi-
cant hypotensive events (systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg) as 
short as 10 min in duration have been shown to adversely influence 
outcome after traumatic brain injury. Even in patients with stroke or 
head trauma who do not require ICP monitoring, close attention to 
adequate cerebral perfusion is warranted. Hypoxia (pulse oximetry 
saturation <90%), particularly in combination with hypotension, 
also leads to secondary brain injury. Likewise, fever and hypergly-
cemia both worsen experimental ischemia and have been associated 
with worsened clinical outcome after stroke and head trauma. 
Aggressive control of fever with a goal of normothermia is war-
ranted but may be difficult to achieve with antipyretic medications 
and cooling blankets. The value of newer surface or intravascular 
temperature control devices for the management of refractory fever 
is under investigation. The use of IV insulin infusion is encouraged 
for control of hyperglycemia because this allows better regulation 
of serum glucose levels than SC insulin. A reasonable goal is to 
maintain the serum glucose level at <10.0 mmol/L (<180 mg/dL), 
although episodes of hypoglycemia appear equally detrimental and 
the optimal targets remain uncertain. New cerebral monitoring tools 
that allow continuous evaluation of brain tissue oxygen tension, 
CBF, and metabolism (via microdialysis) may further improve the 
management of secondary brain injury.
CRITICAL CARE DISORDERS OF THE CNS
■
■HYPOXIC-ISCHEMIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
This occurs from lack of delivery of oxygen to the brain because of 
extreme hypotension (hypoxia-ischemia) or hypoxia due to respiratory 
failure. Causes include myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest, shock, 
asphyxiation, paralysis of respiration, and carbon monoxide or cyanide 
poisoning. In some circumstances, hypoxia may predominate. Carbon 
monoxide and cyanide poisoning are sometimes termed histotoxic 
hypoxia because they cause a direct impairment of the respiratory chain.
Clinical Manifestations  Mild degrees of pure hypoxia, such 
as occur at high altitudes, cause impaired judgment, inattentiveness, 
motor incoordination, and, at times, euphoria. However, with hypoxia- 
ischemia, such as occurs with circulatory arrest, consciousness is lost 
within seconds. If circulation is restored within 3–5 min, full recovery 
may occur, but if hypoxia-ischemia lasts beyond 3–5 min, some degree 
of permanent cerebral damage often results. Except in extreme cases, it 
may be difficult to judge the precise degree of hypoxia-ischemia, and 
some patients make a relatively full recovery after even 8–10 min of 
global cerebral ischemia. The brain is more tolerant to pure hypoxia 
than it is to hypoxia-ischemia. For example, a Pao2 as low as 20 mmHg 
(2.7 kPa) can be well tolerated if it develops gradually, and normal 
blood pressure is maintained, whereas short durations of very low or 
absent cerebral circulation may result in permanent impairment.
Clinical examination at different time points after a hypoxic-ischemic 
insult (especially cardiac arrest) is useful in assessing prognosis for 
long-term neurologic outcome. The prognosis is better for patients 
with intact brainstem function, as indicated by normal pupillary 
light responses and intact oculocephalic (doll’s eyes), oculovestibu-
lar (caloric), and corneal reflexes. Absence of these reflexes and the 
presence of persistently dilated pupils that do not react to light are 
grave prognostic signs. A low likelihood of a favorable outcome from 
hypoxic-ischemic coma is strongly suggested by an absent pupillary 
light reflex or extensor or absent motor response to pain on day 3 fol-
lowing the injury, excluding patients with metabolic disturbances and 
those treated with high-dose barbiturates or hypothermia, which con-
found interpretation of these signs. Electrophysiologically, the bilateral 
absence of the N20 component of the somatosensory evoked potential 
(SSEP) in the first several days also conveys a poor prognosis. Also, the 
presence of a burst-suppression pattern of myoclonic status epilepti-
cus on EEG (Fig 301-3) or a nonreactive EEG is associated with a low 
likelihood of good functional outcome. A very elevated serum level 
(>33 μg/L) of the biochemical marker neuron-specific enolase (NSE) 
within the first 3 days is indicative of brain damage after resuscitation 
from cardiac arrest and predicts a poor outcome. Current approaches to 
prognostication after cardiac arrest encourage the use of a multimodal 
approach that includes these diagnostic tests, along with CT or MRI 
neuroimaging, in conjunction with clinical neurological assessment. 
Recent studies suggest that the administration of mild hypothermia 
after cardiac arrest (see “Treatment”) may affect the time points when 
these clinical and electrophysiologic predictors become reliable in 
identifying patients with a very low likelihood of clinically meaningful 
recovery. For example, the false-positive rate for incorrect prediction 
of poor neurologic outcome may be as high as 21% (95% confidence 
interval [CI] 8–43%) for patients treated with mild hypothermia who 
exhibit 3-day motor function no better than extensor posturing. Thus, 
sufficient time from injury is important to ensure accuracy of prognos-
tic assessment. Long-term consequences of hypoxic-ischemic enceph-
alopathy include persistent coma or a vegetative state (Chap. 300), 
dementia (Chap. 25), visual agnosia (Chap. 26), parkinsonism, choreo-
athetosis, cerebellar ataxia, myoclonus, seizures, and an amnestic state, 
which may be a consequence of selective damage to the hippocampus.
Pathology  Principal histologic findings are extensive multifocal 
or diffuse laminar cortical necrosis (Fig. 301-4), with frequent involve-
ment of the hippocampus. The hippocampal CA1 neurons are vulner-
able to even brief episodes of hypoxia-ischemia, perhaps explaining 
why selective persistent memory deficits may occur after brief cardiac 
arrest. Scattered small areas of infarction or neuronal loss may be pres-
ent in the basal ganglia, hypothalamus, or brainstem. In some cases, 
extensive bilateral thalamic scarring may affect pathways that medi-
ate arousal, and this pathology may be responsible for the persistent 
vegetative state. A specific form of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, 
so-called watershed infarcts, occurs at the distal territories between 
the major cerebral arteries and can cause cognitive deficits, including 
visual agnosia, and weakness that is greater in proximal than in distal 
muscle groups.
Diagnosis  Diagnosis is based on the history of a hypoxic-ischemic 
event such as cardiac arrest. Blood pressure <70 mmHg systolic or 


--- PDF PAGE 2125 ---

CHAPTER 301 Severe Acute Encephalopathies and Critical Care Weakness  
2079
Pao2 <40 mmHg is usually necessary, although both absolute levels 
and duration of exposure are important determinants of cellular injury. 
Carbon monoxide intoxication can be confirmed by measurement of 
carboxyhemoglobin and is suggested by a cherry red color of the venous 
blood and skin, although the latter is an inconsistent clinical finding.
TREATMENT
Hypoxic-Ischemic Encephalopathy
Treatment should be directed at restoration of normal cardiore-
spiratory function. This includes securing a clear airway, ensuring 
adequate oxygenation and ventilation, and restoring cerebral per-
fusion, whether by cardiopulmonary resuscitation, fluid, pressors, 
or cardiac pacing. Hypothermia may target the neuronal cell injury 
FIGURE 301-3  Electroencephalography (EEG) after cardiac arrest. A burst-suppression pattern is seen in a comatose patient with severe hypoxic-ischemic 
encephalopathy after cardiac arrest. In this patient, each burst on EEG was associated with a whole-body jerking movement leading to the clinical and electrophysiological 
diagnosis of myoclonic status epilepticus.
cascade and has substantial neuroprotective properties in exper-
imental models of brain injury. In two trials, mild hypothermia 
(33°C) improved functional outcome in patients who remained 
comatose after resuscitation from a cardiac arrest. Treatment was 
initiated within minutes of cardiac resuscitation and continued 
for 12 h in one study and 24 h in the other. In a more recent study, 
targeted temperature management (TTM) to 33 or 36°C resulted in 
similar outcomes. Potential complications of hypothermia include 
coagulopathy and an increased risk of infection. Current guidelines 
recommend TTM for cardiac arrest patients who have no mean-
ingful response to verbal commands after return of spontaneous 
circulation, with temperature maintained constant between 32 and 
36°C for at least 24 h.
Severe carbon monoxide intoxication may be treated with hyper-
baric oxygen. Anticonvulsants may be needed to control seizures, 
although these are not usually given prophylactically. Posthypoxic 
myoclonus may respond to oral administration of clonazepam at 
doses of 1.5–10 mg daily or valproate at doses of 300–1200 mg daily 
in divided doses. Myoclonic status epilepticus within 24 h after a 
primary circulatory arrest generally portends a very poor prognosis, 
even if seizures are controlled.
Carbon monoxide and cyanide intoxication can also cause a 
delayed encephalopathy. Little clinical impairment is evident when 
the patient first regains consciousness, but a parkinsonian syndrome 
characterized by akinesia and rigidity without tremor may develop. 
Symptoms can worsen over months, accompanied by increasing evi-
dence of damage in the basal ganglia as seen on both CT and MRI.
■
■POSTCARDIAC BYPASS BRAIN INJURY
CNS injuries following open heart or coronary artery bypass graft-
ing (CABG) surgery are common and include acute encephalopathy, 
stroke, and a chronic syndrome of cognitive impairment. Hypoperfu-
sion and embolic disease are frequently involved in the pathogenesis 
of these syndromes, although multiple mechanisms may be involved 
FIGURE 301-4  Cortical laminar necrosis in hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. 
T1-weighted postcontrast magnetic resonance imaging shows cortical 
enhancement in a watershed distribution consistent with laminar necrosis.


--- PDF PAGE 2126 ---

PART 8
Critical Care Medicine
2080 in these critically ill patients who are at risk for various metabolic and 
polypharmaceutical complications.
The frequency of hypoxic injury secondary to inadequate blood flow 
intraoperatively has been markedly decreased by the use of modern sur-
gical and anesthetic techniques. Despite these advances, some patients 
still experience neurologic complications from cerebral hypoperfusion 
or may suffer focal ischemia from carotid or focal intracranial stenoses in 
the setting of regional hypoperfusion. Postoperative infarcts in the border 
zones between vascular territories commonly are blamed on systemic 
hypotension, although these infarcts can also result from embolic disease.
Embolic disease is likely the predominant mechanism of cerebral 
injury during cardiac surgery as evidenced by diffusion-weighted MRI 
and intraoperative transcranial Doppler ultrasound studies. Thrombus 
in the heart itself as well as atheromas in the aortic arch can become 
dislodged during cardiac surgeries, releasing a shower of particulate 
matter into the cerebral circulation. Cross-clamping of the aorta, manip-
ulation of the heart, extracorporeal circulation techniques (“bypass”), 
arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation, and introduction of air through 
suctioning have all been implicated as potential sources of emboli.
This shower of microemboli results in a number of clinical syn-
dromes. Occasionally, a single large embolus leads to an isolated 
large-vessel stroke that presents with obvious clinical focal deficits. 
When there is a high burden of very small emboli, an acute encepha-
lopathy can occur postoperatively, presenting as either a hyperactive 
or hypoactive confusional state, the latter of which is frequently and 
incorrectly ascribed to depression or a sedative-induced delirium. 
When the burden of microemboli is lower, no acute syndrome is recog-
nized, but the patient may suffer a chronic cognitive deficit.
■
■METABOLIC ENCEPHALOPATHIES
Altered mental states, variously described as confusion, delirium, 
disorientation, and encephalopathy, are present in many patients 
with severe illness in an intensive care unit (ICU). Older patients are 
particularly vulnerable to delirium, a confusional state characterized 
by disordered perception, frequent hallucinations, delusions, and 
sleep disturbance. This is often attributed to medication effects, sleep 
deprivation, pain, and anxiety. The presence of delirium is associated 
with worsened outcome in critically ill patients, even in those without 
an identifiable CNS pathology such as stroke or brain trauma. In these 
patients, the cause of delirium is often multifactorial, resulting from 
organ dysfunction, sepsis, and especially the use of medications given 
to treat pain, agitation, or anxiety. Critically ill patients are often treated 
with a variety of sedative and analgesic medications, including opiates, 
benzodiazepines, neuroleptics, and sedative-anesthetic medications, 
such as propofol. In critically ill patients requiring sedation, use of the 
centrally acting α2 agonist dexmedetomidine may reduce delirium and 
shorten the duration of mechanical ventilation compared to the use of 
benzodiazepines such as lorazepam or midazolam. The presence of 
family members in the ICU may also help to calm and orient agitated 
patients, and in severe cases, low doses of neuroleptics (e.g., haloperi-
dol 0.5–1 mg) can be useful. Current strategies focus on limiting the use 
of sedative medications when this can be done safely.
In the ICU setting, several metabolic causes of an altered level of 
consciousness predominate. Hypercarbic encephalopathy can present 
with headache, confusion, stupor, or coma. Hypoventilation syndrome 
occurs most frequently in patients with a history of chronic CO2 reten-
tion who are receiving oxygen therapy for emphysema or chronic 
pulmonary disease (Chap. 290). The elevated Paco2 leading to CO2 
narcosis may have a direct anesthetic effect, and cerebral vasodilation 
from increased Paco2 can lead to increased ICP. Hepatic encephalopa-
thy is suggested by asterixis and can occur in chronic liver failure or 
acute fulminant hepatic failure. Both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia 
can cause encephalopathy, as can hypernatremia and hyponatremia. 
Confusion, impairment of eye movements, and gait ataxia are the hall-
marks of acute Wernicke’s disease (see below).
■
■SEPSIS-ASSOCIATED ENCEPHALOPATHY
Pathogenesis  In patients with sepsis, the systemic response to 
infectious agents leads to the release of circulating inflammatory 
mediators that appear to contribute to encephalopathy. Critical illness, 
in association with the systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
(SIRS), can lead to multisystem organ failure. This syndrome can occur 
in the setting of apparent sepsis, severe burns, or trauma, even without 
clear identification of an infectious agent. Many patients with critical 
illness, sepsis, or SIRS develop encephalopathy without obvious expla-
nation. This condition is broadly termed sepsis-associated encephalopathy. 
Although the specific mediators leading to neurologic dysfunction 
remain uncertain, it is clear that the encephalopathy is not simply the 
result of metabolic derangements of multiorgan failure. The cytokines 
tumor necrosis factor, interleukin (IL)-1, IL-2, and IL-6 are thought to 
play a role in this syndrome.
Diagnosis  Sepsis-associated encephalopathy presents clinically as 
a diffuse dysfunction of the brain without prominent focal findings. 
Confusion, disorientation, agitation, and fluctuations in level of alert-
ness are typical. In more profound cases, especially with hemodynamic 
compromise, the decrease in level of alertness can be more prominent, 
at times resulting in coma. Hyperreflexia and frontal release signs such 
as a grasp or snout reflex (Chap. 26) can be seen. Abnormal movements 
such as myoclonus, tremor, or asterixis can occur. Sepsis-associated 
encephalopathy is quite common, occurring in the majority of patients 
with sepsis and multisystem organ failure. Diagnosis is often difficult 
because of the multiple potential causes of neurologic dysfunction in 
critically ill patients and requires exclusion of structural, metabolic, 
toxic, and infectious (e.g., meningitis or encephalitis) causes. The mor-
tality rate of patients with sepsis-associated encephalopathy severe 
enough to produce coma approaches 50%, although this principally 
reflects the severity of the underlying critical illness and is not a 
direct result of the encephalopathy. Patients dying from severe sepsis 
or septic shock may have elevated levels of the serum brain injury 
biomarker S-100β and neuropathologic findings of neuronal apoptosis 
and cerebral ischemic injury. Successful treatment of the underlying 
critical illness almost always results in substantial improvement of 
the encephalopathy. However, although severe disability to the level 
of chronic vegetative or minimally conscious states is uncommon, 
long-term cognitive dysfunction clinically similar to dementia is being 
increasingly recognized in some survivors, especially in older patients.
■
■OSMOTIC DEMYELINATION SYNDROME (CENTRAL 
PONTINE MYELINOLYSIS)
This disorder often presents in a devastating fashion as quadriplegia 
and pseudobulbar palsy although less severe presentations may occur. 
Predisposing factors include severe underlying medical illness or 
nutritional deficiency; most cases are associated with rapid correction 
of hyponatremia or with hyperosmolar states and clinical symptoms 
are usually identified a few days after sodium correction. Previously 
termed central pontine myelinolysis, the more accurate term osmotic 
demyelination syndrome is now preferred. The pathology consists of 
demyelination without inflammation in the base of the pons, with 
relative sparing of axons and nerve cells. MRI is useful in establishing 
the diagnosis (Fig. 301-5) and may also identify partial forms that pres-
ent as confusion, dysarthria, and/or disturbances of conjugate gaze 
without quadriplegia. Occasional cases present with lesions outside 
of the brainstem. Therapeutic guidelines for the restoration of severe 
hyponatremia should aim for gradual correction, i.e., by ≤10 mmol/L 
(10 meq/L) within 24 h and 20 mmol/L (20 meq/L) within 48 h.
■
■WERNICKE’S DISEASE
Wernicke’s disease is a common and preventable disorder due to a defi-
ciency of thiamine (Chap. 326). In the United States, alcoholics account 
for most cases, but patients with malnutrition due to hyperemesis, 
starvation, renal dialysis, cancer, HIV/AIDS, or rarely gastric surgery 
are also at risk. The characteristic clinical triad is ophthalmoplegia, 
ataxia, and global confusion. However, only one-third of patients 
with acute Wernicke’s disease present with the classic clinical triad. 
Most patients are profoundly disoriented, indifferent, and inattentive, 
although rarely they have an agitated delirium related to ethanol 
withdrawal. If the disease is not treated, stupor, coma, and death may 
ensue. Ocular motor abnormalities include horizontal nystagmus on 


--- PDF PAGE 2127 ---

CHAPTER 301 Severe Acute Encephalopathies and Critical Care Weakness  
2081
lateral gaze, lateral rectus palsy (usually bilateral), conjugate gaze pal-
sies, and rarely ptosis. Gait ataxia probably results from a combination 
of polyneuropathy, cerebellar involvement, and vestibular paresis. The 
pupils are usually spared, but they may become miotic with advanced 
disease.
Wernicke’s disease is usually associated with other manifestations 
of nutritional disease, such as polyneuropathy. Rarely, amblyopia or 
myelopathy occurs. Tachycardia and postural hypotension may be 
related to impaired function of the autonomic nervous system or to 
the coexistence of cardiovascular beriberi. Patients who recover show 
improvement in ocular palsies within hours after the administration 
of thiamine, but horizontal nystagmus may persist. Ataxia improves 
more slowly than the ocular motor abnormalities. Approximately 
half recover incompletely and are left with a slow, shuffling, wide-
based gait and an inability to tandem walk. Apathy, drowsiness, and 
confusion improve more gradually. As these symptoms recede, an 
amnestic state with impairment in recent memory and learning may 
become more apparent (Korsakoff’s psychosis). Korsakoff’s psychosis is 
frequently persistent; the residual mental state is characterized by gaps 
in memory, confabulation, and disordered temporal sequencing.
Pathology  Periventricular lesions surround the third ventricle, 
aqueduct, and fourth ventricle, with petechial hemorrhages in occa-
sional acute cases and atrophy of the mammillary bodies in most 
chronic cases. There is frequently endothelial proliferation, demyeli-
nation, and some neuronal loss. These changes may be detected by 
MRI (Fig. 301-6). The amnestic defect is related to lesions in the dorsal 
medial nuclei of the thalamus.
Pathogenesis  Thiamine is a cofactor of several enzymes, including 
transketolase, pyruvate dehydrogenase, and α-ketoglutarate dehydro-
genase. Thiamine deficiency produces a diffuse decrease in cerebral 
glucose utilization and results in mitochondrial damage. Glutamate 
accumulates due to impairment of α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase 
activity and, in combination with the energy deficiency, may result in 
excitotoxic cell damage.
TREATMENT
Wernicke’s Disease
Wernicke’s disease is a medical emergency and requires immediate 
administration of thiamine, in a dose of 100 mg either IV or IM. The 
dose should be given daily until the patient resumes a normal diet 
FIGURE 301-5  Osmotic demyelination syndrome. Axial T2-weighted magnetic 
resonance scan through the pons reveals a symmetric area of abnormal high 
signal intensity within the basis pontis (arrows).
and should be begun prior to treatment with IV glucose solutions. 
Larger doses, 100 mg four times a day or more, have been advocated 
by some. Glucose infusions may precipitate Wernicke’s disease in a 
previously unaffected patient or cause a rapid worsening of an early 
form of the disease. For this reason, thiamine should be adminis-
tered to all alcoholic patients requiring parenteral glucose.
■
■HYPERPERFUSION DISORDERS (POSTERIOR 
REVERSIBLE ENCEPHALOPATHY SYNDROME)
Several seemingly diverse syndromes including hypertensive encepha-
lopathy, eclampsia, postcarotid endarterectomy syndrome, and toxicity 
from calcineurin-inhibitor and other medications share the common 
pathogenesis of hyperperfusion likely due to endothelial dysfunction. 
Vasogenic edema is typically the primary process leading to neurologic 
dysfunction and this is thought to result from one of two mechanisms: 
exceeding the cerebral autoregulatory threshold leading to increased 
CBF and capillary leakage into the interstitium, or direct impairment 
of the BBB itself. The predilection of all of the hyperperfusion disorders 
to affect the posterior rather than anterior portions of the brain may 
be due to a lower threshold for autoregulatory breakthrough in the 
posterior circulation or a vasculopathy that is more common in these 
blood vessels.
These disorders of hyperperfusion can be divided into those caused 
primarily by increased pressure and those due to endothelial dysfunc-
tion from a toxic or autoimmune etiology (Table 301-3). In reality, both 
of these processes likely play some role in each of these disorders. The 
clinical presentation of all of the hyperperfusion syndromes is simi-
lar with prominent headaches, seizures, or focal neurologic deficits. 
Headaches have no specific characteristics, range from mild to severe, 
and may be accompanied by alterations in consciousness ranging 
from confusion to coma. Seizures may be present, and these can be of 
multiple types depending on the severity and location of the edema. 
Nonconvulsive seizures have been described in hyperperfusion states; 
therefore, a low threshold for obtaining an electroencephalogram 
(EEG) in these patients should be maintained. The typical focal deficit 
in hyperperfusion states is cortical visual loss, given the tendency of 
the process to involve the occipital lobes. However, any focal deficit can 
occur depending on the area affected, as evidenced by patients who, 
after carotid endarterectomy, exhibit neurologic dysfunction referable 
to the ipsilateral newly reperfused hemisphere. It appears as if the 
rapidity of rise, rather than the absolute value of pressure, is the most 
important risk factor.
FIGURE 301-6  Wernicke’s disease. Coronal T1-weighted postcontrast magnetic 
resonance imaging reveals abnormal enhancement of the mammillary bodies 
(arrows), typical of acute Wernicke’s encephalopathy.


--- PDF PAGE 2128 ---

PART 8
Critical Care Medicine
2082
MRI classically exhibits the high T2 signal of edema primarily 
in the posterior occipital lobes, not respecting any single vascular 
territory (Figure 301-7). CT is less sensitive but may show a pattern 
of patchy hypodensity in the involved territory. The term posterior 
reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is often used to describe these 
conditions; however, the clinical syndrome is not always reversible or 
limited just to the posterior brain regions. Vessel imaging may demon-
strate narrowing of the cerebral vasculature, especially in the posterior 
circulation; whether this noninflammatory vasculopathy is a primary 
cause of the edema or occurs as a secondary phenomenon remains 
unclear. Other ancillary studies such as CSF analysis often yield non-
specific results. Many of the substances that have been implicated, such 
as cyclosporine, can cause this syndrome even at low doses or after 
years of treatment. Therefore, normal serum levels of these medications 
do not exclude them as inciting agents.
Treatment involves judicious lowering of the blood pressure with 
IV agents such as labetalol or nicardipine, removal of the offending 
medication, and treatment of an underlying medical condition such 
as eclampsia. If the blood pressure is very elevated, it is reasonable to 
lower the MAP by ~20% initially, as further lowering of the pressure 
may cause secondary ischemia and possibly infarction as pressure 
drops below the lower range of the patient’s autoregulatory capa-
bility. Seizures must be identified and controlled, often necessitating 
continuous EEG monitoring. Anticonvulsants are effective when 
seizure activity is identified, but in the special case of eclampsia, 
there is evidence to support the use of magnesium sulfate for seizure 
control.
TABLE 301-3  Common Etiologies of Posterior Reversible 
Encephalopathy Syndrome
Disorders in which increased capillary pressure dominates the 
pathophysiology
  Hypertensive encephalopathy, including secondary causes such as 
renovascular hypertension, pheochromocytoma, cocaine use, etc.
  Postcarotid endarterectomy syndrome
  Preeclampsia/eclampsia
Disorders in which endothelial dysfunction dominates the pathophysiology
  Calcineurin-inhibitor toxicity (e.g. cyclosporine, tacrolimus)
  Chemotherapeutic agent toxicity (e.g., cytarabine, azathioprine, 
5-fluorouracil, cisplatin, methotrexate, tumor necrosis factor α antagonists)
  HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low platelet 
count)
  Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS)
■
■POST-SOLID ORGAN TRANSPLANT BRAIN INJURY
Immunosuppressive medications are administered in high doses to 
patients after solid organ transplant, and many of these compounds 
have well-described neurologic complications. In patients with head-
ache, seizures, or focal neurologic deficits taking calcineurin inhibitors, 
the diagnosis of hyperperfusion syndrome should be considered, as 
discussed above. This neurotoxicity occurs mainly with cyclosporine 
and tacrolimus and can present even in the setting of normal serum 
drug levels. Treatment primarily involves lowering the drug dosage 
or discontinuing the drug. Sirolimus has very few recorded cases of 
neurotoxicity and may be a reasonable alternative for some patients. 
Other examples of immunosuppressive medications and their neu-
rologic complications include OKT3-associated akinetic mutism and 
the leukoencephalopathy seen with methotrexate, especially when it 
is administered intrathecally or with concurrent radiotherapy. In any 
solid organ transplant patient with neurologic complaints, a careful 
examination of the medication list is required to search for these pos-
sible drug effects.
Cerebrovascular complications of solid organ transplant are often 
first recognized in the immediate postoperative period. Border zone 
territory infarctions can occur, especially in the setting of systemic 
hypotension during cardiac transplant surgery. Embolic infarctions 
classically complicate cardiac transplantation, but all solid organ trans-
plant procedures place patients at risk for systemic emboli. When cere-
bral embolization accompanies renal or liver transplantation surgery, 
a careful search for right-to-left shunting should include evaluation of 
the heart with agitated saline echocardiography (i.e., “bubble study”), 
as well as looking for intrapulmonary shunting. Renal and some car-
diac transplant patients often have advanced atherosclerosis, provid-
ing a risk for stroke. Imaging with CT or MRI should be done when 
cerebrovascular complications are suspected to confirm the diagnosis 
and to exclude intracerebral hemorrhage, which most often occurs in 
the setting of coagulopathy secondary to liver failure or after cardiac 
bypass procedures.
Given that patients with solid organ transplants are chronically 
immunosuppressed, infections are a common concern (Chap. 138). 
In any transplant patient with new CNS signs or symptoms such as 
seizure, confusion, or focal deficit, the diagnosis of a CNS infection 
should be considered and evaluated through imaging (usually MRI) 
and possibly lumbar puncture. The most common pathogens responsi-
ble for CNS infections in these patients vary based on time since trans-
plant. In the first month posttransplant, common pathogens include 
the usual bacterial organisms associated with surgical procedures and 
indwelling catheters. Starting in the second month posttransplant, 
opportunistic infections of the CNS become more common, including 
Nocardia and Toxoplasma species as well as fungal infections such as 
aspergillosis. Viral infections that can affect the brain of the immuno-
suppressed patient, such as herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, 
human herpesvirus type 6 (HHV-6), and varicella, also become more 
common after the first month posttransplant. Beyond 6 months, 
immunosuppressed posttransplant patients still remain at risk for 
these opportunistic bacterial, fungal, and viral infections but can also 
suffer late CNS infectious complications such as progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy (PML) associated with JC virus (Chap. 132), and 
Epstein-Barr virus–driven clonal expansions of B cells resulting in post-
transplant lymphoproliferative disorder or CNS lymphoma (Chap. 86).
CRITICAL CARE DISORDERS OF THE 
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (PNS)
Critical illness with disorders of the PNS arises in two contexts: (1) 
primary neurologic diseases that require critical care interventions 
such as intubation and mechanical ventilation, and (2) secondary 
PNS manifestations of systemic critical illness, often involving mul-
tisystem organ failure. The former include acute polyneuropathies such as 
Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chap. 439), neuromuscular junction disor-
ders including myasthenia gravis (Chap. 440) and botulism (Chap. 148), 
and primary muscle disorders such as polymyositis (Chap. 358). The 
latter result either from the systemic disease itself or as a consequence 
FIGURE 301-7  Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain in a patient taking cyclosporine after liver 
transplantation, who presented with seizures, headache, and cortical blindness. 
Increased signal is seen bilaterally in the occipital lobes predominantly involving 
the white matter, consistent with a hyperperfusion state secondary to calcineurin-
inhibitor exposure.


--- PDF PAGE 2129 ---

CHAPTER 301 Severe Acute Encephalopathies and Critical Care Weakness  
2083
of interventions and as a group are often referred to as ICU acquired 
weakness (ICUAW).
General principles of respiratory evaluation in patients with PNS 
involvement, regardless of cause, include assessment of pulmonary 
mechanics, such as maximal inspiratory force (MIF) and vital capac-
ity (VC), and evaluation of strength of bulbar muscles. Regardless of 
the cause of weakness, endotracheal intubation should be considered 
when the MIF falls to below –25 cmH2O or the VC is <1 L. Also, patients 
with severe palatal weakness may require endotracheal intubation in 
order to prevent acute upper airway obstruction or recurrent aspira-
tion. Arterial blood gases and oxygen saturation from pulse oximetry 
are used to follow patients with potential respiratory compromise 
from PNS dysfunction. However, intubation and mechanical ventila-
tion should be undertaken based on clinical assessment rather than 
waiting until oxygen saturation drops or CO2 retention develops from 
hypoventilation. Noninvasive mechanical ventilation may be consid-
ered initially in lieu of endotracheal intubation in myasthenia gravis 
but is generally insufficient in patients with severe bulbar weakness or 
ventilatory failure with hypercarbia. Principles of mechanical ventila-
tion are discussed in Chap. 295.
■
■NEUROPATHY
Although encephalopathy may be the most obvious neurologic dys-
function in critically ill patients, dysfunction of the PNS is also quite 
common. It is typically present in patients with prolonged critical 
illnesses lasting several weeks and involving sepsis; clinical suspicion 
is aroused when there is failure to wean from mechanical ventilation 
despite improvement of the underlying sepsis and critical illness. 
Critical illness polyneuropathy refers to the most common PNS compli-
cation related to critical illness; it is seen in the setting of prolonged 
critical illness, sepsis, and multisystem organ failure. Neurologic find-
ings include diffuse weakness, decreased reflexes, and distal sensory 
loss. Electrophysiologic studies demonstrate a diffuse, symmetric, 
distal axonal sensorimotor neuropathy, and pathologic studies have 
confirmed axonal degeneration. The precise mechanism of critical 
illness polyneuropathy remains unclear, but circulating factors such 
as cytokines, which are associated with sepsis and SIRS, are thought 
to play a role. It has been reported that up to 70% of patients with the 
sepsis syndrome have some degree of neuropathy, although far fewer 
have a clinical syndrome profound enough to cause severe respira-
tory muscle weakness requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation or 
resulting in failure to wean. Aggressive glycemic control with insulin 
infusions appears to decrease the risk of critical illness polyneuropathy. 
Treatment is otherwise supportive, with specific intervention directed 
at treating the underlying illness. Although spontaneous recovery 
is usually seen, the time course may extend over weeks to months 
and necessitate long-term ventilatory support and care even after the 
underlying critical illness has resolved.
■
■DISORDERS OF NEUROMUSCULAR TRANSMISSION
A defect in neuromuscular transmission may be a source of weakness 
in critically ill patients. Botulism (Chap. 148) may be acquired by 
ingesting botulinum toxin from improperly stored food or may arise 
from an anaerobic abscess from Clostridium botulinum (wound botu-
lism). Infants can present with generalized weakness from gut-derived 
Clostridium infection, especially if they are fed honey. Diplopia and 
dysphagia are early signs of food-borne botulism. Treatment is mostly 
supportive, although use of antitoxin early in the course may limit the 
duration of the neuromuscular blockade. General ICU care is similar 
to patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome or myasthenia gravis with 
focused care to avoid ulcer formation at pressure points, deep venous 
thromboprophylaxis, and infection prevention. Public health officers 
should be rapidly informed when the diagnosis is made to prevent 
further exposure to others from the tainted food or source of wound 
botulism (such as injection drug use).
Undiagnosed myasthenia gravis (Chap. 440) may be a consideration 
in weak ICU patients; however, persistent weakness secondary to 
impaired neuromuscular junction transmission is almost always due to 
administration of drugs. A number of medications impair neuromuscu-
lar transmission; these include antibiotics, especially aminoglycosides, 
and beta-blocking agents. In the ICU, the nondepolarizing neuromus-
cular blocking agents (nd-NMBAs), also known as muscle relaxants, 
are most commonly responsible. Included in this group of drugs are 
such agents as pancuronium, vecuronium, rocuronium, and cisatracu-
rium. They are often used to facilitate mechanical ventilation or other 
critical care procedures, but with prolonged use persistent neuromus-
cular blockade may result in weakness even after discontinuation of 
these agents hours or days earlier. Risk factors for this prolonged action 
of neuromuscular blocking agents include female sex, metabolic acido-
sis, and renal failure.
Prolonged neuromuscular blockade does not appear to produce 
permanent damage to the PNS. Once the offending medications are 
discontinued, full strength is restored, although this may take days. 
In general, the lowest dose of neuromuscular blocking agent should 
be used to achieve the desired result and, when these agents are used 
in the ICU, a peripheral nerve stimulator should be used to monitor 
neuromuscular junction function.
■
■MYOPATHY
Critically ill patients, especially those with sepsis, frequently develop 
muscle weakness and wasting, often in the face of seemingly adequate 
nutritional support. Critical illness myopathy is an overall term that 
describes several different discrete muscle disorders that may occur in 
critically ill patients. The assumption has been that a catabolic myopa-
thy may develop as a result of multiple factors, including elevated cor-
tisol and catecholamine release and other circulating factors induced by 
the SIRS. In this syndrome, known as cachectic myopathy, serum creatine 
kinase levels and electromyography (EMG) are normal. Muscle biopsy 
shows type II fiber atrophy. Panfascicular muscle fiber necrosis may 
also occur in the setting of profound sepsis. This less common acute 
necrotizing intensive care myopathy is characterized clinically by weak-
ness progressing to a profound level over just a few days. There may 
be associated elevations in serum creatine kinase and urine myoglobin. 
Both EMG and muscle biopsy may be normal initially but eventually 
show abnormal spontaneous activity and panfascicular necrosis with 
an accompanying inflammatory reaction. Acute rhabdomyolysis can 
occur from alcohol ingestion or from compartment syndromes.
A thick-filament myopathy may occur in the setting of glucocorticoid 
and nd-NMBA use. The most frequent scenario in which this is encoun-
tered is the asthmatic patient who requires high-dose glucocorticoids 
and nd-NMBA to facilitate mechanical ventilation. This muscle disor-
der is not due to prolonged action of nd-NMBAs at the neuromuscular 
junction but, rather, is an actual myopathy with muscle damage; it 
has occasionally been described with high-dose glucocorticoid use or 
sepsis alone. Clinically this syndrome is most often recognized when 
a patient fails to wean from mechanical ventilation despite resolution 
of the primary pulmonary process. Pathologically, there may be loss of 
thick (myosin) filaments. Thick-filament critical illness myopathy has 
a good prognosis. If patients survive their underlying critical illness, 
the myopathy invariably improves and most patients return to normal. 
However, because this syndrome is a result of true muscle damage, 
not just prolonged blockade at the neuromuscular junction, this pro-
cess may take weeks or months, and tracheotomy with prolonged 
ventilatory support may be necessary. Some patients do have residual 
long-term weakness, with atrophy and fatigue limiting ambulation. 
At present, it is unclear how to prevent this myopathic complication, 
except by avoiding use of nd-NMBAs, a strategy not always possible. 
Monitoring with a peripheral nerve stimulator can help to avoid the 
overuse of these agents. However, this is more likely to prevent the 
complication of prolonged neuromuscular junction blockade than it is 
to prevent this myopathy.
■
■FURTHER READING
Callaway CW et al: Part 4: Advanced life support: 2015 international 
consensus on cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardio-
vascular care science with treatment recommendations. Circulation 
132:S84, 2015.


================================================================================
Ch302 Subarachnoid Hemorrhage [Neurologic Critical Care]
Pages 2130-2134
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 2130 ---

PART 8
Critical Care Medicine
2084 Dhar R: Neurologic complications of transplantation. Handb Clin 
Neurol 141:545, 2017.
Donnelly J et al: Regulation of the cerebral circulation: bedside assess-
ment and clinical implications. Crit Care 20:129, 2016.
Latronico N et al: Critical illness polyneuropathy and myopathy: A 
major cause of muscle weakness and paralysis. Lancet Neurol 10:931, 
2011.
Nielsen N et al: Targeted temperature management at 33 degrees C 
versus 36 degrees C after cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med 369:2197, 2013.
Pandharipande PP et al: Long-term cognitive impairment after critical 
illness. N Engl J Med 369:1306, 2013.
Posner JB et al: Plum and Posner’s Diagnosis of Stupor and Coma, 4th ed. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 2007.
Quillinan N at al: Neuropathophysiology of brain injury. Anesthesiol 
Clin 34:453, 2016.
Sandroni C et al: Prognostication in comatose survivors of cardiac 
arrest: An advisory statement from the European Resuscitation Coun-
cil and the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive 
Care Med 40:1816, 2014.
Toledano M, Fugate JE: Posterior reversible encephalopathy in the 
intensive care unit. Handb Clin Neurol 141:467, 2017.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) renders the brain critically ill from 
both primary and secondary brain insults. Excluding head trauma, the 
most common cause of SAH is rupture of a saccular aneurysm. Other 
causes include bleeding from a vascular malformation (arteriovenous 
malformation or dural arteriovenous fistula) and extension into the 
subarachnoid space from a primary intracerebral hemorrhage. Some 
idiopathic SAHs are localized to the perimesencephalic cisterns and 
are benign; they probably have a venous or capillary source, and angi-
ography is unrevealing.
■
■SACCULAR (“BERRY”) ANEURYSM
Autopsy and angiography studies have found that about 2% of adults 
harbor intracranial aneurysms, for a prevalence of 4 million persons 
in the United States; the aneurysm will rupture, producing SAH, in 
25,000–30,000 cases per year. For patients who arrive alive at hospital, 
the mortality rate over the next month is about 45%. Of those who sur-
vive, more than half are left with major neurologic deficits as a result of 
the initial hemorrhage, cerebral vasospasm with infarction, or hydro-
cephalus. If the patient survives but the aneurysm is not obliterated, 
the rate of rebleeding is about 20% in the first 2 weeks, 30% in the first 
month, and about 3% per year afterward. Given these alarming figures, 
the major therapeutic emphasis is on preventing the predictable early 
complications of the SAH.
Unruptured, asymptomatic aneurysms are much less dangerous 
than a recently ruptured aneurysm. The annual risk of rupture for 
aneurysms <10 mm in size is ~0.1%, and for aneurysms ≥10 mm in size 
is ~0.5–1%; the surgical morbidity rate far exceeds these percentages. 
Aneurysm location may also factor into risk, with basilar bifurca-
tion aneurysms appearing to have a somewhat higher rupture risk. 
Because of the longer length of exposure to risk of rupture, younger 
patients with aneurysms >10 mm in size may benefit from prophylac-
tic treatment. As with the treatment of asymptomatic carotid stenosis, 
this risk-benefit ratio strongly depends on the complication rate of 
treatment.
Giant aneurysms, those >2.5 cm in diameter, occur at the same sites 
(see below) as small aneurysms and account for 5% of cases. The three 
most common locations are the terminal internal carotid artery, middle 
302
cerebral artery (MCA) bifurcation, and top of the basilar artery. Their 
risk of rupture is ~6% in the first year after identification and may 
remain high indefinitely. They often cause symptoms by compressing 
the adjacent brain or cranial nerves.
Mycotic aneurysms are usually located distal to the first bifurcation 
of major arteries of the circle of Willis. Most result from infected emboli 
due to bacterial endocarditis causing septic degeneration of arteries 
and subsequent dilation and rupture. Whether these lesions should be 
sought and repaired prior to rupture or left to heal spontaneously with 
antibiotic treatment remains controversial.
Pathophysiology  Saccular aneurysms occur at the bifurcations 
of the large- to medium-sized intracranial arteries; rupture is into 
the subarachnoid space in the basal cisterns and sometimes into the 
parenchyma of the adjacent brain. Approximately 85% of aneurysms 
occur in the anterior circulation, mostly on the circle of Willis. About 
20% of patients have multiple aneurysms, many at mirror sites bilater-
ally. As an aneurysm develops, it typically forms a neck with a dome. 
The length of the neck and the size of the dome vary greatly and are 
important factors in planning neurosurgical obliteration or endovas-
cular embolization. The arterial internal elastic lamina disappears at 
the base of the neck. The media thins, and connective tissue replaces 
smooth-muscle cells. At the site of rupture (most often the dome), the 
wall thins, and the tear that allows bleeding is often ≤0.5 mm long. 
Aneurysm size and site are important in predicting risk of rupture. 
Those >7 mm in diameter and those at the top of the basilar artery and 
at the origin of the posterior communicating artery are at greater risk 
of rupture.
Clinical Manifestations  Most unruptured intracranial aneu-
rysms are completely asymptomatic. Symptoms are usually due to 
rupture and resultant SAH, although some unruptured aneurysms 
present with mass effect on cranial nerves or brain parenchyma. At 
the moment of aneurysmal rupture with major SAH, the intracra-
nial pressure (ICP) suddenly rises. This may account for the sudden 
transient loss of consciousness that occurs in nearly half of patients. 
Sudden loss of consciousness may be preceded by a brief moment of 
excruciating headache, but most patients first complain of headache 
upon regaining consciousness. In 10% of cases, aneurysmal bleeding is 
severe enough to cause loss of consciousness for several days. In ~45% 
of cases, severe headache associated with exertion is the presenting 
complaint. The patient often calls the headache “the worst headache of 
my life”; however, the most important characteristic is sudden onset. 
Occasionally, these ruptures may present as headache of only moderate 
intensity or as a change in the patient’s usual headache pattern. The 
headache is usually generalized, often with neck stiffness, and vomit-
ing is common.
Although sudden headache in the absence of focal neurologic 
symptoms is the hallmark of aneurysmal rupture, focal neurologic 
deficits may occur. Anterior communicating artery or MCA bifurcation 
aneurysms may rupture into the adjacent brain or subdural space and 
form a hematoma large enough to produce mass effect. The deficits that 
result can include hemiparesis, aphasia, and mental slowness (abulia).
Occasionally, prodromal symptoms suggest the location of a pro-
gressively enlarging unruptured aneurysm. A third cranial nerve palsy, 
particularly when associated with pupillary dilation, loss of ipsilateral 
(but retained contralateral) light reflex, and focal pain above or behind 
the eye, may occur with an expanding aneurysm at the junction of the 
posterior communicating artery and the internal carotid artery. A sixth 
nerve palsy may indicate an aneurysm in the cavernous sinus, and 
visual field defects can occur with an expanding supraclinoid carotid 
or anterior cerebral artery (ACA) aneurysm. Occipital and posterior 
cervical pain may signal a posterior inferior cerebellar artery or ante-
rior inferior cerebellar artery aneurysm (Chap. 419). Pain in or behind 
the eye and in the low temple can occur with an expanding MCA aneu-
rysm. Thunderclap headache is a variant of migraine that simulates an 
SAH. Before concluding that a patient with sudden, severe headache 
has thunderclap migraine, a definitive workup for aneurysm or other 
intracranial pathology is required.
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
J. Claude Hemphill, III,  Wade S. Smith, 
Daryl R. Gress 


--- PDF PAGE 2131 ---

CHAPTER 302 Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
2085
the MCA and proximal ACA, carotid terminus, and vertebral and 
basilar arteries on a daily or every-other-day basis, vasospasm 
can be reliably detected and treatments initiated to prevent cere-
bral ischemia (see below). CT angiography is another method 
that can detect vasospasm.
c.  Severe cerebral edema in patients with infarction from vaso-
spasm may increase the ICP enough to reduce cerebral perfusion 
pressure. Treatment may include mannitol, hyperventilation, and 
for intractable cases hemicraniectomy; moderate hypothermia 
may have a role as well.
4.	 Hyponatremia. Hyponatremia may be profound and can develop 
quickly in the first 2 weeks following SAH. There is both natriure-
sis and volume depletion with SAH, so that patients become both 
hyponatremic and hypovolemic. Both atrial natriuretic peptide 
and brain natriuretic peptide have a role in producing this “cere-
bral salt-wasting syndrome.” Typically, it clears over the course of 
1–2 weeks and, in the setting of SAH, should not be treated with 
free-water restriction as this may increase the risk of stroke (see 
below).
Laboratory Evaluation and Imaging (Fig. 302-1)  The hall-
mark of aneurysmal rupture is blood in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). 
More than 95% of cases have enough blood to be visualized on a 
high-quality noncontrast CT scan obtained within 72 h. If the scan fails 
to establish the diagnosis of SAH and no mass lesion or obstructive 
hydrocephalus is found, a lumbar puncture should be performed to 
establish the presence of subarachnoid blood. Lysis of the red blood 
cells and subsequent conversion of hemoglobin to bilirubin stains the 
spinal fluid yellow within 6–12 h. This xanthochromic spinal fluid 
Aneurysms can undergo small ruptures and leaks of blood into 
the subarachnoid space, so-called sentinel bleeds. Sudden unexplained 
headache at any location should raise suspicion of SAH and be investi-
gated, because a major hemorrhage may be imminent.
The initial clinical manifestations of SAH can be graded using the 
Hunt-Hess or World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies classifica-
tion schemes (Table 302-1). For ruptured aneurysms, prognosis for 
good outcomes falls as the grade increases. For example, it is unusual 
for a Hunt-Hess grade 1 patient to die if the aneurysm is treated, but 
the mortality rate for grade 4 and 5 patients may be as high as 60%.
Delayed Neurologic Deficits  There are four major causes of 
delayed neurologic deficits: rerupture, hydrocephalus, delayed cere-
bral ischemia (DCI), and hyponatremia.
1.	 Rerupture. The incidence of rerupture of an untreated aneurysm in 
the first month following SAH is ~30%, with the peak in the first 
7 days. Rerupture is associated with a 50% mortality rate and poor 
outcome. Early treatment eliminates this risk.
2.	 Hydrocephalus. Acute hydrocephalus can cause stupor and coma and 
can be mitigated by placement of an external ventricular drain. More 
often, subacute hydrocephalus may develop over a few days or 
weeks and causes progressive drowsiness or slowed mentation with 
incontinence. Hydrocephalus is differentiated from cerebral vaso-
spasm with a CT scan, CT angiogram, transcranial Doppler (TCD) 
ultrasound, or conventional x-ray angiography. Hydrocephalus 
may clear spontaneously or require temporary ventricular drainage. 
Chronic hydrocephalus may develop weeks to months after SAH 
and manifest as gait difficulty, incontinence, or impaired mentation. 
Subtle signs may be a lack of initiative in conversation or a failure to 
recover independence.
3.	 Delayed cerebral ischemia. Vasospasm is the narrowing of the arteries 
at the base of the brain following SAH. This may cause symptomatic 
ischemia and infarction in ~30% of patients and is the major cause of 
delayed morbidity and death. Signs of DCI appear 4–14 days after 
the hemorrhage, most often at 7 days. The severity and distribution 
of vasospasm determine whether infarction will occur.
a.  Vasospasm is believed to result from direct effects of clotted 
blood and its breakdown products on the arteries within the 
subarachnoid space. In general, the more blood that surrounds 
the arteries, the greater the chance of symptomatic vasospasm. 
Spasm of major arteries produces symptoms referable to the 
appropriate vascular territory (Chap. 419). All of these focal 
symptoms may present abruptly, fluctuate, or develop over a 
few days. In most cases, focal spasm is preceded by a decline in 
mental status.
b.  Vasospasm can be detected reliably with conventional x-ray 
angiography, but this procedure is invasive and carries the risk of 
stroke and other complications. TCD ultrasound is based on the 
principle that the velocity of blood flow within an artery will rise 
as the lumen diameter is narrowed. By directing the probe along 
TABLE 302-1  Grading Scales for Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
GRADE
HUNT-HESS SCALE
WORLD FEDERATION 
OF NEUROSURGICAL 
SOCIETIES (WFNS) 
SCALE
1
Mild headache, normal mental status, 
no cranial nerve or motor findings
GCSa score 15, no motor 
deficits
2
Severe headache, normal mental 
status, may have cranial nerve deficit
GCS score 13–14, no 
motor deficits
3
Somnolent, confused, may have cranial 
nerve or mild motor deficit
GCS score 13–14, with 
motor deficits
4
Stupor, moderate to severe motor 
deficit, may have intermittent reflex 
posturing
GCS score 7–12, with or 
without motor deficits
5
Coma, reflex posturing or flaccid
GCS score 3–6, with or 
without motor deficits
aGlasgow Coma Scale; see Table 435-1.
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 302-1  Subarachnoid hemorrhage. A. Computed tomography (CT) 
angiography revealing an aneurysm of the left superior cerebellar artery. 
B. Noncontrast CT scan at the level of the third ventricle revealing subarachnoid 
blood (bright) in the left sylvian fissure and within the left lateral ventricle. 
C. Conventional anteroposterior x-ray angiogram of the right vertebral and basilar 
artery showing the large aneurysm. D. Conventional angiogram following coil 
embolization of the aneurysm, whereby the aneurysm body is filled with platinum 
coils delivered through a microcatheter navigated from the femoral artery into the 
aneurysm neck.


--- PDF PAGE 2132 ---

PART 8
Critical Care Medicine
2086 peaks in intensity at 48 h and lasts for 1–4 weeks, depending on the 
amount of subarachnoid blood.
The extent and location of subarachnoid blood on a noncontrast CT 
scan help locate the underlying aneurysm, identify the cause of any 
neurologic deficit, and predict the occurrence of vasospasm. A high 
incidence of symptomatic vasospasm in the MCA and ACA has been 
found when early CT scans show subarachnoid clots >5 × 3 mm in the 
basal cisterns, or layers of blood >1 mm thick in the cerebral fissures. 
CT scans less reliably predict vasospasm in the vertebral, basilar, or 
posterior cerebral arteries.
Lumbar puncture prior to an imaging procedure is indicated only 
if a CT scan is not available at the time of the suspected SAH. Once 
the diagnosis of hemorrhage from a ruptured saccular aneurysm is 
suspected, four-vessel conventional x-ray angiography (both carotids 
and both vertebrals) is generally performed to localize and define the 
anatomic details of the aneurysm and to determine if other unruptured 
aneurysms exist (Fig. 302-1C). At some centers, the ruptured aneurysm 
can be treated using endovascular techniques at the time of the initial 
angiogram as a way to expedite treatment and minimize the number 
of invasive procedures. CT angiography is an alternative method for 
locating the aneurysm and may be sufficient to plan definitive therapy.
Close monitoring (daily or twice daily) of electrolytes is important 
because hyponatremia can occur precipitously during the first 2 weeks 
following SAH (see above).
The electrocardiogram (ECG) frequently shows ST-segment and 
T-wave changes similar to those associated with cardiac ischemia. 
A prolonged QRS complex, increased QT interval, and prominent 
“peaked” or deeply inverted symmetric T waves are usually second-
ary to the intracranial hemorrhage. There is evidence that structural 
myocardial lesions produced by circulating catecholamines and exces-
sive discharge of sympathetic neurons may occur after SAH, causing 
these ECG changes and a reversible cardiomyopathy sufficient to 
cause shock or congestive heart failure. Echocardiography reveals a 
pattern of regional wall motion abnormalities that follow the distri-
bution of sympathetic nerves rather than the major coronary arteries, 
with relative sparing of the ventricular wall apex. The sympathetic 
nerves themselves appear to be injured by direct toxicity from the 
excessive catecholamine release. An asymptomatic troponin elevation 
is common. Serious ventricular dysrhythmias occurring in-hospital are 
unusual.
TREATMENT
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
Early aneurysm repair prevents rerupture and allows the safe 
application of techniques to improve blood flow (e.g., induced 
hypertension) should vasospasm and DCI develop. An aneurysm 
can be “clipped” by a neurosurgeon or “coiled” by an endovascular 
surgeon. Surgical repair involves placing a metal clip across the 
aneurysm neck, thereby immediately eliminating the risk of rebleed-
ing. This approach requires craniotomy and brain retraction, which 
is associated with neurologic morbidity. Endovascular techniques 
involve placing platinum coils, or other embolic material, within the 
aneurysm via a catheter that is passed from the femoral artery. The 
aneurysm is packed tightly to enhance thrombosis and over time 
is walled off from the circulation (Fig. 302-1D). There have been 
two prospective randomized trials of surgery versus endovascular 
treatment for ruptured aneurysms: the first was the International 
Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial (ISAT), which was terminated early 
when 24% of patients treated with endovascular therapy were dead 
or dependent at 1 year compared to 31% treated with surgery, a sig-
nificant 23% relative reduction. After 5 years, risk of death was lower 
in the coiling group, although the proportion of survivors who were 
independent was the same in both groups. Risk of rebleeding was 
low, but more common in the coiling group. These results favoring 
coiling at 1 year were confirmed in a second trial, although the dif-
ferences in functional outcome were no longer significant at 3 years. 
Because some aneurysms have a morphology that is not amenable 
to endovascular treatment, surgery remains an important treatment 
option. Newer endovascular techniques using balloon-assisted coil-
ing or placement of flow-diverting stents are increasing the types 
of aneurysms amenable to endovascular intervention. Centers that 
combine both endovascular and neurosurgical expertise likely offer 
the best outcomes for patients, and there are reliable data showing 
that specialized aneurysm treatment centers can improve mortality 
rates.
The medical management of SAH focuses on protecting the air-
way, managing blood pressure before and after aneurysm treatment, 
preventing rebleeding prior to treatment, managing vasospasm 
and DCI, treating hydrocephalus, treating hyponatremia, limiting 
secondary brain insults, and preventing pulmonary embolus (PE).
Intracranial hypertension following aneurysmal rupture occurs 
secondary to subarachnoid blood, parenchymal hematoma, acute 
hydrocephalus, or loss of vascular autoregulation. Patients who are 
stuporous should undergo emergent ventriculostomy to measure 
ICP and to treat high ICP in order to prevent cerebral ischemia.  
Medical therapies designed to combat raised ICP (e.g., osmotic ther-
apy and sedation) can also be used as needed. High ICP refractory 
to treatment is a poor prognostic sign.
Prior to definitive treatment of the ruptured aneurysm, care is 
required to maintain adequate cerebral perfusion pressure while 
avoiding excessive elevation of arterial pressure. If the patient is 
alert, it is reasonable to lower the systolic blood pressure to below 
160 mmHg using nicardipine, labetalol, or esmolol. If the patient has 
a depressed level of consciousness, ICP should be measured and the 
cerebral perfusion pressure targeted to 60–70 mmHg. If headache 
or neck pain is severe, mild sedation and analgesia are prescribed. 
Extreme sedation is avoided if possible because it can obscure the 
ability to clinically detect changes in neurologic status. Adequate 
hydration is necessary to avoid a decrease in blood volume predis-
posing to brain ischemia.
Seizures are uncommon at the onset of aneurysmal rupture. The 
quivering, jerking, and extensor posturing that often accompany 
loss of consciousness with SAH are probably related to the sharp 
rise in ICP rather than seizures. However, anticonvulsants are 
sometimes given as prophylactic therapy because a seizure could 
theoretically promote rebleeding.
Glucocorticoids may help reduce the head and neck ache caused 
by the irritative effect of the subarachnoid blood. There is no good 
evidence that they reduce cerebral edema, are neuroprotective, 
or reduce vascular injury, and their routine use therefore is not 
recommended.
Antifibrinolytic agents are not routinely prescribed but may be 
considered in patients in whom aneurysm treatment cannot pro-
ceed immediately. They are associated with a reduced incidence 
of aneurysmal rerupture but may also increase the risk of DCI and 
deep-vein thrombosis (DVT). Several recent studies suggest that a 
shorter duration of use (until the aneurysm is secured or for the first 
3 days) may decrease rerupture and be safer than found in earlier 
studies of longer duration treatment.
DCI due to vasospasm remains the leading cause of morbidity 
and mortality following aneurysmal SAH. Treatment with the cal-
cium channel antagonist nimodipine (60 mg PO every 4 h) improves 
outcome, perhaps by preventing ischemic injury rather than 
reducing the risk of vasospasm. Nimodipine can cause significant 
hypotension in some patients, which may worsen cerebral ischemia 
in patients with vasospasm. Symptomatic cerebral vasospasm can 
also be treated by increasing the cerebral perfusion pressure by rais-
ing mean arterial pressure through plasma volume expansion and 
the judicious use of IV vasopressor agents, usually phenylephrine or 
norepinephrine. Raised perfusion pressure has been associated with 
clinical improvement in many patients, but high arterial pressure 
may promote rebleeding in unprotected aneurysms. Treatment with 
induced hypertension and hypervolemia generally requires mon-
itoring of arterial and central venous pressures; it is best to infuse 
pressors through a central venous line as well. Volume expansion 
helps prevent hypotension and augments cardiac output.


--- PDF PAGE 2133 ---

CHAPTER 302 Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
2087
If DCI due to vasospasm persists despite optimal medical  
therapy, intraarterial vasodilators and percutaneous transluminal 
angioplasty are considered (Fig. 302-2). Vasodilatation by direct 
angioplasty appears to be permanent, allowing hypertensive therapy 
to be tapered sooner. The pharmacologic vasodilators (verapamil 
and nicardipine) do not last more than about 24 h, and therefore 
multiple treatments may be required until the subarachnoid blood is 
reabsorbed. Although intraarterial papaverine is an effective vasodi-
lator, there is evidence that papaverine may be neurotoxic, so its use 
should generally be avoided.
Acute hydrocephalus can cause stupor or coma. It may clear 
spontaneously or require temporary ventricular drainage. When 
FIGURE 302-2  Vasospasm of the right middle cerebral artery. A. Catheter 
angiography demonstrates significant narrowing of the right middle cerebral 
artery (MCA). B. Because of symptomatic delayed cerebral ischemia, soft-balloon 
angioplasty was used to dilate the proximal portion of the main MCA stem.
A
B
chronic hydrocephalus develops, ventricular shunting is the treat-
ment of choice.
Free-water restriction is contraindicated in patients with SAH at 
risk for DCI because hypovolemia and hypotension may occur and 
precipitate cerebral ischemia. Many patients continue to experience 
a decline in serum sodium despite receiving parenteral fluids con-
taining normal saline. Frequently, supplemental oral salt coupled 
with normal saline will mitigate hyponatremia, but often patients 
also require intravenous hypertonic saline. Care must be taken not to 
correct serum sodium too quickly in patients with marked hypona-
tremia of several days’ duration, as the osmotic demyelination syn-
drome (Chap. 301) may occur.
All patients should have pneumatic compression stockings 
applied to prevent pulmonary embolism. Unfractionated heparin 
administered subcutaneously for DVT prophylaxis can be initiated 
within 1–2 days following endovascular treatment or craniotomy 
with surgical clipping and is a useful adjunct to pneumatic compres-
sion stockings. Treatment of PE depends on whether the aneurysm 
has been treated and whether or not the patient has had a craniot-
omy. Systemic anticoagulation with heparin is contraindicated in 
patients with ruptured and untreated aneurysms. It is a relative 
contraindication following craniotomy for several days, and it may 
delay thrombosis of a coiled aneurysm. If DVT or PE occurs within 
the first days following craniotomy, use of an inferior vena cava 
filter may be considered to prevent additional PEs, whereas sys-
temic anticoagulation with heparin is preferred following successful 
endovascular treatment.
■
■FURTHER READING
Diringer MN et al: Critical care management of patients following 
aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: Recommendations from the 
Neurocritical Care Society’s Multidisciplinary Consensus Confer-
ence. Neurocrit Care 15:211, 2011.
Etminan N, MacDonald RL: Management of aneurysmal subarach-
noid hemorrhage. Handb Clin Neurol 140:195, 2017.
Molyneux AJ et al: The durability of endovascular coiling versus neu-
rosurgical clipping of ruptured cerebral aneurysms: 18 year follow-up 
of the UK cohort of the International Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial 
(ISAT). Lancet 385:691, 2015.


================================================================================
Ch132 Encephalitis
Pages 1037-1043
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 1037 ---

CHAPTER 132 Encephalitis
991
to recognize that, while immunization against HBV has contributed 
to marked reductions in the incidence of infection with this virus, the 
majority of new cases that do occur are acquired through sex. In 2006, 
the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) rec-
ommended the following: (1) Universal hepatitis B vaccination should 
be implemented for all unvaccinated adults in settings in which a high 
proportion of adults have risk factors for HBV infection (e.g., STD 
clinics, HIV testing and treatment facilities, drug-abuse treatment and 
prevention settings, health care settings targeting services to injection 
drug users or MSM, and correctional facilities). (2) In other primary 
care and specialty medical settings that provide care to adults at risk for 
HBV infection, health care providers should inform all patients about 
the health benefits of vaccination, the risk factors for HBV infection, 
and the persons for whom vaccination is recommended; they should 
vaccinate adults who report risk factors for HBV infection as well as 
any adult who requests protection from HBV infection. To promote 
vaccination in all settings, health care providers should implement 
standing orders to identify adults recommended for hepatitis B 
vaccination, should administer hepatitis B vaccine as part of routine 
clinical services, should not require acknowledgment of an HBV 
infection risk factor for adult vaccination, and should use available 
reimbursement mechanisms to remove financial barriers to hepatitis 
B vaccination.
In 2007, the ACIP made its first recommendation for routine immu-
nization of 9- to 26-year-old girls and women with the quadrivalent 
HPV vaccine (against HPV types 6, 11, 16, and 18). In 2011, the ACIP 
recommended routine administration of quadrivalent HPV vaccine to 
boys at 11 or 12 years of age and to males 13–21 years of age who have 
not yet been vaccinated or who have not completed the three-dose vac-
cine series; HBV vaccination of men 22–26 years of age has also been 
recommended. Since that time, a nonavalent HPV vaccine has become 
available and has largely replaced the earlier vaccines. The optimal age 
for recommended vaccination is 11–12 years because of the very high 
risk of HPV infection after sexual debut.
Partner notification is the process of identifying and informing part-
ners of infected patients about possible exposure to an STI and of exam-
ining, testing, vaccinating, and treating partners as appropriate. In a 
series of 22 reports concerning partner notification during the 1990s, 
index patients with gonorrhea or chlamydial infection named a mean 
of 0.75–1.6 partners, of whom one-fourth to one-third were infected; 
those with syphilis named 1.8–6.3 partners, with one-third to one-half 
infected; and those with HIV infection named 0.76–5.31 partners, with 
up to one-fourth infected. Persons who transmit infection or who have 
recently been infected and are still in the incubation period usually 
have no symptoms or only mild symptoms and seek medical attention 
only when notified of their exposure. Therefore, the clinician must 
encourage patients to participate in partner notification, must ensure 
that exposed persons are notified and treated, and must guarantee 
confidentiality to all involved. In the United States, local health depart-
ments often offer assistance in partner notification, treatment, and/or 
counseling. It seems both feasible and most useful to notify those part-
ners exposed within the patient’s likely period of infectiousness, which 
is often considered the preceding 1 month for gonorrhea, 1–2 months for 
chlamydial infection, and up to 3 months for early syphilis.
Persons with a new-onset STI always have a source contact who gave 
them the infection; in addition, they may have a secondary (spread or 
exposed) contact with whom they had sex after becoming infected. The 
identification and treatment of these two types of contacts have differ-
ent objectives. Treatment of the source contact (often a casual contact) 
benefits the community by preventing further transmission and ben-
efits the source contact; treatment of the recently exposed secondary 
contact (typically a spouse or another steady sexual partner) prevents 
the development of serious complications (such as PID) in the partner, 
reinfection of the index patient, and further spread of infection. A sur-
vey of a random sample of U.S. physicians found that most instructed 
patients to abstain from sex during treatment, to use condoms, and 
to inform their sex partners after being diagnosed with gonorrhea, 
chlamydial infection, or syphilis; physicians sometimes gave the 
patients drugs for their partners. However, follow-up of the partners 
by physicians was infrequent. A randomized trial compared patients’ 
delivery of therapy to partners exposed to gonorrhea or chlamydial 
infection with conventional notification and advice to partners to seek 
evaluation for STD; patients’ delivery of partners’ therapy, also known 
as expedited partner therapy (EPT), significantly reduced combined rates 
of reinfection of the index patient with N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis. 
State-by-state variations in regulations governing this approach have 
not been well defined, but the 2015 CDC STD treatment guidelines 
describe its potential use. EPT, which is now commonly used by many 
practicing physicians, is currently permissible in 39 states and poten-
tially allowable in another 8. (Updated information on the legal status 
of EPT is available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/ept.)
In summary, clinicians and public health agencies share respon-
sibility for the prevention and control of STIs. In the current health 
care environment, the role of primary care clinicians has become 
increasingly important in STI prevention as well as in diagnosis and 
treatment, and the resurgence of bacterial STIs like syphilis and LGV 
among MSM—particularly those co-infected with HIV—emphasizes 
the need for risk assessment and routine screening.
■
■FURTHER READING
Clement ME et al: Treatment of syphilis: A systematic review. JAMA 
312:1905, 2014.
Gottlieb SL et al: The global roadmap for advancing development of 
vaccines against sexually transmitted infections: Update and next 
steps. Vaccine 34:2939, 2016.
Johnston C, Corey L: Current concepts for genital herpes simplex 
virus infection: Diagnostics and pathogenesis of genital tract shed-
ding. Clin Microbiol Rev 29:149, 2016.
Kirkcaldy RD et al: Neisseria gonorrhoeae antimicrobial resistance 
among men who have sex with men and men who have sex exclu-
sively with women: The Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance Project, 
2005–2010. Ann Intern Med 158:321, 2013.
Mlisana K et al: Symptomatic vaginal discharge is a poor predictor 
of sexually transmitted infections and genital tract inflammation in 
high-risk women in South Africa. J Infect Dis 206:6, 2012.
Newman L et al: Global estimates of the prevalence and incidence of 
four curable sexually transmitted infections in 2012 based on system-
atic review and global reporting. PLoS One 10:e0143304, 2015.
Price MJ et al: Risk of pelvic inflammatory disease following Chlamydia 
trachomatis infection: Analysis of prospective studies with a multistate 
model. Am J Epidemiol 178:484, 2013.
Wandeler G et al: Hepatitis C virus infections in the Swiss HIV Cohort 
Study: A rapidly evolving epidemic. Clin Infect Dis 55:1408, 2012.
Workowski KA, Bolan GA: Sexually transmitted disease treatment 
guidelines, 2015. MMWR Recomm Rep 64(RR-03):1, 2015.
Zakher B et al: Screening for gonorrhea and Chlamydia: A systematic 
review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 
161:884, 2014.
■
■DEFINITION
Encephalitis is defined as an inflammation of the brain caused either 
by infection, usually with a virus, or from a primary autoimmune pro-
cess. This chapter will focus on infectious causes of encephalitis; non- 
infectious etiologies are considered elsewhere (Chaps. 90, 436, and 437). 
In contrast to meningitis (Chaps. 133 and 134), in which the infectious 
process and associated inflammatory response are limited largely to the 
meninges, in encephalitis the brain parenchyma is also involved. Many 
patients with encephalitis also have evidence of associated meningitis 
(meningoencephalitis) and, in some cases, involvement of the spinal 
cord or nerve roots (encephalomyelitis, encephalomyeloradiculitis).
132 Encephalitis
Karen L. Roos, Kenneth L. Tyler 


--- PDF PAGE 1038 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
992
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
In addition to the acute febrile illness with evidence of meningeal 
involvement characteristic of meningitis, the patient with encephalitis 
commonly has an altered level of consciousness (confusion, behavioral 
abnormalities), or a depressed level of consciousness ranging from 
mild lethargy to coma, and evidence of either focal or diffuse neuro-
logic signs and symptoms. Patients with encephalitis may have hallu-
cinations, agitation, personality change, behavioral disorders, and, at 
times, a frankly psychotic state. Focal or generalized seizures occur in 
many patients with encephalitis. Virtually every possible type of focal 
neurologic disturbance has been reported in viral encephalitis; the 
signs and symptoms reflect the sites of infection and inflammation. The 
most commonly encountered focal findings are aphasia, ataxia, upper 
or lower motor neuron patterns of weakness, involuntary movements 
(e.g., myoclonic jerks, tremor), and cranial nerve deficits (e.g., ocular 
palsies, facial weakness). Involvement of the hypothalamic-pituitary 
axis may result in temperature dysregulation, diabetes insipidus, or 
the development of the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidi-
uretic hormone (SIADH). Even though neurotropic viruses typically 
cause pathologic injury in distinct regions of the central nervous system 
(CNS), variations in clinical presentations make it impossible to reliably 
establish the etiology of a specific case of encephalitis on clinical grounds 
alone (see “Differential Diagnosis,” below).
■
■ETIOLOGY
In the United States, there are an estimated ~20,000 cases of encephalitis 
per year, although the actual number of cases is likely to be significantly 
larger. Despite comprehensive diagnostic efforts, the majority of cases of 
acute encephalitis of suspected viral etiology remain of unknown cause. 
Hundreds of viruses are capable of causing encephalitis, although only 
a limited subset is responsible for most cases in which a specific cause 
is identified (Table 132-1). The most commonly identified viruses caus-
ing sporadic cases of acute encephalitis in immunocompetent adults 
are herpesviruses (herpes simplex virus [HSV], varicella-zoster virus 
[VZV], Epstein-Barr virus [EBV]). Epidemics of encephalitis are caused 
by arboviruses, which belong to several different viral taxonomic 
groups including Alphaviruses (e.g., eastern equine encephalitis [EEE] 
virus), Flaviviruses (e.g., West Nile virus [WNV], St. Louis encephalitis 
virus, Japanese encephalitis virus, Powassan virus), and Bunyaviruses 
(e.g., California encephalitis virus serogroup, La Crosse virus). Histori-
cally, the largest number of cases of arbovirus encephalitis in the United 
States has been due to St. Louis encephalitis virus and the California 
encephalitis virus serogroup. However, since 2002, WNV has been 
responsible for the majority of arbovirus meningitis and encephalitis 
cases in the United States. WNV caused 21,405 confirmed cases of neu-
roinvasive disease (encephalitis, meningitis, or myelitis) in the years 
1995–2016 with 1877 deaths. It is important to recognize that WNV 
epidemics are unpredictable and that cases have occurred in every state 
in the continental United States. New causes of viral CNS infections 
are constantly appearing, as evidenced by the outbreak of cases of 
encephalitis in Southeast Asia caused by Nipah virus, a member of 
the Paramyxoviridae family; meningitis in Europe caused by Toscana 
virus, an arbovirus belonging to the Bunyavirus family; neurological 
disorders associated with Zika virus, a flavivirus, in South America; and 
neurologic disorders associated with major epidemics of Chikungunya 
virus, a togavirus in Africa, India, and Southeast Asia. Parechoviruses 
including human parechovirus 3 (HPeV3), members of the Picornavirus 
family, have been reported as causes of fever, sepsis, and meningitis in 
infants (age <3 months) in the United States and abroad.
■
■LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
CSF Examination  Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination should 
be performed in all patients with suspected viral encephalitis unless 
contraindicated by the presence of severely increased intracranial 
pressure (ICP). Ideally at least 20 mL should be collected with 5–10 mL 
stored frozen for later studies as needed. The characteristic CSF profile 
is indistinguishable from that of viral meningitis and typically consists 
of a lymphocytic pleocytosis, a mildly elevated protein concentration, 
and a normal glucose concentration. A CSF pleocytosis (>5 cells/μL) 
occurs in >95% of immunocompetent patients with documented viral 
encephalitis. In rare cases, a pleocytosis may be absent on the initial 
lumbar puncture (LP) but present on subsequent LPs. Patients who 
are severely immunocompromised by HIV infection, glucocorticoid 
or other immunosuppressant drugs, chemotherapy, or lymphoretic-
ular malignancies may fail to mount a CSF inflammatory response. 
CSF cell counts exceed 500/μL in only about 10% of patients with 
encephalitis. Infections with certain arboviruses (e.g., EEE virus or 
California encephalitis virus), mumps, and lymphocytic choriomen-
ingitis virus (LCMV) may occasionally result in cell counts >1000/μL, 
but this degree of pleocytosis should suggest the possibility of nonviral 
infections or other inflammatory processes. Atypical lymphocytes in 
the CSF may be seen in EBV infection and less commonly with other 
viruses, including cytomegalovirus (CMV), HSV, and enteroviruses. 
Increased numbers of plasmacytoid or Mollaret-like large mononuclear 
cells have been reported in WNV encephalitis. Polymorphonuclear 
pleocytosis occurs in ~45% of patients with WNV encephalitis and is 
also a common feature in CMV myeloradiculitis in immunocompro-
mised patients. Large numbers of CSF polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
may be present in patients with encephalitis due to EEE virus, echo-
virus 9, and, more rarely, other enteroviruses. However, persisting CSF 
neutrophilia should prompt consideration of bacterial infection, lepto-
spirosis, amebic infection, and noninfectious processes such as acute 
hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis. About 20% of patients with encepha-
litis will have a significant number of red blood cells (>500/μL) in the 
CSF in a nontraumatic tap. The pathologic correlate of this finding may 
be a hemorrhagic encephalitis of the type seen with HSV; however, CSF 
red blood cells occur with similar frequency and in similar numbers in 
patients with nonherpetic focal encephalitides. A decreased CSF glu-
cose concentration is distinctly unusual in viral encephalitis and should 
suggest the possibility of bacterial, fungal, tuberculous, parasitic, lep-
tospiral, syphilitic, sarcoid, or neoplastic meningitis. Rare patients with 
mumps, LCMV, or advanced HSV encephalitis and many patients with 
CMV myeloradiculitis have low CSF glucose concentrations.
■
■CSF POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION
CSF PCR has become the primary diagnostic test for CNS infections 
caused by CMV, EBV, HHV-6, and enteroviruses. In the case of VZV 
CNS infection, CSF PCR and detection of virus-specific IgM or intra-
thecal antibody synthesis both provide important aids to diagnosis. 
The sensitivity and specificity of CSF PCRs vary with the virus being 
tested. The sensitivity (~96%) and specificity (~99%) of HSV CSF PCR 
are equivalent to or exceed those of brain biopsy. It is important to 
recognize that HSV CSF PCR results need to be interpreted after con-
sidering the likelihood of disease in the patient being tested, the timing 
of the test in relationship to onset of symptoms, and the prior use of 
antiviral therapy. A negative HSV CSF PCR test performed by a quali-
fied laboratory at the appropriate time during illness in a patient with 
a high likelihood of HSV encephalitis based on clinical and laboratory 
TABLE 132-1 Viruses Causing Acute Encephalitis in North America
COMMON
LESS COMMON
Herpesviruses
  Cytomegalovirusa
  Herpes simplex virus 1b
  Herpes simplex virus 2
  Human herpesvirus 6
  Varicella-zoster virus
  Epstein-Barr virus
Rabies
Eastern equine encephalitis virus
Powassan virus
Cytomegalovirusa
Colorado tick fever virus
Mumps
Arthropod-borne viruses
  La Crosse virus
  West Nile virusc
  St. Louis encephalitis virus
  Zika
Enteroviruses
aImmunocompromised host. bThe most common cause of sporadic encephalitis. 
cThe most common cause of epidemic encephalitis.


--- PDF PAGE 1039 ---

CHAPTER 132 Encephalitis
993
abnormalities significantly reduces the likelihood of HSV encephalitis 
but does not exclude it. For example, in a patient with a pretest prob-
ability of 35% of having HSV encephalitis, a negative HSV CSF PCR 
reduces the posttest probability to ~2%, and for a patient with a pretest 
probability of 60%, a negative test reduces the posttest probability to 
~6%. In both situations, a positive test makes the diagnosis almost cer-
tain (98–99%). There have been reports of initially negative HSV CSF 
PCR tests that were obtained early (≤72 h) following symptom onset 
and that became positive when repeated 1–3 days later. The frequency 
of positive HSV CSF PCRs in patients with herpes encephalitis also 
decreases as a function of the duration of illness, with only ~20% of 
cases remaining positive after ≥14 days. PCR results are generally not 
affected by ≤1 week of antiviral therapy. In one study, 98% of CSF speci-
mens remained PCR-positive during the first week of antiviral therapy, 
but the numbers fell to ~50% by 8–14 days and to ~21% by >15 days 
after initiation of antiviral therapy.
The sensitivity and specificity of CSF PCR tests for viruses other 
than HSV have not been definitively characterized. Enteroviral (EV) 
CSF PCR appears to have a sensitivity and specificity of >95%. EV 
PCR sensitivity for EV71 may be considerably lower (~30% in some 
reports). Parechoviruses are also not detected by standard EV RT-PCRs. 
The specificity of EBV CSF PCR has not been established. Positive EBV 
CSF PCRs associated with positive tests for other pathogens have been 
reported and may reflect reactivation of EBV latent in lymphocytes that 
enter the CNS as a result of an unrelated infectious or inflammatory 
process. In patients with CNS infection due to VZV, CSF antibody and 
PCR studies should be considered complementary because patients 
may have evidence of intrathecal synthesis of VZV-specific antibod-
ies and negative CSF PCRs. In the case of WNV infection, CSF PCR 
appears to be less sensitive than detection of WNV-specific CSF IgM, 
although PCR testing remains useful in immunocompromised patients 
who may not mount an effective anti-WNV antibody response.
Unbiased rapid parallel sequencing technologies capable of identi-
fying infectious genomes in CSF, brain, and other tissues have recently 
shown great promise for rapid diagnosis of obscure cases of encephali-
tis and other brain infections.
CSF Culture  CSF culture is generally of limited utility in the diag-
nosis of acute viral encephalitis. Culture may be insensitive (e.g., >95% 
of patients with HSV encephalitis have negative CSF cultures as do 
virtually all patients with EBV-associated CNS disease) and often takes 
too long to significantly effect immediate therapy.
Serologic Studies and Antigen Detection  For many arbovi-
ruses including WNV, serologic studies remain important diagnostic 
tools. Serum antibody determination is less useful for viruses with high 
seroprevalence rates in the general population such as HSV, VZV, CMV, 
and EBV. For viruses with low seroprevalence rates, diagnosis of acute 
viral infection can be made by documenting seroconversion between 
acute-phase and convalescent sera (typically obtained after 2–4 weeks) 
or by demonstrating the presence of virus-specific IgM antibodies. For 
viruses with high seroprevalence such as VZV and HSV, demonstra-
tion of synthesis of virus-specific antibodies in CSF, as shown by an 
increased IgG index or the presence of CSF IgM antibodies, may be 
useful and can provide presumptive evidence of CNS infection. Unfor-
tunately, the delay between onset of infection and the host’s generation 
of a virus-specific antibody response often means that serologic data 
are useful mainly for the retrospective establishment of a specific diag-
nosis, rather than in aiding acute diagnosis or management.
In patients with HSV encephalitis, antibodies to HSV-1 glycopro-
teins and HSV glycoprotein antigens have been detected in the CSF. 
Optimal detection of both HSV antibodies and antigen typically 
occurs after the first week of illness, limiting the utility of these tests in 
acute diagnosis. Nonetheless, HSV CSF antibody testing is of value in 
selected patients whose illness is >1 week in duration and who are CSF 
PCR–negative for HSV. In the case of VZV infection, CSF antibody tests 
may be positive when PCR fails to detect viral DNA, and both tests 
should be considered complementary rather than mutually exclusive.
Demonstration of WNV IgM antibodies is diagnostic of WNV 
encephalitis because IgM antibodies do not cross the blood-brain 
barrier, and their presence in CSF is therefore indicative of intrathecal 
synthesis. Timing of antibody collection may be important because the 
rate of CSF WNV IgM seropositivity increases by ~10% per day during 
the first week after illness onset, reaching 80% or higher on day 7 after 
symptom onset. Although serum and CSF IgM antibodies generally 
persist for only a few months after acute infection, there are exceptions 
to this rule, and WNV serum IgM has been shown to persist in some 
patients for >1 year following acute infection.
MRI, CT, and EEG  Patients with suspected encephalitis almost 
invariably undergo neuroimaging studies and often electroencepha-
logram (EEG). These tests help identify or exclude alternative diag-
noses and assist in the differentiation between a focal, as opposed to 
diffuse, encephalitic process. Focal findings in a patient with enceph-
alitis should always raise the possibility of HSV encephalitis. Exam-
ples of focal findings include: (1) areas of increased signal intensity 
in the frontotemporal, cingulate, or insular regions of the brain on 
T2-weighted, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), or diffu-
sion-weighted MRI (Fig. 132-1); (2) focal areas of low absorption, 
mass effect, and contrast enhancement on CT; or (3) periodic focal 
temporal lobe spikes on a background of slow or low-amplitude 
(“flattened”) activity on EEG. Approximately 10% of patients with PCR-
documented HSV encephalitis will have a normal MRI, although nearly 
80% will have abnormalities in the temporal lobe, and an additional 
10% in extratemporal regions. The lesions are typically hyperintense 
on T2-weighted images. The addition of FLAIR and diffusion-weighted 
images to the standard MRI sequences enhances sensitivity. Children 
with HSV encephalitis may have atypical patterns of MRI lesions and 
often show involvement of brain regions outside the frontotemporal 
areas. CT is less sensitive than MRI and is normal in up to 20–35% of 
patients. EEG abnormalities occur in >75% of PCR-documented cases of 
HSV encephalitis; they typically involve the temporal lobes but are often 
nonspecific. Some patients with HSV encephalitis have a distinctive EEG 
pattern consisting of periodic, stereotyped, sharp-and-slow complexes 
originating in one or both temporal lobes and repeating at regular inter-
vals of 2–3 s. The periodic complexes are typically noted between days 
2 and 15 of the illness and are present in two-thirds of pathologically 
proven cases of HSV encephalitis.
Significant MRI abnormalities are found in only approximately 
two-thirds of patients with WNV encephalitis, a frequency less than 
that with HSV encephalitis. When present, abnormalities often involve 
deep brain structures, including the thalamus, basal ganglia, and 
brainstem, rather than the cortex and may only be apparent on FLAIR 
images. EEGs in patients with WNV encephalitis typically show gener-
alized slowing that may be more anteriorly prominent rather than the 
FIGURE 132-1  Coronal fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) magnetic 
resonance image from a patient with herpes simplex encephalitis. Note the 
area of increased signal in the right temporal lobe (left side of image) confined 
predominantly to the gray matter. This patient had predominantly unilateral disease; 
bilateral lesions are more common but may be quite asymmetric in their intensity.


--- PDF PAGE 1040 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
994
temporally predominant pattern of sharp or periodic discharges more 
characteristic of HSV encephalitis. Patients with VZV encephalitis may 
show multifocal areas of hemorrhagic and ischemic infarction, reflect-
ing the tendency of this virus to produce a CNS vasculopathy rather 
than a true encephalitis. Immunocompromised adult patients with 
CMV often have enlarged ventricles with areas of increased T2 signal 
on MRI outlining the ventricles and subependymal enhancement 
on T1-weighted postcontrast images. Table 132-2 highlights specific 
diagnostic test results in encephalitis that can be useful in clinical 
decision-making.
Brain Biopsy  Brain biopsy is now generally reserved for patients 
in whom CSF PCR studies fail to lead to a specific diagnosis, who have 
focal abnormalities on MRI, no serologic evidence of autoimmune 
disease, and who continue to show progressive clinical deterioration 
despite treatment with acyclovir and supportive therapy.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Infection by a variety of other organisms can mimic viral encephalitis. 
In studies of biopsy-proven HSV encephalitis, common infectious 
mimics of focal viral encephalitis included mycobacteria, fungi, rick-
ettsiae, Listeria, Mycoplasma, and other bacteria (including Bartonella 
sp.). There are an increasing number of antibodies reported that cause 
autoimmune encephalitis, including those associated with antibodies 
against N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, voltage-gated potas-
sium channels/leucine-rich glioma inactivated protein-1 (VGKC/ 
LGI-I), α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA), 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors, and glutamic acid decarboxy-
lase (GAD 65), that can mimic that caused by viral infection. In most 
cases, diagnosis is made by detection of the specific autoantibodies in 
serum and/or CSF. NMDA receptor antibodies have been reported in 
some patients with HSE encephalitis, and their presence should not 
exclude appropriate testing and treatment for HSV encephalitis. It has 
been suggested that development of NMDAR antibodies in patients 
with HSE may contribute to delayed recovery or clinical relapse. 
Autoimmune encephalitis may also be associated with specific cancers 
(paraneoplastic) and onconeuronal antibodies (e.g., anti-Hu, Yo, Ma2, 
amphiphysin, CRMP5, CV2) (Chap. 90). Subacute or chronic forms 
of encephalitis may occur in association with autoantibodies against 
thyroglobulin and thyroperoxidase (Hashimoto’s encephalopathy) and 
with prion diseases.
Infection caused by the ameba Naegleria fowleri can also cause acute 
meningoencephalitis (primary amebic meningoencephalitis), whereas 
that caused by Acanthamoeba and Balamuthia more typically produces 
subacute or chronic granulomatous amebic meningoencephalitis. 
Naegleria thrive in warm, iron-rich pools of water, including those 
found in drains, canals, and both natural and human-made outdoor 
pools. Infection has typically occurred in immunocompetent children 
with a history of swimming in potentially infected water. The CSF, in 
contrast to the typical profile seen in viral encephalitis, often resembles 
that of bacterial meningitis with a neutrophilic pleocytosis and hypo-
glycorrhachia. Motile trophozoites can be seen in a wet mount of warm, 
fresh CSF. There have been an increasing number of cases of Balamuthia 
mandrillaris amebic encephalitis mimicking acute viral encephalitis in 
children and immunocompetent adults. This organism has also been 
associated with encephalitis in recipients of transplanted organs from 
a donor with unrecognized infection. No effective treatment has been 
identified, and mortality approaches 100%.
Encephalitis can be caused by the raccoon pinworm Baylisascaris 
procyonis. Clues to the diagnosis include a history of raccoon exposure, 
especially of playing in or eating dirt potentially contaminated with 
raccoon feces. Most patients are children, and many have an associated 
eosinophilia.
Once nonviral causes of encephalitis have been excluded, the major 
diagnostic challenge is to distinguish HSV from other viruses that 
cause encephalitis. This distinction is particularly important because 
in virtually every other instance the therapy is supportive, whereas 
specific and effective antiviral therapy is available for HSV, and its effi-
cacy is enhanced when it is instituted early in the course of infection. 
HSV encephalitis should be considered when clinical features suggest 
involvement of the inferomedial frontotemporal regions of the brain, 
including prominent olfactory or gustatory hallucinations, anosmia, 
unusual or bizarre behavior or personality alterations, or memory 
disturbance. HSV encephalitis should always be suspected in patients 
with signs and symptoms consistent with acute encephalitis with focal 
findings on clinical examination, neuroimaging studies, or EEG. The 
diagnostic procedure of choice in these patients is CSF PCR analysis for 
HSV. A positive CSF PCR establishes the diagnosis, and a negative test 
dramatically reduces the likelihood of HSV encephalitis (see above).
The anatomic distribution of lesions may provide an addi-
tional clue to diagnosis. Patients with rapidly progressive 
encephalitis and prominent brainstem signs, symptoms, or 
neuroimaging abnormalities may be infected by flaviviruses (WNV, 
St. Louis encephalitis virus, Japanese encephalitis virus), HSV, enterovi-
rus 71 (EV71), rabies, or Listeria monocytogenes. Significant involvement 
of deep gray matter structures, including the basal ganglia and thala-
mus, should also suggest possible flavivirus infection. These patients 
may present clinically with prominent movement disorders (tremor, 
myoclonus) or parkinsonian features. Patients with WNV infection can 
also present with a poliomyelitis-like acute flaccid paralysis, as can 
patients infected with EV71, Enterovirus D-68 (EV-D68) and less com-
monly, other enteroviruses. Acute flaccid paralysis is characterized by 
the acute onset of a lower motor neuron type of weakness with flaccid 
tone, reduced or absent reflexes, and relatively preserved sensation. The 
complete eradication of polio remains an ongoing challenge despite a 
continuing World Health Organization poliovirus elimination cam-
paign. There have been small outbreaks of poliomyelitis associated with 
vaccine strains of virus that have reverted to virulence through muta-
tion or recombination with circulating wild-type enteroviruses in 
Hispaniola, China, the Philippines, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Madagascar.
Epidemiologic factors may provide important clues to the diagnosis 
of viral encephalitis. Particular attention should be paid to the season 
TABLE 132-2  Use of Diagnostic Tests in Encephalitis
The best test for WNV encephalitis is the CSF IgM antibody test. The 
prevalence of positive CSF IgM tests increases by about 10% per day after 
illness onset and reaches 70–80% by the end of the first week. Serum WNV 
IgM can provide evidence for recent WNV infection, but in the absence of 
other findings does not establish the diagnosis of neuroinvasive disease 
(meningitis, encephalitis, acute flaccid paralysis).
Approximately 80% of patients with proven HSV encephalitis have MRI 
abnormalities involving the temporal lobes. This percentage likely increases 
to >90% when FLAIR and diffusion-weighted MRI sequences are also used. 
The absence of temporal lobe lesions on MRI reduces the likelihood of HSV 
encephalitis and should prompt consideration of other diagnostic possibilities.
The CSF HSV PCR test may be negative in the first 72 h of symptoms of HSV 
encephalitis. A repeat study should be considered in patients with an initial 
early negative PCR in whom diagnostic suspicion of HSV encephalitis remains 
high and no alternative diagnosis has yet been established.
Detection of intrathecal synthesis (increased CSF/serum HSV antibody ratio 
corrected for breakdown of the blood-brain barrier) of HSV-specific antibody 
may be useful in diagnosis of HSV encephalitis in patients in whom only late 
(>1 week after onset) CSF specimens are available and PCR studies are 
negative. Serum serology alone is of no value in diagnosis of HSV encephalitis 
due to the high seroprevalence rate in the general population.
Negative CSF viral cultures are of no value in excluding the diagnosis of HSV or 
EBV encephalitis.
VZV CSF IgM antibodies may be present in patients with a negative VZV CSF 
PCR. Both tests should be performed in patients with suspected VZV CNS 
disease.
The specificity of EBV CSF PCR for diagnosis of CNS infection is unknown. 
Positive tests may occur in patients with a CSF pleocytosis due to other 
causes. Detection of EBV CSF IgM or intrathecal synthesis of antibody to VCA 
supports the diagnosis of EBV encephalitis. Serologic studies consistent with 
acute EBV infection (e.g., IgM VCA, presence of antibodies against EA but not 
against EBNA) can help support the diagnosis.
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DWI, 
diffusion-weighted imaging; EA, early antigen; EBNA, EBV-associated nuclear 
antigen; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; HSV, 
herpes simplex virus; IgM, immunoglobulin M; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; 
PCR, polymerase chain reaction; VCA, viral capsid antibody; VZV, varicella-zoster 
virus; WNV, West Nile virus.


--- PDF PAGE 1041 ---

CHAPTER 132 Encephalitis
995
of the year; the geographic location and travel history; and possible 
exposure to animal bites or scratches, rodents, and ticks. Although 
transmission from the bite of an infected dog remains the most com-
mon cause of rabies worldwide, in the United States very few cases 
of dog rabies occur, and the most common risk factor is exposure to 
bats—although a clear history of a bite or scratch is often lacking. The 
classic clinical presentation of encephalitic (furious) rabies is fever, fluc-
tuating consciousness, and autonomic hyperactivity. Phobic spasms of 
the larynx, pharynx, neck muscles, and diaphragm can be triggered by 
attempts to swallow water (hydrophobia) or by inspiration (aerophobia). 
Patients may also present with paralytic (dumb) rabies characterized 
by acute ascending paralysis. Rabies due to the bite of a bat has a dif-
ferent clinical presentation than classic rabies due to a dog or wolf bite. 
Patients present with focal neurologic deficits, myoclonus, seizures, 
and hallucinations; phobic spasms are not a typical feature. Patients 
with rabies have a CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis and may show areas 
of increased T2 signal abnormality in the brainstem, hippocampus, and 
hypothalamus. Diagnosis can be made by finding rabies virus antigen 
in brain tissue or in the neural innervation of hair follicles at the nape of 
the neck. PCR amplification of viral nucleic acid from CSF and saliva or 
tears may also enable diagnosis. Serology is frequently negative in both 
serum and CSF in the first week after onset of infection, which limits 
its acute diagnostic utility. No specific therapy is available, and cases 
are almost invariably fatal, with isolated survivors having devastating 
neurologic sequelae.
State public health authorities provide a valuable resource concern-
ing isolation of particular agents in individual regions. Regular updates 
concerning the number, type, and distribution of cases of arboviral 
encephalitis can be found on the CDC and U.S. Geological Survey 
(USGS) websites (http://www.cdc.gov and http://diseasemaps.usgs.gov).
TREATMENT
Viral Encephalitis
Specific antiviral therapy should be initiated when appropriate. 
Vital functions, including respiration and blood pressure, should 
be monitored continuously and supported as required. In the initial 
stages of encephalitis, many patients will require care in an intensive 
care unit. Basic management and supportive therapy should include 
careful monitoring of ICP, fluid restriction, avoidance of hypotonic 
intravenous solutions, and suppression of fever. Seizures should be 
treated with standard anticonvulsant regimens, and prophylactic 
therapy should be considered in view of the high frequency of sei-
zures in severe cases of encephalitis. As with all seriously ill, immo-
bilized patients with altered levels of consciousness, encephalitis 
patients are at risk for aspiration pneumonia, stasis ulcers and decu-
biti, contractures, deep-venous thrombosis and its complications, 
and infections of indwelling lines and catheters.
Acyclovir is of benefit in the treatment of HSV and should be 
started empirically in patients with suspected viral encephalitis, 
especially if focal features are present, while awaiting viral diagnos-
tic studies. Treatment should be discontinued in patients found not 
to have HSV encephalitis, with the possible exception of patients 
with severe encephalitis due to VZV or EBV. HSV, VZV, and EBV all 
encode an enzyme deoxypyrimidine (thymidine) kinase that phos-
phorylates acyclovir to produce acyclovir-5′-monophosphate. Host 
cell enzymes then phosphorylate this compound to form a triphos-
phate derivative. It is the triphosphate that acts as an antiviral agent 
by inhibiting viral DNA polymerase and by causing premature 
termination of nascent viral DNA chains. The specificity of action 
depends on the fact that uninfected cells do not phosphorylate 
significant amounts of acyclovir to acyclovir-5′-monophosphate. A 
second level of specificity is provided by the fact that the acyclovir 
triphosphate is a more potent inhibitor of viral DNA polymerase 
than of the analogous host cell enzymes.
Adults should receive a dose of 10 mg/kg of acyclovir intrave-
nously every 8 h (30 mg/kg per day total dose) for 21 days. Neonatal 
HSV CNS infection is less responsive to acyclovir therapy than HSV 
encephalitis in adults; it is recommended that neonates with HSV 
encephalitis receive 20 mg/kg of acyclovir every 8 h (60 mg/kg per 
day total dose) for a minimum of 21 days.
Prior to intravenous administration, acyclovir should be diluted 
to a concentration ≤7 mg/mL. (A 70-kg person would receive a 
dose of 700 mg, which would be diluted in a volume of 100 mL.) 
Each dose should be infused slowly over 1 h, rather than by rapid 
or bolus infusion, to minimize the risk of renal dysfunction. Care 
should be taken to avoid extravasation or intramuscular or subcuta-
neous administration. The alkaline pH of acyclovir can cause local 
inflammation and phlebitis (9%). Dose adjustment is required in 
patients with impaired renal glomerular filtration. Penetration into 
CSF is excellent, with average drug levels ~50% of serum levels. 
Complications of therapy include elevations in blood urea nitrogen 
and creatinine levels (5%), thrombocytopenia (6%), gastrointestinal  
toxicity (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea) (7%), and neurotoxicity (leth-
argy or obtundation, disorientation, confusion, agitation, hallucina-
tions, tremors, seizures) (1%). Acyclovir resistance may be mediated 
by changes in either the viral deoxypyrimidine kinase or DNA 
polymerase. To date, acyclovir-resistant isolates have not been a 
significant clinical problem in immunocompetent individuals. How-
ever, there have been reports of clinically virulent acyclovir-resistant 
HSV isolates from sites outside the CNS in immunocompromised 
individuals, including those with AIDS.
Oral antiviral drugs with efficacy against HSV, VZV, and EBV, 
including acyclovir, famciclovir, and valacyclovir, have not been 
evaluated in the treatment of encephalitis either as primary therapy 
or as supplemental therapy following completion of a course of 
parenteral acyclovir. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases (NIAID)/National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke–sponsored phase III trial of supplemental oral valacyclovir 
therapy (2 g tid for 3 months) following the initial 14- to 21-day 
course of therapy with parenteral acyclovir (www.clinicaltrials.gov, 
identifier NCT00031486) was terminated early due to low enroll-
ment. Although analysis was compromised due to low numbers, 
no differences were seen in the 12-month endpoints including 
dementia rating scale, mini-mental state examination, and Glasgow 
Coma Score in patients receiving valacyclovir versus placebo. The 
role of adjunctive intravenous glucocorticoids in treatment of HSV 
and VZV infection remains unclear. Experimental models and case 
reports of HSV encephalitis suggest that glucocorticoids may be effi-
cacious and a randomized clinical trial comparing acyclovir alone 
and acyclovir plus dexamethasone (10 mg every 6 h intravenously 
for 4 days) in patients with HSV encephalitis is underway in Europe 
(NCT03084783).
Ganciclovir and foscarnet, either alone or in combination, are 
often used in the treatment of CMV-related CNS infections, although 
their efficacy remains unproven. Cidofovir (see below) may provide 
an alternative in patients who fail to respond to ganciclovir and 
foscarnet, although data concerning its use in CMV CNS infections 
are extremely limited.
Ganciclovir is a synthetic nucleoside analogue of 2′-deoxyguanosine. 
The drug is preferentially phosphorylated by virus-induced cellular 
kinases. Ganciclovir triphosphate acts as a competitive inhibitor of 
the CMV DNA polymerase, and its incorporation into nascent viral 
DNA results in premature chain termination. Following intravenous 
administration, CSF concentrations of ganciclovir are 25–70% of 
coincident plasma levels. The usual dose for treatment of severe 
neurologic illnesses is 5 mg/kg every 12 h given intravenously at 
a constant rate over 1 h. Induction therapy is followed by main-
tenance therapy of 5 mg/kg every day for an indefinite period. 
Induction therapy should be continued until patients show a decline 
in CSF pleocytosis and a reduction in CSF CMV DNA copy number 
on quantitative PCR testing (where available). Doses should be 
adjusted in patients with renal insufficiency. Treatment is often lim-
ited by the development of granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia 
(20–25%), which may require reduction in or discontinuation of 
therapy. Gastrointestinal side effects, including nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, and abdominal pain, occur in ~20% of patients. Some 


--- PDF PAGE 1042 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
996
patients treated with ganciclovir for CMV retinitis have developed 
retinal detachment, but the causal relationship to ganciclovir treat-
ment is unclear. Valganciclovir is an orally bioavailable prodrug that 
can generate high serum levels of ganciclovir, although studies of its 
efficacy in treating CMV CNS infections are limited.
Foscarnet is a pyrophosphate analogue that inhibits viral DNA 
polymerases by binding to the pyrophosphate-binding site. Follow-
ing intravenous infusion, CSF concentrations range from 15 to 100% 
of coincident plasma levels. The usual dose for serious CMV-related 
neurologic illness is 60 mg/kg every 8 h administered by constant 
infusion over 1 h. Induction therapy for 14–21 days is followed by 
maintenance therapy (60–120 mg/kg per day). Induction therapy 
may need to be extended in patients who fail to show a decline in 
CSF pleocytosis and a reduction in CSF CMV DNA copy number on 
quantitative PCR tests (where available). Approximately one-third 
of patients develop renal impairment during treatment, which is 
reversible following discontinuation of therapy in most, but not all, 
cases. This is often associated with elevations in serum creatinine 
and proteinuria and is less frequent in patients who are adequately 
hydrated. Many patients experience fatigue and nausea. Reductions 
in serum calcium, magnesium, and potassium occur in ~15% of 
patients and may be associated with tetany, cardiac rhythm distur-
bances, or seizures.
Cidofovir is a nucleotide analogue that is effective in treating 
CMV retinitis and equivalent to or better than ganciclovir in some 
experimental models of murine CMV encephalitis, although data 
concerning its efficacy in human CMV CNS disease are limited. 
The usual dose is 5 mg/kg intravenously once weekly for 2 weeks, 
then biweekly for two or more additional doses, depending on 
clinical response. Patients must be prehydrated with normal saline  
(e.g., 1 L over 1–2 h) prior to each dose and treated with probene-
cid (e.g., 1 g 3 h before cidofovir and 1 g 2 and 8 h after cidofovir). 
Nephrotoxicity is common; the dose should be reduced if renal 
function deteriorates.
Intravenous ribavirin (15–25 mg/kg per day in divided doses 
given every 8 h) has been reported to be of benefit in isolated cases of 
severe encephalitis due to California encephalitis (La Crosse) virus. 
Ribavirin might be of benefit for the rare patients, typically infants 
or young children, with severe adenovirus or rotavirus encephalitis 
and in patients with encephalitis due to LCMV or other arenavi-
ruses. However, clinical trials are lacking. Hemolysis, with resulting 
anemia, has been the major side effect limiting therapy.
No specific antiviral therapy of proven efficacy is currently avail-
able for treatment of WNV encephalitis. Patients have been treated 
with interferon-a, ribavirin, an Israeli IVIg preparation that contains 
high-titer anti-WNV antibody (Omr-IgG-am) (www.clinicaltrials.gov, 
identifier NCT00069316 and 0068055), and humanized monoclo-
nal antibodies directed against the viral envelope glycoprotein 
(www.clinicaltrials.gov, identifier NCT00927953 and 00515385). WNV  
chimeric vaccines, in which WNV envelope and premembrane 
proteins are inserted into the background of another flavivirus, 
DNA plasmid vaccines and inactivated virus vaccines have all been 
tested in phase I clinical trials and have been found to be both safe 
and immunogenic in healthy adults but have not yet been tested 
for disease prevention in humans (see www.clinicaltrials.gov). Both 
chimeric and killed inactivated WNV vaccines have been found 
to be safe and effective in preventing equine WNV infection, and 
effective vaccines are already in human use for prevention of other 
flavivirus infections including Japanese encephalitis, and yellow 
fever, suggesting that efficacy testing and commercial considerations 
rather than scientific issues will be the major impediment to creating 
a WNV vaccine.
■
■SEQUELAE
There is considerable variation in the incidence and severity of sequelae 
in patients surviving viral encephalitis. In the case of EEE virus infec-
tion, nearly 80% of survivors have severe neurologic sequelae. At the 
other extreme are infections due to EBV, California encephalitis virus, 
and Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, where severe sequelae are 
unusual. For example, ~5–15% of children infected with La Crosse virus 
have a residual seizure disorder, and 1% have persistent hemiparesis. 
Detailed information about sequelae in patients with HSV encepha-
litis treated with acyclovir is available from the NIAID-Collaborative 
Antiviral Study Group (CASG) trials. Of 32 acyclovir-treated patients, 
26 survived (81%). Of the 26 survivors, 12 (46%) had no or only minor 
sequelae, 3 (12%) were moderately impaired (gainfully employed but 
not functioning at their previous level), and 11 (42%) were severely 
impaired (requiring continuous supportive care). The incidence and 
severity of sequelae were directly related to the age of the patient and 
the level of consciousness at the time of initiation of therapy. Patients 
with severe neurologic impairment (Glasgow Coma Score 6) at initiation 
of therapy either died or survived with severe sequelae. Young patients 
(<30 years) with good neurologic function at initiation of therapy did 
substantially better (100% survival, 62% with no or mild sequelae) com-
pared with their older counterparts (>30 years; 64% survival, 57% no 
or mild sequelae). Many patients with WNV infection have sequelae, 
including cognitive impairment; weakness; and hyper- or hypokinetic 
movement disorders, including tremor, myoclonus, and parkinsonism. 
In a large longitudinal study of prognosis in 156 patients with WNV 
infection, the mean time to achieve recovery (defined as 95% of max-
imal predicted score on specific validated tests) was 112–148 days for 
fatigue, 121–175 days for physical function, 131–139 days for mood, 
and 302–455 days for mental function (the longer interval in each case 
representing patients with invasive CNS disease).
CHRONIC ENCEPHALITIS
■
■PROGRESSIVE MULTIFOCAL 
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY
Clinical Features and Pathology  Progressive multifocal leu-
koencephalopathy (PML) is characterized pathologically by multifocal 
areas of demyelination of varying size distributed throughout the brain 
but sparing the spinal cord and optic nerves. In addition to demyeli-
nation, there are characteristic cytologic alterations in both astrocytes 
and oligodendrocytes. Astrocytes are enlarged and contain hyper-
chromatic, deformed, and bizarre nuclei and frequent mitotic figures. 
Oligodendrocytes have enlarged, densely staining nuclei that contain 
viral inclusions formed by crystalline arrays of JC virus (JCV) particles. 
Patients often present with visual deficits (45%), typically a homon-
ymous hemianopia; mental impairment (38%) (dementia, confusion, 
personality change); weakness, including hemi- or monoparesis; and 
ataxia. Seizures occur in ~20% of patients, predominantly in those with 
lesions abutting the cortex.
Almost all patients have an underlying immunosuppressive disor-
der or are receiving immunomodulatory therapy. In recent series, the 
most common associated conditions were AIDS (80%), hematologic 
malignancies (13%), transplant recipients (5%), and chronic inflam-
matory diseases (2%). It has been estimated that up to 5% of AIDS 
patients will develop PML. There have been >700 reported cases of 
PML occurring in patients being treated for multiple sclerosis and 
inflammatory bowel disease with natalizumab, a humanized monoclo-
nal antibody that inhibits lymphocyte trafficking into CNS and bowel 
mucosa by binding to α4 integrins. Overall risk in these patients has 
been estimated at ~4.2 PML cases per 1000 treated patients, but the risk 
depends on a variety of factors including anti-JCV antibody serostatus 
and the magnitude of the JCV antibody response, prior immunosup-
pressive therapy use, and duration of natalizumab therapy. Patients 
who lack detectable JCV antibody have a risk of developing PML of 
<0.1 case/1000 patients, whereas those who are JCV seropositive 
and have been exposed to prior immunosuppressive therapy and 
have received >24 months of natalizumab therapy have a risk of 
>1.3 case/100 treated patients. PML cases have also been reported 
in patients receiving other humanized monoclonal antibodies with 
immunomodulatory activity including efalizumab and rituximab, 
although the relative risks have not been clearly established. The basic 
clinical and diagnostic features appear to be similar in HIV-associated 


--- PDF PAGE 1043 ---

CHAPTER 132 Encephalitis
997
PML and PML associated with immunomodulatory drugs with the 
exception of an increased likelihood of MRI enhancement of PML 
lesions in immunomodulatory cases. In natalizumab-associated PML, 
patients will also almost invariably develop clinical and radiographic 
worsening of lesions with discontinuation of therapy, attributed to 
development of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS).
Diagnostic Studies  The diagnosis of PML is frequently suggested 
by MRI. MRI reveals multifocal asymmetric, coalescing white matter 
lesions located periventricularly, in the centrum semiovale, in the 
parietal-occipital region, and in the cerebellum. These lesions have 
increased signal on T2 and FLAIR images and decreased signal on 
T1-weighted images. HIV-PML lesions are classically nonenhancing 
(90%), but patients with immunomodulatory drug-associated PML 
may have peripheral ring enhancement. PML lesions are not typically 
associated with edema or mass effect. CT scans, which are less sensitive 
than MRI for the diagnosis of PML, often show hypodense nonenhanc-
ing white matter lesions.
The CSF is typically normal, although mild elevation in protein 
and/or IgG may be found. Pleocytosis occurs in <25% of cases, is pre-
dominantly mononuclear, and rarely exceeds 25 cells/μL. PCR amplifi-
cation of JCV DNA from CSF has become an important diagnostic tool. 
The presence of a positive CSF PCR for JCV DNA in association with 
typical MRI lesions in the appropriate clinical setting is diagnostic of 
PML, reflecting the assay’s relatively high specificity (92–100%); how-
ever, sensitivity is variable, and a negative CSF PCR does not exclude 
the diagnosis. In HIV-negative patients and HIV-positive patients not 
receiving highly active antiviral therapy (HAART), sensitivity is likely 
70–90%. In HAART-treated patients, sensitivity may be closer to 60%, 
reflecting the lower JCV CSF viral load in this relatively more immu-
nocompetent group. Patients with natalizumab-associated PML have 
highly variable amounts of JCV DNA in CSF. Some patients may have 
negative CSF PCRs performed in commercial laboratories where assay 
detection thresholds are typically >100 JCV DNA copies/μL, but pos-
itive results in reference laboratories using supersensitive techniques 
(detection of 10 JCV copies/μL or less). CSF studies with quantitative 
JCV PCR indicate that patients with low JCV loads (<100 copies/μL) 
have a generally better prognosis than those with higher viral loads. 
Patients with negative CSF PCR studies may require brain biopsy for 
definitive diagnosis. In biopsy or necropsy specimens of brain, JCV 
antigen and nucleic acid can be detected by immunocytochemistry, in 
situ hybridization, or PCR amplification.
Serologic studies are of no utility in diagnosis due to high basal 
seroprevalence level, but may contribute to risk stratification in 
patients contemplating therapy with immunomodulatory drugs such 
as natalizumab.
TREATMENT
Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy
No effective therapy for PML is available. There are case reports 
of potential beneficial effects of the 5-HT2a receptor antagonist 
mirtazapine, which may inhibit binding of JCV to its receptor on 
oligodendrocytes. Retrospective non-controlled studies have also 
suggested a possible beneficial effect of treatment with interferon-α. 
Neither of these agents has been tested in randomized controlled 
clinical trials. A prospective multicenter clinical trial to evaluate the 
efficacy of the antimalarial drug mefloquine failed to show benefit. 
Intravenous and/or intrathecal cytarabine were not shown to be 
of benefit in a randomized controlled trial in HIV-associated PML, 
although some experts suggest that cytarabine may have therapeutic 
efficacy in situations where breakdown of the blood-brain barrier 
allows sufficient CSF penetration. A randomized controlled trial of 
cidofovir in HIV-associated PML also failed to show significant ben-
efit. Because PML almost invariably occurs in immunocompromised 
individuals, any therapeutic interventions designed to enhance 
or restore immunocompetence should be considered. Perhaps the 
most dramatic demonstration of this is disease stabilization and, in 
rare cases, improvement associated with the improvement in the 
immune status of HIV-positive patients with AIDS following institu-
tion of HAART. In HIV-positive PML patients treated with HAART, 
1-year survival is ~50%, although up to 80% of survivors may have 
significant neurologic sequelae. HIV-positive PML patients with 
higher CD4 counts (>300/μL) and low or nondetectable HIV viral 
loads have a better prognosis than those with lower CD4 counts and 
higher viral loads. Although institution of HAART enhances sur-
vival in HIV-positive PML patients, the associated immune recon-
stitution in patients with an underlying opportunistic infection such 
as PML may also result in a severe CNS inflammatory syndrome 
(IRIS) associated with clinical worsening, CSF pleocytosis, and the 
appearance of new enhancing MRI lesions. Patients receiving natal-
izumab or other immunomodulatory antibodies who are suspected 
of having PML should have therapy immediately halted. Removal 
of drugs with long pharmacokinetic or biological half-lives, such as 
natalizumab, with plasma exchange or immunoadsorption is fre-
quently utilized, although whether this improves outcomes has not 
been definitively established. Patients should be closely monitored 
for development of IRIS, which is generally treated with intravenous 
glucocorticoids, although controlled clinical trials of efficacy remain 
lacking.
■
■SUBACUTE SCLEROSING PANENCEPHALITIS (SSPE)
SSPE is a rare, chronic, progressive demyelinating disease of the CNS 
associated with a chronic nonpermissive infection of brain tissue with 
measles virus. The frequency has been estimated at 1 in 100,000–500,000 
measles cases. An average of five cases per year is reported in the 
United States. The incidence has declined dramatically since the intro-
duction of a measles vaccine. Most patients give a history of primary 
measles infection at an early age (2 years), which is followed after a 
latent interval of 6–8 years by the development of a progressive neuro-
logic disorder. Some 85% of patients are between 5 and 15 years old at 
diagnosis. Initial manifestations include poor school performance and 
mood and personality changes. Typical signs of a CNS viral infection, 
including fever and headache, do not occur. As the disease progresses, 
patients develop progressive intellectual deterioration, focal and/or 
generalized seizures, myoclonus, ataxia, and visual disturbances. In 
the late stage of the illness, patients are unresponsive, quadriparetic, 
and spastic, with hyperactive tendon reflexes and extensor plantar 
responses.
Diagnostic Studies  MRI is often normal early, although areas 
of increased T2 signal develop in the white matter of the brain and 
brainstem as disease progresses. The EEG may initially show only 
nonspecific slowing, but with disease progression, patients develop 
a characteristic periodic pattern with bursts of high-voltage, sharp, 
slow waves every 3–8 s, followed by periods of attenuated (“flat”) 
background. The CSF is acellular with a normal or mildly elevated 
protein concentration and a markedly elevated gamma globulin level 
(>20% of total CSF protein). CSF antimeasles antibody levels are 
invariably elevated, and oligoclonal antimeasles antibodies are often 
present. Measles virus can be cultured from brain tissue using special 
cocultivation techniques. Viral antigen can be identified immunocyto-
chemically, and viral genome can be detected by in situ hybridization 
or PCR amplification.
TREATMENT
Subacute Sclerosing Panencephalitis
No definitive therapy for SSPE is available. Treatment with isopri-
nosine (Inosiplex, 100 mg/kg per day), alone or in combination with 
intrathecal or intraventricular interferon-α, has been reported to 
prolong survival and produce clinical improvement in some patients 
but has never been subjected to a controlled clinical trial.
■
■PROGRESSIVE RUBELLA PANENCEPHALITIS
This is an extremely rare disorder that primarily affects males with con-
genital rubella syndrome, although isolated cases have been reported 


================================================================================
Ch133 Acute Meningitis
Pages 1044-1052
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 1044 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
998
following childhood rubella. After a latent period of 8–19 years, patients 
develop progressive neurologic deterioration. The manifestations are 
similar to those seen in SSPE. CSF shows a mild lymphocytic pleocyto-
sis, slightly elevated protein concentration, markedly increased gamma 
globulin, and rubella virus–specific oligoclonal bands. No therapy 
is available. Universal prevention of both congenital and childhood 
rubella through the use of the available live attenuated rubella vaccine 
would be expected to eliminate the disease.
■
■FURTHER READING
Beckham JD, Tyler KL: Encephalitis, in Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s 
Principles and Practice of Infectious Disease, 8th ed, JE Bennett, R Dolin, 
MJ Blaser (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2015, pp 1144–1176.
Ramos-Estebanez et al: A systematic review on the role of adjunctive 
corticosteroids in herpes simplex virus encephalitis: Is timing critical 
for safety and efficacy? Antivir Ther 19:133, 2014.
Tunkel AR et al: The management of encephalitis: Clinical practice 
guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect 
Dis 47:303, 2008.
Venkatesan A et al: International Encephalitis Consortium. Case 
definitions, diagnostic algorithms, and priorities in encephalitis: 
Consensus statement of the International Encephalitis Consortium. 
Clin Infect Dis 57:1114, 2013.
Wilson MR et al: Acute West Nile virus meningoencephalitis diag-
nosed via metagenomic deep sequencing of cerebrospinal fluid in a 
renal transplant patient. Am J Transplant 17:803, 2017.
BACTERIAL MENINGITIS
■
■DEFINITION
Bacterial meningitis is an acute purulent infection within the sub-
arachnoid space (SAS). It is associated with a CNS inflammatory 
reaction that may result in decreased consciousness, seizures, raised 
intracranial pressure (ICP), and stroke. The meninges, SAS, and brain 
parenchyma are all frequently involved in the inflammatory reaction 
(meningoencephalitis).
■
■EPIDEMIOLOGY
Bacterial meningitis is the most common form of suppurative 
CNS infection, with an annual incidence in the United States of 
>2.5 cases/100,000 population. The organisms most often responsible 
for community-acquired bacterial meningitis are Streptococcus pneu-
moniae (~50%), Neisseria meningitidis (~25%), group B streptococci 
(~15%), and Listeria monocytogenes (~10%). Haemophilus influenzae type 
b accounts for <10% of cases of bacterial meningitis in most series. 
N. meningitidis is the causative organism of recurring epidemics of 
meningitis every 8–12 years.
■
■ETIOLOGY
S. pneumoniae (Chap. 143) is the most common cause of meningitis in 
adults >20 years of age, accounting for nearly half the reported cases 
(1.1 per 100,000 persons per year). There are a number of predisposing 
conditions that increase the risk of pneumococcal meningitis, the most 
important of which is pneumococcal pneumonia. Additional risk fac-
tors include coexisting acute or chronic pneumococcal sinusitis or otitis 
media, alcoholism, diabetes, splenectomy, hypogammaglobulinemia, 
complement deficiency, and head trauma with basilar skull fracture 
and CSF rhinorrhea. The mortality rate remains ~20% despite antibiotic 
therapy.
The incidence of meningitis due to N. meningitidis (Chap. 150) has 
decreased with the routine immunization of 11- to 18-year-olds with 
Acute Meningitis
Karen L. Roos, Kenneth L. Tyler 
133
the quadrivalent (serogroups A, C, W-135, and Y) meningococcal gly-
coconjugate vaccine. The vaccine does not contain serogroup B, which 
is responsible for one-third of cases of meningococcal disease. The 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends 
that adolescents and young adults aged 16–23 years may be vaccinated 
with the serogroup B meningococcal (MenB) vaccine. The presence of 
petechial or purpuric skin lesions can provide an important clue to 
the diagnosis of meningococcal infection. In some patients the disease 
is fulminant, progressing to death within hours of symptom onset. 
Infection may be initiated by nasopharyngeal colonization, which can 
result in either an asymptomatic carrier state or invasive meningo-
coccal disease. The risk of invasive disease following nasopharyngeal 
colonization depends on both bacterial virulence factors and host 
immune defense mechanisms, including the host’s capacity to produce 
antimeningococcal antibodies and to lyse meningococci by both classic 
and alternative complement pathways. Individuals with deficiencies 
of any of the complement components, including properdin, are highly 
susceptible to meningococcal infections.
Gram-negative bacilli cause meningitis in individuals with chronic 
and debilitating diseases such as diabetes, cirrhosis, or alcoholism and 
in those with chronic urinary tract infections. Gram-negative menin-
gitis can also complicate neurosurgical procedures, particularly cran-
iotomy, and head trauma associated with CSF rhinorrhea or otorrhea.
Otitis, mastoiditis, and sinusitis are predisposing and associated 
conditions for meningitis due to Streptococci sp., gram-negative anaer-
obes, Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus sp., and Enterobacteriaceae. 
Meningitis complicating endocarditis may be due to viridans strepto-
cocci, S. aureus, Streptococcus bovis, the HACEK group (Haemophilus sp., 
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella 
corrodens, Kingella kingae), or enterococci.
Group B Streptococcus, or Streptococcus agalactiae, was previously 
responsible for meningitis predominantly in neonates, but it has been 
reported with increasing frequency in individuals aged >50 years, par-
ticularly those with underlying diseases.
L. monocytogenes (Chap. 146) is an increasingly important cause 
of meningitis in neonates (<1 month of age), pregnant women, indi-
viduals >60 years, and immunocompromised individuals of all ages. 
Infection is acquired by ingesting foods contaminated by Listeria. Food-
borne human listerial infection has been reported from contaminated 
coleslaw, milk, soft cheeses, and several types of “ready-to-eat” foods, 
including delicatessen meat and uncooked hotdogs.
The frequency of H. influenzae type b (Hib) meningitis in children 
has declined dramatically since the introduction of the Hib conjugate 
vaccine, although rare cases of Hib meningitis in vaccinated children 
have been reported. More frequently, H. influenzae causes meningitis in 
unvaccinated children and older adults, and non-b H. influenzae is an 
emerging pathogen.
S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci (Chap. 142) are 
important causes of meningitis that occurs following invasive neuro-
surgical procedures, particularly shunting procedures for hydrocepha-
lus, or as a complication of the use of subcutaneous Ommaya reservoirs 
for administration of intrathecal chemotherapy.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The most common bacteria that cause meningitis, S. pneumoniae and 
N. meningitidis, initially colonize the nasopharynx by attaching to 
nasopharyngeal epithelial cells. Bacteria are transported across epi-
thelial cells in membrane-bound vacuoles to the intravascular space 
or invade the intravascular space by creating separations in the apical 
tight junctions of columnar epithelial cells. Once in the bloodstream, 
bacteria are able to avoid phagocytosis by neutrophils and classic 
complement-mediated bactericidal activity because of the presence of a 
polysaccharide capsule. Bloodborne bacteria can reach the intraventric-
ular choroid plexus, directly infect choroid plexus epithelial cells, and 
gain access to the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Some bacteria, such as S. 
pneumoniae, can adhere to cerebral capillary endothelial cells and sub-
sequently migrate through or between these cells to reach the CSF. Bac-
teria are able to multiply rapidly within CSF because of the absence of 
effective host immune defenses. Normal CSF contains few white blood 


--- PDF PAGE 1045 ---

CHAPTER 133 Acute Meningitis
999
Invasion of SAS by meningeal pathogens
Multiplication of organisms and lysis of organisms by bactericidal antibiotics
Release of bacterial cell-wall components (endotoxin, teichoic acid)
Production of inflammatory cytokines
Altered blood-brain
  barrier permeability
Adherence of leukocytes
  to cerebral capillary
  endothelial cells
  Permeability of
    blood vessels with
    leakage of plasma
    proteins into CSF
Leukocytes migrate into
  CSF, degranulate, and
  release toxic metabolites
Alterations
  in cerebral
  blood flow
Production of
  excitatory amino
  acids and reactive
  oxygen and
  nitrogen species
Cell injury
  and death
  blood flow
Cerebral
  ischemia
Vasogenic
  edema
Exudate in SAS obstructs
  outflow and resorption of
  CSF and surrounds
  and infiltrates
  cerebral vasculature
Obstructive
  and communicating
  hydrocephalus and
  interstitial edema
Cytotoxic edema,
  stroke, seizures
  blood flow
  Intracranial pressure
Coma
FIGURE 133-1  The pathophysiology of the neurologic complications of bacterial meningitis. CSF, cerebrospinal 
fluid; SAS, subarachnoid space.
cells (WBCs) and relatively small amounts of complement proteins 
and immunoglobulins. The paucity of the latter two prevents effective 
opsonization of bacteria, an essential prerequisite for bacterial phago-
cytosis by neutrophils. Phagocytosis of bacteria is further impaired by 
the fluid nature of CSF, which is less conducive to phagocytosis than a 
solid tissue substrate.
A critical event in the pathogenesis of bacterial meningitis is the 
inflammatory reaction induced by the invading bacteria. Many of the 
neurologic manifestations and complications of bacterial meningitis 
result from the immune response to the invading pathogen rather 
than from direct bacteria-induced tissue injury. As a result, neurologic 
injury can progress even after the CSF has been sterilized by antibiotic 
therapy.
The lysis of bacteria with the subsequent release of cell-wall compo-
nents into the SAS is the initial step in the induction of the inflammatory 
response and the formation of a purulent exudate in the SAS (Fig. 133-1). 
Bacterial cell-wall components, such as the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
molecules of gram-negative bacteria and teichoic acid and peptidogly-
cans of S. pneumoniae, induce meningeal inflammation by stimulating 
the production of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines by micro-
glia, astrocytes, monocytes, microvascular endothelial cells, and CSF 
leukocytes. In experimental models of meningitis, cytokines including 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin 1β (IL-1β) are 
present in CSF within 1–2 h of intracisternal inoculation of LPS. This 
cytokine response is quickly followed by an increase in CSF protein 
concentration and leukocytosis. Chemokines (cytokines that induce 
chemotactic migration in leukocytes) and a variety of other proin-
flammatory cytokines are also produced and secreted by leukocytes 
and tissue cells that are stimulated by IL-1β and TNF-α. In addition, 
bacteremia and the inflammatory cytokines induce the production 
of excitatory amino acids, reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (free 
oxygen radicals, nitric oxide, and peroxynitrite), and other mediators 
that can induce death of brain cells, especially in the dentate gyrus of 
the hippocampus.
Much of the pathophysiology of bacterial meningitis is a direct con-
sequence of elevated levels of CSF cytokines and chemokines. TNF-α 
and IL-1β act synergistically to increase the permeability of the blood-
brain barrier, resulting in induction of vasogenic edema and the leakage 
of serum proteins into the SAS (Fig. 133-1). The subarachnoid exudate 
of proteinaceous material and leukocytes obstructs the flow of CSF 
through the ventricular system and diminishes the resorptive capacity 
of the arachnoid granulations in the dural sinuses, leading to obstruc-
tive and communicating hydrocephalus and concomitant interstitial 
edema.
Inflammatory cytokines upregulate the expression of selectins on 
cerebral capillary endothelial cells and leukocytes, promoting leuko-
cyte adherence to vascular endothelial cells and subsequent migration 
into the CSF. The adherence of leukocytes to capillary endothelial cells 
increases the permeability of blood vessels, allowing for the leakage of 
plasma proteins into the CSF, which adds to the inflammatory exudate. 
Neutrophil degranulation results in the release of toxic metabolites 
that contribute to cytotoxic edema, cell injury, and death. Contrary to 
previous beliefs, CSF leukocytes probably do little to contribute to the 
clearance of CSF bacterial infection.
During the very early stages of meningitis, there is an increase in 
cerebral blood flow, soon followed by a decrease in cerebral blood flow 
and a loss of cerebrovascular autoregula-
tion (Chap. 301). Narrowing of the large 
arteries at the base of the brain due to 
encroachment by the purulent exudate 
in the SAS and infiltration of the arterial 
wall by inflammatory cells with intimal 
thickening (vasculitis) also occur and may 
result in ischemia and infarction, obstruc-
tion of branches of the middle cerebral 
artery by thrombosis, thrombosis of 
the major cerebral venous sinuses, and 
thrombophlebitis of the cerebral cortical 
veins. The combination of interstitial, 
vasogenic, and cytotoxic edema leads to 
raised ICP and coma. Cerebral herniation 
usually results from the effects of cere-
bral edema, either focal or generalized; 
hydrocephalus and dural sinus or cortical 
vein thrombosis may also play a role.
■
■CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Meningitis can present as either an acute 
fulminant illness that progresses rapidly 
in a few hours or as a subacute infection 
that progressively worsens over several 
days. The classic clinical triad of meningi-
tis is fever, headache, and nuchal rigidity, 
but the classic triad may not be pres-
ent. A decreased level of consciousness 
occurs in >75% of patients and can vary 
from lethargy to coma. Fever and either 
headache, stiff neck, or an altered level 
of consciousness will be present in nearly 
every patient with bacterial meningitis. 
Nausea, vomiting, and photophobia are 
also common complaints.
Nuchal rigidity (“stiff neck”) is the 
pathognomonic sign of meningeal irri-
tation and is present when the neck 
resists passive flexion. Kernig’s and 
Brudzinski’s signs are also classic signs 


--- PDF PAGE 1046 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
1000
TABLE 133-1  Antibiotics Used in Empirical Therapy of Bacterial 
Meningitis and Focal Central Nervous System Infectionsa
INDICATION
ANTIBIOTIC
Preterm infants to 
infants <1 month
Ampicillin + cefotaxime
Infants 1–3 months
Ampicillin + cefotaxime or ceftriaxone
Immunocompetent 
children >3 months and 
adults <55
Cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, or cefepime + vancomycin
Adults >55 and 
adults of any age with 
alcoholism or other 
debilitating illnesses
Ampicillin + cefotaxime, ceftriaxone or cefepime + 
vancomycin
Hospital-acquired 
meningitis, 
posttraumatic or 
postneurosurgery 
meningitis, neutropenic 
patients, or patients 
with impaired cell-
mediated immunity
Ampicillin + ceftazidime or meropenem + 
vancomycin
TOTAL DAILY DOSE AND DOSING INTERVAL
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENT
CHILD (>1 MONTH)
ADULT
Ampicillin
300 (mg/kg)/d, q6h
12 g/d, q4h
Cefepime
150 (mg/kg)/d, q8h
6 g/d, q8h
Cefotaxime
225–300 (mg/kg)/d, 
q6h
12 g/d, q4h
Ceftriaxone
100 (mg/kg)/d, q12h
4 g/d, q12h
Ceftazidime
150 (mg/kg)/d, q8h
6 g/d, q8h
Gentamicin
7.5 (mg/kg)/d, q8hb
7.5 (mg/kg)/d, q8h
Meropenem
120 (mg/kg)/d, q8h
6 g/d, q8h
Metronidazole
30 (mg/kg)/d, q6h
1500–2000 mg/d, q6h
Nafcillin
100–200 (mg/kg)/d, 
q6h
9–12 g/d, q4h
Penicillin G
400,000 (U/kg)/d, q4h
20–24 million U/d, q4h
Vancomycin
45–60 (mg/kg)/d, q6h
45–60 (mg/kg)d, 
q6–12hb
aAll antibiotics are administered intravenously; doses indicated assume normal 
renal and hepatic function. bDoses should be adjusted based on serum peak and 
trough levels: gentamicin therapeutic level: peak: 5–8 μg/mL; trough: <2 μg/mL; 
vancomycin therapeutic level: peak: 25–40 μg/mL; trough: 5–15 μg/mL.
TABLE 133-2  Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Abnormalities in Bacterial 
Meningitis
Opening pressure
>180 mmH2O
White blood cells
10/μL to 10,000/μL; neutrophils predominate
Red blood cells
Absent in nontraumatic tap
Glucose
<2.2 mmol/L (<40 mg/dL)
CSF/serum glucose
<0.4
Protein
>0.45 g/L (>45 mg/dL)
Gram’s stain
Positive in >60%
Culture
Positive in >80%
PCR
Detects bacterial DNA
Latex agglutination
May be positive in patients with meningitis due to 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, 
Haemophilus influenzae type b, Escherichia coli, 
group B streptococci
Limulus lysate
Positive in cases of gram-negative meningitis
Abbreviation: PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
of meningeal irritation. Kernig’s sign is elicited with the patient in the 
supine position. The thigh is flexed on the abdomen, with the knee 
flexed; attempts to passively extend the knee elicit pain when menin-
geal irritation is present. Brudzinski’s sign is elicited with the patient in 
the supine position and is positive when passive flexion of the neck 
results in spontaneous flexion of the hips and knees. Although com-
monly tested on physical examinations, the sensitivity and specificity 
of Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs are uncertain. Both may be absent or 
reduced in very young or elderly patients, immunocompromised indi-
viduals, or patients with a severely depressed mental status. The high 
prevalence of cervical spine disease in older individuals may result in 
false-positive tests for nuchal rigidity.
Seizures occur as part of the initial presentation of bacterial men-
ingitis or during the course of the illness in 20–40% of patients. Focal 
seizures are usually due to focal arterial ischemia or infarction, cortical 
venous thrombosis with hemorrhage, or focal edema. Generalized sei-
zure activity and status epilepticus may be due to hyponatremia, cere-
bral anoxia, or, less commonly, the toxic effects of antimicrobial agents.
Raised ICP is an expected complication of bacterial meningitis and 
the major cause of obtundation and coma in this disease. More than 
90% of patients will have a CSF opening pressure >180 mmH2O, and 
20% have opening pressures >400 mmH2O. Signs of increased ICP 
include a deteriorating or reduced level of consciousness, papilledema, 
dilated poorly reactive pupils, sixth nerve palsies, decerebrate postur-
ing, and the Cushing reflex (bradycardia, hypertension, and irregular 
respirations). The most disastrous complication of increased ICP is 
cerebral herniation. The incidence of herniation in patients with bacte-
rial meningitis has been reported to occur in as few as 1% to as many 
as 8% of cases.
Specific clinical features may provide clues to the diagnosis of indi-
vidual organisms and are discussed in more detail in specific chapters 
devoted to individual pathogens. The most important of these clues is 
the rash of meningococcemia, which begins as a diffuse erythematous 
maculopapular rash resembling a viral exanthem; however, the skin 
lesions of meningococcemia rapidly become petechial. Petechiae are 
found on the trunk and lower extremities, in the mucous membranes 
and conjunctiva, and occasionally on the palms and soles.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
When bacterial meningitis is suspected, blood cultures should be imme-
diately obtained and empirical antimicrobial and adjunctive dexametha-
sone therapy initiated without delay (Table 133-1). The diagnosis of 
bacterial meningitis is made by examination of the CSF (Table 133-2). 
The need to obtain neuroimaging studies (CT or MRI) prior to lumbar 
puncture (LP) requires clinical judgment. In an immunocompetent 
patient with no known history of recent head trauma, a normal level 
of consciousness, and no evidence of papilledema or focal neurologic 
deficits, it is considered safe to perform LP without prior neuroimag-
ing studies. If LP is delayed in order to obtain neuroimaging studies, 
empirical antibiotic therapy should be initiated after blood cultures are 
obtained. Antibiotic therapy initiated a few hours prior to LP will not 
significantly alter the CSF WBC count or glucose concentration, nor is 
it likely to prevent visualization of organisms by Gram’s stain or detec-
tion of bacterial nucleic acid by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay.
The classic CSF abnormalities in bacterial meningitis (Table 133-2) 
are (1) polymorphonuclear (PMN) leukocytosis (>100 cells/μL in 90%), 
(2) decreased glucose concentration (<2.2 mmol/L [<40 mg/dL] and/
or CSF/serum glucose ratio of <0.4 in ~60%), (3) increased protein con-
centration (>0.45 g/L [>45 mg/dL] in 90%), and (4) increased opening 
pressure (>180 mmH2O in 90%). CSF bacterial cultures are positive in 
>80% of patients, and CSF Gram’s stain demonstrates organisms in 
>60%.
CSF glucose concentrations <2.2 mmol/L (<40 mg/dL) are abnor-
mal, and a CSF glucose concentration of zero can be seen in bac-
terial meningitis. Use of the CSF/serum glucose ratio corrects for 
hyperglycemia that may mask a relative decrease in the CSF glucose 
concentration. The CSF glucose concentration is low when the CSF/
serum glucose ratio is <0.6. A CSF/serum glucose ratio <0.4 is highly 
suggestive of bacterial meningitis but may also be seen in other condi-
tions, including fungal, tuberculous, and carcinomatous meningitis. It 
takes from 30 min to several hours for the concentration of CSF glucose 
to reach equilibrium with blood glucose levels; therefore, administra-
tion of 50 mL of 50% glucose (D50) prior to LP, as commonly occurs in 
emergency room settings, is unlikely to alter CSF glucose concentra-
tion significantly unless more than a few hours have elapsed between 
glucose administration and LP.


--- PDF PAGE 1047 ---

CHAPTER 133 Acute Meningitis
1001
There are a number of “CSF pathogen panels” available that use 
specific bacterial primers to detect the nucleic acid of S. pneumoniae, 
N. meningitidis, Escherichia coli, L. monocytogenes, H. influenzae, and S. 
agalactiae (Group B streptococci). The latex agglutination (LA) test for 
the detection of bacterial antigens of S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, H. 
influenzae type b, group B Streptococcus, and E. coli K1 strains in the CSF 
has been useful for making a diagnosis of bacterial meningitis but is 
being replaced by the CSF bacterial PCR assay. The CSF LA test has a 
specificity of 95–100% for S. pneumoniae and N. meningitidis, so a posi-
tive test is virtually diagnostic of bacterial meningitis caused by these 
organisms. However, the sensitivity of the CSF LA test is only 70–100% 
for detection of S. pneumoniae and 33–70% for detection of N. menin-
gitidis antigens, so a negative test does not exclude infection by these 
organisms. The Limulus amebocyte lysate assay is a rapid diagnostic 
test for the detection of gram-negative endotoxin in CSF and thus for 
making a diagnosis of gram-negative bacterial meningitis. The test has 
a specificity of 85–100% and a sensitivity approaching 100%. Thus, a 
positive Limulus amebocyte lysate assay occurs in virtually all patients 
with gram-negative bacterial meningitis, but false positives may occur.
Almost all patients with bacterial meningitis will have neuroim-
aging studies performed during the course of their illness. MRI is 
preferred over CT because of its superiority in demonstrating areas 
of cerebral edema and ischemia. In patients with bacterial meningitis, 
diffuse meningeal enhancement is often seen after the administration 
of gadolinium. Meningeal enhancement is not diagnostic of meningitis 
but occurs in any CNS disease associated with increased blood-brain 
barrier permeability.
Petechial skin lesions, if present, should be biopsied. The rash of 
meningococcemia results from the dermal seeding of organisms with 
vascular endothelial damage, and biopsy may reveal the organism on 
Gram’s stain.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Viral meningoencephalitis, and particularly herpes simplex virus 
(HSV) encephalitis, can mimic the clinical presentation of bacterial 
meningitis (encephalitis). HSV encephalitis typically presents with 
headache, fever, altered consciousness, focal neurologic deficits (e.g., 
dysphasia, hemiparesis), and focal or generalized seizures. The find-
ings on CSF studies, neuroimaging, and electroencephalogram (EEG) 
distinguish HSV encephalitis from bacterial meningitis. The typical 
CSF profile with viral CNS infections is a lymphocytic pleocytosis with 
a normal glucose concentration, in contrast to the PMN pleocytosis and 
hypoglycorrhachia characteristic of bacterial meningitis. The CSF HSV 
PCR has a 96% sensitivity and a 99% specificity when CSF is examined 
72 h following symptom onset, and in the first week of antiviral therapy. 
MRI abnormalities (other than meningeal enhancement) are not seen in 
uncomplicated bacterial meningitis. By contrast, in HSV encephalitis, 
on T2-weighted, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and dif-
fusion-weighted MRI images, high signal intensity lesions are seen in 
the orbitofrontal, anterior, and medial temporal lobes in the majority 
of patients within 48 h of symptom onset. Some patients with HSV 
encephalitis have a distinctive periodic pattern on EEG.
Rickettsial disease can resemble bacterial meningitis (Chap. 182). 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is transmitted by a tick bite 
and caused by the bacteria Rickettsia rickettsii. The disease may present 
acutely with high fever, prostration, myalgia, headache, nausea, and 
vomiting. Most patients develop a characteristic rash within 96 h of 
the onset of symptoms. The rash is initially a diffuse erythematous 
maculopapular rash that may be difficult to distinguish from that of 
meningococcemia. It progresses to a petechial rash, then to a purpuric 
rash, and if untreated, to skin necrosis or gangrene. The color of the 
lesions changes from bright red to very dark red, then yellowish-green 
to black. The rash typically begins in the wrist and ankles and then 
spreads distally and proximally within a matter of a few hours, involv-
ing the palms and soles. Diagnosis is made by immunofluorescent 
staining of skin biopsy specimens. Ehrlichioses are also transmitted 
by a tick bite. These are small gram-negative coccobacilli of which two 
species cause human disease. Anaplasma phagocytophilum causes human 
granulocytic ehrlichiosis (anaplasmosis), and Ehrlichia chaffeensis causes 
human monocytic ehrlichiosis. The clinical and laboratory manifesta-
tions of the infections are similar. Patients present with fever, headache, 
confusion, nausea, and vomiting. Twenty percent of patients have 
a maculopapular or petechial rash. There is laboratory evidence of 
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia, and mild to moderate 
elevations in alanine aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, and 
lactate dehydrogenase. Patients with RMSF and those with ehrlichial 
infections may have an altered level of consciousness ranging from 
mild lethargy to coma, confusion, focal neurologic signs, cranial nerve 
palsies, hyperreflexia, and seizures.
Focal suppurative CNS infections, including subdural and epidural 
empyema and brain abscess, should also be considered, especially 
when focal neurologic findings are present. MRI should be performed 
promptly in all patients with suspected meningitis who have focal 
features, both to detect the intracranial infection and to search for asso-
ciated areas of infection in the sinuses or mastoid bones.
A number of noninfectious CNS disorders can mimic bacterial men-
ingitis. Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH; Chap. 301) is generally the 
major consideration. Other possibilities include medication-induced 
hypersensitivity meningitis; chemical meningitis due to rupture of 
tumor contents into the CSF (e.g., from a cystic glioma or craniophar-
yngioma epidermoid or dermoid cyst); carcinomatous or lymphoma-
tous meningitis; meningitis associated with inflammatory disorders 
such as sarcoid, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and Behçet’s 
syndrome; pituitary apoplexy; and uveomeningitic syndromes (Vogt- 
Koyanagi-Harada syndrome).
On occasion, subacutely evolving meningitis (Chap. 134) may be 
considered in the differential diagnosis of acute meningitis. The princi-
pal causes include Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Chap. 173), Cryptococcus 
neoformans (Chap. 210), Histoplasma capsulatum (Chap. 207), Coccidioides 
immitis (Chap. 208), and Treponema pallidum (Chap. 177).
TREATMENT
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
EMPIRICAL ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
(Table 133-1) Bacterial meningitis is a medical emergency. The goal 
is to begin antibiotic therapy within 60 min of a patient’s arrival in 
the emergency room. Empirical antimicrobial therapy is initiated in 
patients with suspected bacterial meningitis before the results of CSF 
Gram’s stain and culture are known. S. pneumoniae (Chap. 141) and 
N. meningitidis (Chap. 150) are the most common etiologic organisms 
of community-acquired bacterial meningitis. Due to the emergence 
of penicillin- and cephalosporin-resistant S. pneumoniae, empirical 
therapy of community-acquired suspected bacterial meningitis in 
children and adults should include a combination of dexametha-
sone, a third- or fourth-generation cephalosporin (e.g., ceftriaxone, 
cefotaxime, or cefepime), and vancomycin, plus acyclovir, as HSV 
encephalitis is the leading disease in the differential diagnosis, 
and doxycycline during tick season to treat tick-borne bacterial 
infections. Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime provides good coverage for 
susceptible S. pneumoniae, group B streptococci, and H. influenzae and 
adequate coverage for N. meningitidis. Cefepime is a broad-spectrum 
fourth-generation cephalosporin with in vitro activity similar to that 
of cefotaxime or ceftriaxone against S. pneumoniae and N. meningitidis 
and greater activity against Enterobacter species and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. In clinical trials, cefepime has been demonstrated to be 
equivalent to cefotaxime in the treatment of penicillin-sensitive 
pneumococcal and meningococcal meningitis, and it has been used 
successfully in some patients with meningitis due to Enterobacter spe-
cies and P. aeruginosa. Ampicillin should be added to the empirical 
regimen for coverage of L. monocytogenes in individuals <3 months 
of age, those >55, or those with suspected impaired cell-mediated 
immunity because of chronic illness, organ transplantation, preg-
nancy, malignancy, or immunosuppressive therapy. Metronidazole 
is added to the empirical regimen to cover gram-negative anaerobes 
in patients with otitis, sinusitis, or mastoiditis. In hospital-acquired 


--- PDF PAGE 1048 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
1002
meningitis, and particularly meningitis following neurosurgical 
procedures, staphylococci and gram-negative organisms including 
P. aeruginosa are the most common etiologic organisms. In these 
patients, empirical therapy should include a combination of van-
comycin and ceftazidime or meropenem. Ceftazidime or meropenem 
should be substituted for ceftriaxone or cefotaxime in neurosurgical 
patients and in neutropenic patients, because ceftriaxone and cefo-
taxime do not provide adequate activity against CNS infection with 
P. aeruginosa. Meropenem is a carbapenem antibiotic that is highly 
active in vitro against L. monocytogenes, has been demonstrated to be 
effective in cases of meningitis caused by P. aeruginosa, and shows 
good activity against penicillin-resistant pneumococci. In experi-
mental pneumococcal meningitis, meropenem was comparable to 
ceftriaxone and inferior to vancomycin in sterilizing CSF cultures. 
The number of patients with bacterial meningitis enrolled in clinical 
trials of meropenem has not been sufficient to definitively assess the 
efficacy of this antibiotic.
■
■SPECIFIC ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
Meningococcal Meningitis (Table 133-3)  Although ceftriax-
one and cefotaxime provide adequate empirical coverage for N. menin-
gitidis, penicillin G remains the antibiotic of choice for meningococcal 
meningitis caused by susceptible strains. Isolates of N. meningitidis 
with moderate resistance to penicillin have been identified and are 
increasing in incidence worldwide. CSF isolates of N. meningitidis 
should be tested for penicillin and ampicillin susceptibility, and if 
resistance is found, cefotaxime or ceftriaxone should be substituted for 
penicillin. A 7-day course of intravenous antibiotic therapy is adequate 
for uncomplicated meningococcal meningitis. The index case and all 
close contacts should receive chemoprophylaxis with a 2-day regimen 
of rifampin (600 mg every 12 h for 2 days in adults and 10 mg/kg every 
12 h for 2 days in children >1 year). Rifampin is not recommended in 
pregnant women. Alternatively, adults can be treated with one dose 
of azithromycin (500 mg) or one intramuscular dose of ceftriaxone 
(250 mg). Close contacts are defined as those individuals who have 
had contact with oropharyngeal secretions, either through kissing or 
by sharing toys, beverages, or cigarettes.
Pneumococcal Meningitis  Antimicrobial therapy of pneumo-
coccal meningitis is initiated with a cephalosporin (ceftriaxone, cefo-
taxime, or cefepime) and vancomycin. All CSF isolates of S. pneumoniae 
should be tested for sensitivity to penicillin and the cephalosporins. 
Once the results of antimicrobial susceptibility tests are known, 
therapy can be modified accordingly (Table 133-3). For S. pneumoniae 
meningitis, an isolate of S. pneumoniae is considered to be susceptible 
to penicillin with a minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) <0.06 
μg/mL and to be resistant when the MIC is >0.12 μg/mL. Isolates of 
S. pneumoniae that have cephalosporin MICs ≤0.5 μg/mL are considered 
sensitive to the cephalosporins (cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, cefepime). 
Those with MICs of 1 μg/mL are considered to have intermediate 
resistance, and those with MICs ≥2 μg/mL are considered resistant. 
For meningitis due to pneumococci, with cefotaxime or ceftriaxone 
MICs ≤0.5 μg/mL, treatment with cefotaxime or ceftriaxone is usually 
adequate. For MIC >1 μg/mL, vancomycin is the antibiotic of choice. 
Rifampin can be added to vancomycin for its synergistic effect but is 
inadequate as monotherapy because resistance develops rapidly when 
it is used alone.
A 2-week course of intravenous antimicrobial therapy is recom-
mended for pneumococcal meningitis.
Patients with S. pneumoniae meningitis should have a repeat LP per-
formed 24–36 h after the initiation of antimicrobial therapy to document 
sterilization of the CSF. Failure to sterilize the CSF after 24–36 h of anti-
biotic therapy should be considered presumptive evidence of antibiotic 
resistance. Patients with penicillin- and cephalosporin-resistant strains 
of S. pneumoniae who do not respond to intravenous vancomycin alone 
may benefit from the addition of intraventricular vancomycin. The 
intraventricular route of administration is preferred over the intrathe-
cal route because adequate concentrations of vancomycin in the cere-
bral ventricles are not always achieved with intrathecal administration.
Listeria Meningitis  Meningitis due to L. monocytogenes is treated 
with ampicillin for at least 3 weeks (Table 133-3). Gentamicin is added 
in critically ill patients (2 mg/kg loading dose, then 7.5 mg/kg per day 
given every 8 h and adjusted for serum levels and renal function). The 
combination of trimethoprim (10–20 mg/kg per day) and sulfamethox-
azole (50–100 mg/kg per day) given every 6 h may provide an alterna-
tive in penicillin-allergic patients.
Staphylococcal Meningitis  Meningitis due to susceptible strains 
of S. aureus or coagulase-negative staphylococci is treated with naf-
cillin (Table 133-3). Vancomycin is the drug of choice for methicillin- 
resistant staphylococci and for patients allergic to penicillin. In these 
patients, the CSF should be monitored during therapy. If the CSF is not 
sterilized after 48 h of intravenous vancomycin therapy, then either intra-
ventricular or intrathecal vancomycin, 20 mg once daily, can be added.
Gram-Negative Bacillary Meningitis  The third-generation 
cephalosporins—cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, and ceftazidime—are equally 
efficacious for the treatment of gram-negative bacillary meningitis, 
with the exception of meningitis due to P. aeruginosa, which should be 
treated with ceftazidime or meropenem (Table 133-3). A 3-week course 
of intravenous antibiotic therapy is recommended for meningitis due 
to gram-negative bacilli.
■
■ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY
The release of bacterial cell-wall components by bactericidal antibiotics 
leads to the production of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and TNF-α 
in the SAS. Dexamethasone exerts its beneficial effect by inhibiting the 
synthesis of IL-1β and TNF-α at the level of mRNA, decreasing CSF 
outflow resistance, and stabilizing the blood-brain barrier. The ratio-
nale for giving dexamethasone 20 min before antibiotic therapy is that 
dexamethasone inhibits the production of TNF-α by macrophages and 
microglia only if it is administered before these cells are activated by 
endotoxin. Dexamethasone does not alter TNF-α production once it has 
been induced. The results of clinical trials of dexamethasone therapy in 
meningitis due to H. influenzae, S. pneumoniae, and N. meningitidis have 
demonstrated its efficacy in decreasing meningeal inflammation and 
neurologic sequelae such as the incidence of sensorineural hearing loss.
A prospective European trial of adjunctive therapy for acute bacte-
rial meningitis in 301 adults found that dexamethasone reduced the 
number of unfavorable outcomes (15 vs 25%, p = .03) including death 
(7 vs 15%, p = .04). The benefits were most striking in patients with 
pneumococcal meningitis. Dexamethasone (10 mg intravenously) was 
TABLE 133-3  Antimicrobial Therapy of Central Nervous System 
Bacterial Infections Based on Pathogena
ORGANISM
ANTIBIOTIC
Neisseria meningitides
  Penicillin-sensitive
Penicillin G or ampicillin
  Penicillin-resistant
Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime
Streptococcus pneumoniae
  Penicillin-sensitive
Penicillin G
  Penicillin-intermediate
Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime or cefepime
  Penicillin-resistant
Ceftriaxone (or cefotaxime or 
cefepime) + vancomycin
Gram-negative bacilli (except 
Pseudomonas spp.)
Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Ceftazidime or meropenem
Staphylococci spp.
  Methicillin-sensitive
Nafcillin
  Methicillin-resistant
Vancomycin
Listeria monocytogenes
Ampicillin + gentamicin
Haemophilus influenzae
Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime or cefepime
Streptococcus agalactiae
Penicillin G or ampicillin
Bacteroides fragilis
Metronidazole
Fusobacterium spp.
Metronidazole
aDoses are as indicated in Table 133-1.


--- PDF PAGE 1049 ---

CHAPTER 133 Acute Meningitis
1003
administered 15–20 min before the first dose of an antimicrobial agent, 
and the same dose was repeated every 6 h for 4 days. These results 
were confirmed in a second trial of dexamethasone in adults with 
pneumococcal meningitis. Therapy with dexamethasone should ide-
ally be started 20 min before, or not later than concurrent with, the first 
dose of antibiotics. It is unlikely to be of significant benefit if started 
>6 h after antimicrobial therapy has been initiated. Dexamethasone 
may decrease the penetration of vancomycin into CSF, and it delays 
the sterilization of CSF in experimental models of S. pneumoniae men-
ingitis. As a result, to assure reliable penetration of vancomycin into 
the CSF, children and adults are treated with vancomycin in a dose of 
45–60 mg/kg per day. Alternatively, vancomycin can be administered 
by the intraventricular route. In clinical trials, dexamethasone has also 
been shown to reduce rates of death and hearing loss with no adverse 
effects in patients with meningococcal meningitis.
One of the concerns for using dexamethasone in adults with bac-
terial meningitis is that in experimental models of meningitis, dex-
amethasone therapy increased hippocampal cell injury and reduced 
learning capacity. This has not been the case in clinical series. The 
efficacy of dexamethasone therapy in preventing neurologic sequelae 
is different between high- and low-income countries. Three large ran-
domized trials in low-income countries (sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast 
Asia) failed to show benefit in subgroups of patients. The lack of 
efficacy of dexamethasone in these trials has been attributed to late 
presentation to the hospital with more advanced disease, antibiotic pre-
treatment, malnutrition, infection with HIV, and treatment of patients 
with probable, but not microbiologically proven, bacterial meningitis. 
The results of these clinical trials suggest that patients in sub-Saharan 
Africa and those in low-income countries with negative CSF Gram’s 
stain and culture should not be treated with dexamethasone.
■
■INCREASED INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE
Emergency treatment of increased ICP includes elevation of the 
patient’s head to 30–45°, intubation and hyperventilation (Paco2  
25–30 mmHg), and mannitol. Patients with increased ICP should be 
managed in an intensive care unit; accurate ICP measurements are best 
obtained with an ICP monitoring device.
Treatment of increased ICP is discussed in detail in Chap. 301.
■
■PROGNOSIS
Mortality rate is 3–7% for meningitis caused by H. influenzae, N. men-
ingitidis, or group B streptococci; 15% for that due to L. monocytogenes; 
and 20% for S. pneumoniae. In general, the risk of death from bacterial 
meningitis increases with (1) decreased level of consciousness on 
admission, (2) onset of seizures within 24 h of admission, (3) signs of 
increased ICP, (4) young age (infancy) and age >50, (5) the presence of 
comorbid conditions including shock and/or the need for mechanical 
ventilation, and (6) delay in the initiation of treatment. Decreased CSF 
glucose concentration (<2.2 mmol/L [<40 mg/dL]) and markedly 
increased CSF protein concentration (>3 g/L [> 300 mg/dL]) have been 
predictive of increased mortality and poorer outcomes in some series. 
Moderate or severe sequelae occur in ~25% of survivors, although the 
exact incidence varies with the infecting organism. Common sequelae 
include decreased intellectual function, memory impairment, seizures, 
hearing loss and dizziness, and gait disturbances.
VIRAL MENINGITIS
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Immunocompetent adult patients with viral meningitis usually present 
with headache, fever, and signs of meningeal irritation coupled with an 
inflammatory CSF profile (see below). Headache is almost invariably 
present and often characterized as frontal or retroorbital and frequently 
associated with photophobia and pain on moving the eyes. Nuchal 
rigidity is present in most cases but may be mild and present only near 
the limit of neck anteflexion. Constitutional signs can include malaise, 
myalgia, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, and/or 
diarrhea. Patients often have mild lethargy or drowsiness; however, 
profound alterations in consciousness, such as stupor, coma, or marked 
confusion, do not occur in viral meningitis and suggest the presence 
of encephalitis or other alternative diagnoses. Similarly, seizures or 
focal neurologic signs or symptoms or neuroimaging abnormalities 
indicative of brain parenchymal involvement are not typical of viral 
meningitis and suggest the presence of encephalitis or another CNS 
infectious or inflammatory process.
■
■ETIOLOGY
Using a variety of diagnostic techniques, including CSF PCR, culture, 
and serology, a specific viral cause can be found in 60–90% of cases of 
viral meningitis. The most important agents are enteroviruses (includ-
ing echoviruses and coxsackieviruses in addition to numbered entero-
viruses), varicella-zoster virus (VZV), HSV (HSV-2 > HSV-1), HIV, 
and arboviruses (Table 133-4). CSF cultures are positive in 30–70% of 
patients, with the frequency of isolation depending on the specific viral 
agent. Approximately two-thirds of culture-negative cases of “aseptic” 
meningitis have a specific viral etiology identified by CSF PCR testing 
(see below).
■
■EPIDEMIOLOGY
Viral meningitis is not a nationally reportable disease; however, it has 
been estimated that the incidence is ~60,000–75,000 cases per year. In 
temperate climates, there is a substantial increase in cases during the 
nonwinter months, reflecting the seasonal predominance of enterovi-
rus and arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) infections in the summer 
and fall, with a peak monthly incidence of about 1 reported case per 
100,000 population.
■
■LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
CSF Examination  The most important laboratory test in the diag-
nosis of viral meningitis is examination of the CSF. The typical profile is 
a pleocytosis, a normal or slightly elevated protein concentration (0.2–
0.8 g/L [20–80 mg/dL]), a normal glucose concentration, and a normal 
or mildly elevated opening pressure (100–350 mmH2O). Organisms are 
not seen on Gram’s stain of CSF. The total CSF cell count in viral menin-
gitis is typically 25–500/μL, although cell counts of several thousand/
μL are occasionally seen, especially with infections due to lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) and mumps virus. Lymphocytes are 
typically the predominant cell. Rarely, PMNs may predominate in the 
first 48 h of illness, especially with infections due to echovirus 9, West 
Nile virus (WNV), eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) virus, or mumps. 
A PMN pleocytosis occurs in 45% of patients with WNV meningitis 
and can persist for a week or longer before shifting to a lymphocytic 
pleocytosis. PMN pleocytosis with low glucose may also be a feature 
of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections in immunocompromised hosts. 
Despite these exceptions, the presence of a CSF PMN pleocytosis in a 
patient with suspected viral meningitis in whom a specific diagnosis 
has not been established should prompt consideration of alternative 
diagnoses, including bacterial meningitis or parameningeal infections. 
The CSF glucose concentration is typically normal in viral infections, 
although it may be decreased in 10–30% of cases due to mumps or 
LCMV. Rare instances of decreased CSF glucose concentration occur in 
cases of meningitis due to echoviruses and other enteroviruses, HSV-2, 
and VZV. As a rule, a lymphocytic pleocytosis with a low glucose 
concentration should suggest fungal or tuberculous meningitis, Listeria 
meningoencephalitis, or noninfectious disorders (e.g., sarcoid, neoplastic 
meningitis).
TABLE 133-4 Viruses Causing Acute Meningitis in North America
COMMON
LESS COMMON
Enteroviruses (coxsackieviruses, 
echoviruses, and human 
enteroviruses 68–71)
Varicella-zoster virus
Herpes simplex virus 2
Epstein-Barr virus
Arthropod-borne viruses
HIV
Herpes simplex virus 1
Human herpesvirus 6
Cytomegalovirus
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
Mumps
Zika


--- PDF PAGE 1050 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
1004
A number of tests measuring levels of various CSF proteins, 
enzymes, and mediators—including C-reactive protein, lactic acid, 
lactate dehydrogenase, neopterin, quinolinate, IL-1β, IL-6, soluble IL-2 
receptor, β2-microglobulin, and TNF—have been proposed as potential 
discriminators between viral and bacterial meningitis or as markers 
of specific types of viral infection (e.g., infection with HIV), but they 
remain of uncertain sensitivity and specificity and are not widely used 
for diagnostic purposes.
Polymerase Chain Reaction Amplification of Viral 
Nucleic Acid  Amplification of viral-specific DNA or RNA from 
CSF using PCR amplification has become the single most important 
method for diagnosing CNS viral infections. In both enteroviral and 
HSV infections of the CNS, CSF PCR has become the diagnostic proce-
dure of choice and is substantially more sensitive than viral cultures. 
HSV CSF PCR is also an important diagnostic test in patients with 
recurrent episodes of “aseptic” meningitis, many of whom have ampli-
fiable HSV DNA in CSF despite negative viral cultures. CSF PCR is 
also used routinely to diagnose CNS viral infections caused by CMV, 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), VZV, and human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6). 
CSF PCR tests are available for WNV but are not as sensitive as detec-
tion of WNV-specific CSF IgM. PCR is also useful in the diagnosis of 
CNS infection caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae, which can mimic 
viral meningitis and encephalitis. PCR of throat washings may assist 
in diagnosis of enteroviral and mycoplasmal CNS infections. PCR of 
stool specimens may also assist in diagnosis of enteroviral infections 
(see below).
Viral Culture  The sensitivity of CSF cultures for the diagnosis of 
viral meningitis and encephalitis, in contrast to its utility in bacterial 
infections, is generally poor. In addition to CSF, specific viruses may 
also be isolated from throat swabs, stool, blood, and urine. Entero-
viruses and adenoviruses may be found in feces; arboviruses, some 
enteroviruses, and LCMV in blood; mumps and CMV in urine; and 
enteroviruses, mumps, and adenoviruses in throat washings. During 
enteroviral infections, viral shedding in stool may persist for several 
weeks. The presence of enterovirus in stool is not diagnostic and may 
result from residual shedding from a previous enteroviral infection; 
it also occurs in some asymptomatic individuals during enteroviral 
epidemics.
Serologic Studies  The basic approach to the serodiagnosis of 
viral meningitis is identical to that discussed earlier for viral encepha-
litis (see Chap. 132). Serologic studies are important for the diagnosis 
of arboviruses such as WNV, however these tests are less useful for 
viruses such as HSV, VZV, CMV, and EBV that have a high seropreva-
lence in the general population.
CSF oligoclonal gamma globulin bands occur in association with a 
number of viral infections. The associated antibodies are often directed 
against viral proteins. Oligoclonal bands also occur commonly in 
certain noninfectious neurologic diseases (e.g., multiple sclerosis) 
and may be found in nonviral infections (e.g., neurosyphilis, Lyme 
neuroborreliosis).
Other Laboratory Studies  All patients with suspected viral 
meningitis should have a complete blood count and differential, liver 
and renal function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and 
C-reactive protein, electrolytes, glucose, creatine kinase, aldolase, amy-
lase, and lipase. Neuroimaging studies (MRI preferable to CT) are not 
absolutely necessary in patients with uncomplicated viral meningitis 
but should be performed in patients with altered consciousness, sei-
zures, focal neurologic signs or symptoms (see “Differential Diagnosis” 
below), atypical CSF profiles, or underlying immunocompromising 
treatments or conditions.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The most important issue in the differential diagnosis of viral menin-
gitis is to consider diseases that can mimic viral meningitis, including 
(1) untreated or partially treated bacterial meningitis; (2) early stages of 
meningitis caused by fungi, mycobacteria, or Treponema pallidum (neu-
rosyphilis), in which a lymphocytic pleocytosis is common, cultures 
may be slow growing or negative, and hypoglycorrhachia may not 
be present early; (3) meningitis caused by agents such as Mycoplasma, 
Listeria spp., Brucella spp., Coxiella spp., Leptospira spp., and Rickettsia 
spp.; (4) parameningeal infections; (5) neoplastic meningitis; and 
(6) meningitis secondary to noninfectious inflammatory diseases, 
including medication-induced hypersensitivity meningitis, SLE and 
other rheumatologic diseases, sarcoidosis, Behçet’s syndrome, and the 
uveomeningitic syndromes. Studies in children >28 days of age suggest 
that the presence of CSF protein >0.5 g/L (sensitivity 89%, specificity 
78%) and elevated serum procalcitonin levels >0.5 ng/mL (sensitivity 
89%, specificity 89%) were clues to the presence of bacterial as opposed 
to “aseptic” meningitis. A variety of clinical algorithms for differenti-
ating bacterial from aseptic meningitis have been developed. One such 
prospectively validated system, the bacterial meningitis score, suggests 
that the probability of bacterial meningitis is 0.3% or less (negative 
predictive value 99.7%, 95% confidence interval 99.6–100%) in chil-
dren with CSF pleocytosis who have (1) a negative CSF Gram’s stain, 
(2) CSF neutrophil count <1000 cells/μL, (3) CSF protein <80 mg/dL, 
(4) peripheral absolute neutrophil count of <10,000 cells/μL, and (5) no 
prior history or current presence of seizures.
■
■SPECIFIC VIRAL ETIOLOGIES
Enteroviruses (EV) (Chap. 199) are the most common cause of viral men-
ingitis, accounting for >85% of cases in which a specific etiology can 
be identified. Cases may either be sporadic or occur in clusters. EV71 
has produced large epidemics of neurologic disease outside the United 
States, especially in Southeast Asia, but most recently reported cases in 
the United States have been sporadic. Enteroviruses are the most likely 
cause of viral meningitis in the summer and fall months, especially 
in children (<15 years), although cases occur at reduced frequency 
year round. Although the incidence of enteroviral meningitis declines 
with increasing age, some outbreaks have preferentially affected older 
children and adults. Meningitis outside the neonatal period is usually 
benign. Patients present with sudden onset of fever; headache; nuchal 
rigidity; and often constitutional signs, including vomiting, anorexia, 
diarrhea, cough, pharyngitis, and myalgias. The physical examination 
should include a careful search for stigmata of enterovirus infection, 
including exanthems, hand-foot-mouth disease, herpangina, pleu-
rodynia, myopericarditis, and hemorrhagic conjunctivitis. The CSF 
profile is typically a lymphocytic pleocytosis (100–1000 cells/μL) with 
normal glucose and normal or mildly elevated protein concentration. 
However, up to 15% of patients, most commonly young infants rather 
than older children or adults, have a normal CSF leukocyte count. In 
rare cases, PMNs may predominate during the first 48 h of illness. 
CSF reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) is the diagnostic procedure of 
choice and is both sensitive (>95%) and specific (>100%). CSF PCR has 
the highest sensitivity if performed within 48 h of symptom onset, with 
sensitivity declining rapidly after day 5 of symptoms. PCR of throat 
washings or stool specimens may be positive for several weeks, and 
positive results can help support the diagnosis of an acute enteroviral 
infection. The sensitivity of routine enteroviral PCRs for detecting EV71 
is low, and specific testing may be required. Treatment is supportive, 
and patients usually recover without sequelae. Chronic and severe 
infections can occur in neonates and in individuals with hypo- or 
agammaglobulinemia.
Arbovirus infections (Chap. 204) occur predominantly in the summer 
and early fall. Arboviral meningitis should be considered when clusters 
of meningitis and encephalitis cases occur in a restricted geographic 
region during the summer or early fall. In the United States, the most 
important causes of arboviral meningitis and encephalitis are WNV, 
St. Louis encephalitis virus, and the California encephalitis group 
of viruses. In WNV epidemics, avian deaths may serve as sentinel 
infections for subsequent human disease. A history of tick exposure or 
travel or residence in the appropriate geographic area should suggest 
the possibility of Colorado tick fever virus or Powassan virus infection, 
although nonviral tick-borne diseases, including RMSF and Lyme neu-
roborreliosis, may present similarly. Arbovirus meningitis is typically 
associated with a CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis, normal glucose concen-
tration, and normal or mildly elevated protein concentration. However, 


--- PDF PAGE 1051 ---

CHAPTER 133 Acute Meningitis
1005
~45% of patients with WNV meningitis have CSF neutrophilia, which 
can persist for a week or more. The rarity of hypoglycorrhachia in 
WNV infection, the absence of positive Gram’s stains, and the nega-
tive cultures help distinguish these patients from those with bacterial 
meningitis. Definitive diagnosis of arboviral meningitis is based on 
demonstration of viral-specific IgM in CSF or seroconversion. The 
prevalence of CSF IgM increases progressively during the first week 
after infection, peaking at >80% in patients with neuroinvasive disease; 
as a result, repeat studies may be needed when disease suspicion is 
high and an early study is negative. CSF PCR tests are available for 
some viruses in selected diagnostic laboratories and at the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), but in the case of WNV, sensi-
tivity (~70%) of CSF PCR is less than that of CSF serology. WNV CSF 
PCR may be useful in immunocompromised patients who may have 
absent or reduced antibody responses.
HSV meningitis (Chap. 187) has been increasingly recognized as a 
major cause of viral meningitis in adults, and overall, it is probably 
second in importance to enteroviruses as a cause of viral meningitis, 
accounting for 5% of total cases overall and undoubtedly a higher 
frequency of those cases occurring in adults and/or outside of the 
summer-fall period when enterovirus infections are increasingly 
common. In adults, the majority of cases of uncomplicated meningitis 
are due to HSV-2, whereas HSV-1 is responsible for 90% of cases of 
HSV encephalitis. HSV meningitis occurs in ~25–35% of women and 
~10–15% of men at the time of an initial (primary) episode of geni-
tal herpes. Of these patients, 20% go on to have recurrent attacks of 
meningitis. Diagnosis of HSV meningitis is usually by HSV CSF PCR 
because cultures may be negative, especially in patients with recurrent 
meningitis. Demonstration of intrathecal synthesis of HSV-specific 
antibody may also be useful in diagnosis, although antibody tests are 
less sensitive and less specific than PCR and may not become positive 
until after the first week of infection. Although a history of or the 
presence of HSV genital lesions is an important diagnostic clue, many 
patients with HSV meningitis give no history and have no evidence of 
active genital herpes at the time of presentation. Most cases of recurrent 
viral or “aseptic” meningitis, including cases previously diagnosed as 
Mollaret’s meningitis, are due to HSV.
VZV meningitis should be suspected in the presence of concurrent 
chickenpox or shingles. However, it is important to recognize that VZV 
is being increasingly identified as an important cause of both meningi-
tis and encephalitis in patients without rash. The frequency of VZV as 
a cause of meningitis is extremely variable, ranging from as low as 3% 
to as high as 20% in different series. Diagnosis is usually based on CSF 
PCR, although the sensitivity of this test is not as high as for the other 
herpesviruses. VZV serologic studies complement PCR testing, and 
the diagnosis of VZV CNS infection can be made by the demonstration 
of VZV-specific intrathecal antibody synthesis and/or the presence of 
VZV CSF IgM antibodies, or by positive CSF cultures.
EBV infections may also produce aseptic meningitis, with or without 
associated infectious mononucleosis. The presence of atypical lympho-
cytes in the CSF or peripheral blood is suggestive of EBV infection but 
may occasionally be seen with other viral infections. EBV is almost 
never cultured from CSF. Serum and CSF serology help establish the 
presence of acute infection, which is characterized by IgM viral capsid 
antibodies (VCAs), antibodies to early antigens (EAs), and the absence 
of antibodies to EBV-associated nuclear antigen (EBNA). CSF PCR is 
another important diagnostic test, although false-positive results may 
reflect viral reactivation associated with other infectious or inflam-
matory processes or the presence of latent viral DNA in lymphocytes 
recruited due to other inflammatory conditions.
HIV meningitis should be suspected in any patient presenting with a 
viral meningitis with known or suspected risk factors for HIV infection. 
Meningitis may occur following primary infection with HIV in 5–10% 
of cases and less commonly at later stages of illness. Cranial nerve pal-
sies, most commonly involving cranial nerves V, VII, or VIII, are more 
common in HIV meningitis than in other viral infections. Diagnosis 
can be confirmed by detection of HIV genome in blood or CSF. Sero-
conversion may be delayed, and patients with negative HIV serologies 
who are suspected of having HIV meningitis should be monitored for 
delayed seroconversion. For further discussion of HIV infection, see 
Chap. 197.
Mumps (Chap. 202) should be considered when meningitis occurs in 
the late winter or early spring, especially in males (male-to-female ratio 
3:1). With the widespread use of the live attenuated mumps vaccine 
in the United States since 1967, the incidence of mumps meningitis 
has fallen by >95%; however, mumps remains a potential source of 
infection in nonimmunized individuals and populations. Rare cases 
(10–100:100,000 vaccinated individuals) of vaccine-associated mumps 
meningitis have been described, with onset typically 2–4 weeks after 
vaccination. The presence of parotitis, orchitis, oophoritis, pancreatitis, 
or elevations in serum lipase and amylase is suggestive of mumps 
meningitis; however, their absence does not exclude the diagnosis. 
Clinical meningitis was previously estimated to occur in 10–30% of 
patients with mumps parotitis; however, in a recent U.S. outbreak of 
nearly 2600 cases of mumps, only 11 cases of meningitis were identi-
fied, suggesting the incidence may be lower than previously suspected. 
Mumps infection confers lifelong immunity, so a documented history 
of previous infection excludes this diagnosis. Patients with meningitis 
have a CSF pleocytosis that can exceed 1000 cells/μL in 25%. Lympho-
cytes predominate in 75%, although CSF neutrophilia occurs in 25%. 
Hypoglycorrhachia occurs in 10–30% of patients and may be a clue to 
the diagnosis when present. Diagnosis is typically made by culture of 
virus from CSF or by detecting IgM antibodies or seroconversion. CSF 
PCR is available in some diagnostic and research laboratories.
LCMV infection (Chap. 204) should be considered when aseptic 
meningitis occurs in the late fall or winter and in individuals with a 
history of exposure to house mice (Mus musculus), pet or laboratory 
rodents (e.g., hamsters, rats, mice), or their excreta. Some patients have 
an associated rash, pulmonary infiltrates, alopecia, parotitis, orchitis, 
or myopericarditis. Laboratory clues to the diagnosis of LCMV, in 
addition to the clinical findings noted above, may include the presence 
of leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, or abnormal liver function tests. 
Some cases present with a marked CSF pleocytosis (>1000 cells/μL) 
and hypoglycorrhachia (<30%). Diagnosis is based on serology and/or 
culture of virus from CSF.
TREATMENT
Acute Viral Meningitis
Treatment of almost all cases of viral meningitis is primarily symp-
tomatic and includes use of analgesics, antipyretics, and antiemetics. 
Fluid and electrolyte status should be monitored. Patients with 
suspected bacterial meningitis should receive appropriate empirical 
therapy pending culture results (see above). Hospitalization may 
not be required in immunocompetent patients with presumed viral 
meningitis and no focal signs or symptoms, no significant alteration 
in consciousness, and a classic CSF profile (lymphocytic pleocyto-
sis, normal glucose, negative Gram’s stain) if adequate provision 
for monitoring at home and medical follow-up can be ensured. 
Immunocompromised patients; patients with significant alteration 
in consciousness, seizures, or the presence of focal signs and symp-
toms suggesting the possibility of encephalitis or parenchymal brain 
involvement; and patients who have an atypical CSF profile should 
be hospitalized. Oral or intravenous acyclovir may be of benefit in 
patients with meningitis caused by HSV-1 or 2 and in cases of severe 
EBV or VZV infection. Data concerning treatment of HSV, EBV, and 
VZV meningitis are extremely limited. Seriously ill patients should 
probably receive intravenous acyclovir (15–30 mg/kg per day in 
three divided doses), which can be followed by an oral drug such 
as acyclovir (800 mg five times daily), famciclovir (500 mg tid), or 
valacyclovir (1000 mg tid) for a total course of 7–14 days. Patients 
who are less ill can be treated with oral drugs alone. Patients with 
HIV meningitis should receive highly active antiretroviral therapy 
(Chap. 197). There is no specific therapy of proven benefit for 
patients with arboviral encephalitis, including that caused by WNV.
Patients with viral meningitis who are known to have deficient 
humoral immunity (e.g., X-linked agammaglobulinemia) and who 


--- PDF PAGE 1052 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
1006
are not already receiving either intramuscular gamma globulin or 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) should be treated with these 
agents. Intraventricular administration of immunoglobulin through 
an Ommaya reservoir has been tried in some patients with chronic 
enteroviral meningitis who have not responded to intramuscular or 
intravenous immunoglobulin.
Vaccination is an effective method of preventing the development 
of meningitis and other neurologic complications associated with 
poliovirus, mumps, measles, rubella, and varicella infection. A live 
attenuated VZV vaccine (Varivax) is available in the United States. 
Clinical studies indicate an effectiveness rate of 70–90% for this 
vaccine, but a booster may be required after ~10 years to maintain 
immunity. A live attenuated vaccine (Zostavax) is recommended for 
prevention of herpes zoster (shingles) in adults aged >60 at the pres-
ent time. A new vaccine should be available soon. The herpes zoster 
subunit vaccine (HZ/su) containing recombinant varicella-zoster 
virus glycoprotein E and an adjuvant system has greater efficacy 
in preventing zoster in adults aged ≥70 years than the live atten-
uated vaccine. An inactivated varicella vaccine is available for 
transplant recipients and others for whom live viral vaccines are 
contraindicated.
■
■PROGNOSIS
In adults, the prognosis for full recovery from viral meningitis is 
excellent. Rare patients complain of persisting headache, mild men-
tal impairment, incoordination, or generalized asthenia for weeks to 
months. The outcome in infants and neonates (<1 year) is less certain; 
intellectual impairment, learning disabilities, hearing loss, and other 
lasting sequelae have been reported in some studies.
SUBACUTE MENINGITIS
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Patients with subacute meningitis typically have an unrelenting head-
ache, stiff neck, low-grade fever, and lethargy for days to several weeks 
before they present for evaluation. Cranial nerve abnormalities and 
night sweats may be present. This syndrome overlaps that of chronic 
meningitis, discussed in detail in Chap. 134, but is included here as 
the meningeal pathogens of subacute meningitis can also present as 
an acute meningitis.
■
■ETIOLOGY
Common causative organisms include M. tuberculosis, C. neoformans, 
H. capsulatum, C. immitis, and T. pallidum. Initial infection with M. tuber-
culosis is acquired by inhalation of aerosolized droplet nuclei. Tubercu-
lous meningitis in adults does not develop acutely from hematogenous 
spread of tubercle bacilli to the meninges. Rather, millet seed–sized 
(miliary) tubercles form in the parenchyma of the brain during hema-
togenous dissemination of tubercle bacilli in the course of primary 
infection. These tubercles enlarge and are usually caseating. The pro-
pensity for a caseous lesion to produce meningitis is determined by its 
proximity to the SAS and the rate at which fibrous encapsulation devel-
ops. Subependymal caseous foci cause meningitis via discharge of 
bacilli and tuberculous antigens into the SAS. Mycobacterial antigens 
produce an intense inflammatory reaction that leads to the production 
of a thick exudate that fills the basilar cisterns and surrounds the cra-
nial nerves and major blood vessels at the base of the brain.
Fungal infections are typically acquired by the inhalation of 
airborne fungal spores. The initial pulmonary infection may 
be asymptomatic or present with fever, cough, sputum pro-
duction, and chest pain. The pulmonary infection is often self-limited. 
A localized pulmonary fungal infection can then remain dormant in the 
lungs until there is an abnormality in cell-mediated immunity that 
allows the fungus to reactivate and disseminate to the CNS. The most 
common pathogen causing fungal meningitis is C. neoformans. This 
fungus is found worldwide in soil and bird excreta. H. capsulatum is 
endemic to the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys of the central United 
States and to parts of Central and South America. C. immitis is endemic 
to the desert areas of the southwest United States, northern Mexico, 
and Argentina.
Syphilis is a sexually transmitted disease that is manifest by the 
appearance of a painless chancre at the site of inoculation. T. pallidum 
invades the CNS early in the course of syphilis. Cranial nerves VII and 
VIII are most frequently involved.
■
■LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
The classic CSF abnormalities in tuberculous meningitis are as follows: 
(1) elevated opening pressure, (2) lymphocytic pleocytosis (10–500 
cells/μL), (3) elevated protein concentration in the range of 1–5 g/L, 
and (4) decreased glucose concentration in the range of 1.1–2.2 mmol/L 
(20–40 mg/dL). The combination of unrelenting headache, stiff neck, fatigue, 
night sweats, and fever with a CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis and a mildly 
decreased glucose concentration is highly suspicious for tuberculous menin-
gitis. The last tube of fluid collected at LP is the best tube to send for a 
smear for acid-fast bacilli (AFB). If there is a pellicle in the CSF or a cob-
web-like clot on the surface of the fluid, AFB can best be demonstrated 
in a smear of the clot or pellicle. Positive smears are typically reported 
in only 10–40% of cases of tuberculous meningitis in adults. Cultures of 
CSF take 4–8 weeks to identify the organism and are positive in ~50% 
of adults. Culture remains the gold standard to make the diagnosis of 
tuberculous meningitis. PCR for the detection of M. tuberculosis DNA 
should be sent on CSF if available, but the sensitivity and specificity on 
CSF have not been defined. The CDC recommends the use of nucleic 
acid amplification tests for the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis.
The characteristic CSF abnormalities in fungal meningitis are a 
mononuclear or lymphocytic pleocytosis, an increased protein con-
centration, and a decreased glucose concentration. There may be 
eosinophils in the CSF in C. immitis meningitis. Large volumes of CSF 
are often required to demonstrate the organism on India ink smear or 
grow the organism in culture. If spinal fluid examined by LP on two 
separate occasions fails to yield an organism, CSF should be obtained 
by high-cervical or cisternal puncture.
The cryptococcal polysaccharide antigen test is a highly sensitive 
and specific test for cryptococcal meningitis. A reactive CSF cryp-
tococcal antigen test establishes the diagnosis. The detection of the 
Histoplasma polysaccharide antigen in CSF establishes the diagnosis 
of a fungal meningitis but is not specific for meningitis due to H. cap-
sulatum. It may be falsely positive in coccidioidal meningitis. The CSF 
complement fixation antibody test is reported to have a specificity of 
100% and a sensitivity of 75% for coccidioidal meningitis.
The diagnosis of syphilitic meningitis is made when a reactive serum 
treponemal test (fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test 
[FTA-ABS] or microhemagglutination assay–T. pallidum [MHA-TP]) 
is associated with a CSF lymphocytic or mononuclear pleocytosis and 
an elevated protein concentration, or when the CSF Venereal Disease 
Research Laboratory (VDRL) test is positive. A reactive CSF FTA-ABS 
is not definitive evidence of neurosyphilis. The CSF FTA-ABS can be 
falsely positive from blood contamination. A negative CSF VDRL does 
not rule out neurosyphilis. A negative CSF FTA-ABS or MHA-TP rules 
out neurosyphilis.
TREATMENT
Subacute Meningitis
Empirical therapy of tuberculous meningitis is often initiated on 
the basis of a high index of suspicion without adequate laboratory 
support. Initial therapy is a combination of isoniazid (300 mg/d), 
rifampin (10 mg/kg per day), pyrazinamide (30 mg/kg per day in 
divided doses), ethambutol (15–25 mg/kg per day in divided doses), 
and pyridoxine (50 mg/d). When the antimicrobial sensitivity of the 
M. tuberculosis isolate is known, ethambutol can be discontinued. 
If the clinical response is good, pyrazinamide can be discontinued 
after 8 weeks and isoniazid and rifampin continued alone for the 
next 6–12 months. A 6-month course of therapy is acceptable, but 
therapy should be prolonged for 9–12 months in patients who have 


================================================================================
Ch134 Chronic and Recurrent Meningitis
Pages 1053-1058
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 1053 ---

CHAPTER 134 Chronic and Recurrent Meningitis
1007
an inadequate resolution of symptoms of meningitis or who have 
positive mycobacterial cultures of CSF during the course of therapy. 
Dexamethasone therapy is recommended for HIV-negative patients 
with tuberculous meningitis. The dose is 12–16 mg/d for 3 weeks, 
and then tapered over 3 weeks.
Meningitis due to C. neoformans in non-HIV, nontransplant 
patients is treated with induction therapy with amphotericin B 
(AmB) (0.7 mg/kg IV per day) plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg per day 
in four divided doses) for at least 4 weeks if CSF culture results are 
negative after 2 weeks of treatment. Therapy should be extended 
for a total of 6 weeks in the patient with neurologic complications. 
Induction therapy is followed by consolidation therapy with flu-
conazole 400 mg/d for 8 weeks. Organ transplant recipients are 
treated with liposomal AmB (3–4 mg/kg per day) or AmB lipid 
complex (ABLC) 5 mg/kg per day plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg per 
day in four divided doses) for at least 2 weeks or until CSF culture 
is sterile. Follow CSF yeast cultures for sterilization rather than the 
cryptococcal antigen titer. This treatment is followed by an 8- to 
10-week course of fluconazole (400–800 mg/d [6–12 mg/kg] PO). If 
the CSF culture is sterile after 10 weeks of acute therapy, the dose of 
fluconazole is decreased to 200 mg/d for 6 months to a year. Patients 
with HIV infection are treated with AmB or a lipid formulation 
plus flucytosine for at least 2 weeks, followed by fluconazole for a 
minimum of 8 weeks. HIV-infected patients may require indefinite 
maintenance therapy with fluconazole 200 mg/d. Meningitis due 
to H. capsulatum is treated with AmB (0.7–1.0 mg/kg per day) for 
4–12 weeks. A total dose of 30 mg/kg is recommended. Therapy 
with AmB is not discontinued until fungal cultures are sterile. After 
completing a course of AmB, maintenance therapy with itraconazole 
200 mg two or three times daily is initiated and continued for at 
least 9 months to a year. C. immitis meningitis is treated with either 
high-dose fluconazole (1000 mg daily) as monotherapy or intrave-
nous AmB (0.5–0.7 mg/kg per day) for >4 weeks. Intrathecal AmB 
(0.25–0.75 mg/d three times weekly) may be required to eradicate 
the infection. Lifelong therapy with fluconazole (200–400 mg daily) 
is recommended to prevent relapse. AmBisome (5 mg/kg per day) 
or AmB lipid complex (5 mg/kg per day) can be substituted for 
AmB in patients who have or who develop significant renal dys-
function. The most common complication of fungal meningitis is 
hydrocephalus. Patients who develop hydrocephalus should receive 
a CSF diversion device. A ventriculostomy can be used until CSF 
fungal cultures are sterile, at which time the ventriculostomy is 
replaced by a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.
Syphilitic meningitis is treated with aqueous penicillin G in a 
dose of 3–4 million units intravenously every 4 h for 10–14 days. 
An alternative regimen is 2.4 million units of procaine penicillin G 
intramuscularly daily with 500 mg of oral probenecid four times 
daily for 10–14 days. Either regimen is followed with 2.4 million 
units of benzathine penicillin G intramuscularly once a week for  
3 weeks. The standard criterion for treatment success is reexami-
nation of the CSF. The CSF should be reexamined at 6-month 
intervals for 2 years. The cell count is expected to normalize within  
12 months, and the VDRL titer to decrease by two dilutions or revert 
to nonreactive within 2 years of completion of therapy. Failure of the 
CSF pleocytosis to resolve or an increase in the CSF VDRL titer by 
two or more dilutions requires retreatment.
■
■FURTHER READING
Cunningham Al et al: Efficacy of the herpes zoster subunit vaccine in 
adults 70 years of age or older. N Engl J Med 375:1019, 2016.
Heckenberg SG et al: Adjunctive dexamethasone in adults with 
meningococcal meningitis. Neurology 79:1563, 2012.
Roos KL et al: Acute bacterial meningitis, in Infections of the Cen-
tral Nervous System, 4th ed. Scheld WM, Whitley RJ, Marra (eds). 
Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer Health, 2014, pp 365–419.
Chronic inflammation of the meninges (pia, arachnoid, and dura) 
can produce profound neurologic disability and may be fatal if not 
successfully treated. Chronic meningitis is diagnosed when a charac-
teristic neurologic syndrome exists for >4 weeks and is associated with 
a persistent inflammatory response in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
(white blood cell count >5/μL). The causes are varied, and appropriate 
treatment depends on identification of the etiology. Five categories of 
disease account for most cases of chronic meningitis: (1) meningeal 
infections, (2) malignancy, (3) autoimmune inflammatory disorders, 
(4) chemical meningitis, and (5) parameningeal infections.
■
■CLINICAL PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Neurologic manifestations of chronic meningitis (Table 134-1) are 
determined by the anatomic location of the inflammation and its con-
sequences. Persistent headache, hydrocephalus, cranial neuropathies, 
radiculopathies, and cognitive or personality changes are the cardinal 
features. These can occur alone or in combination. When they appear 
in combination, widespread dissemination of the inflammatory process 
along CSF pathways has occurred. In some cases, the presence of an 
underlying systemic illness points to a specific agent or class of agents 
as the probable cause. The diagnosis of chronic meningitis is usually 
made when the clinical presentation prompts the physician to examine 
the CSF for signs of inflammation. CSF is produced by the choroid 
plexus of the cerebral ventricles, exits through narrow foramina into 
the subarachnoid space surrounding the brain and spinal cord, circu-
lates around the base of the brain and over the cerebral hemispheres, 
and is resorbed by arachnoid villi projecting into the superior sagittal 
sinus. CSF flow provides a pathway for rapid spread of infectious and 
other infiltrative processes over the brain, spinal cord, cranial, and 
spinal nerve roots. Spread from the subarachnoid space into brain 
parenchyma may occur via the arachnoid cuffs that surround blood 
vessels that penetrate brain tissue (Virchow-Robin spaces).
Intracranial Meningitis  Nociceptive nerve fibers of the menin-
ges are stimulated by the inflammatory process, resulting in head-
ache, neck pain, or back pain. Obstruction of CSF pathways at the 
foramina or arachnoid villi may produce hydrocephalus and signs 
Chronic and Recurrent 
Meningitis
Walter J. Koroshetz, Michael R. Wilson, 
Avindra Nath 
134
TABLE 134-1  Symptoms and Signs of Chronic Meningitis
SYMPTOM
SIGN
Chronic headache
± Papilledema
Neck or back pain/stiffness
Brudzinski’s or Kernig’s sign of meningeal 
irritation
Change in personality
Altered mental status—drowsiness, 
inattention, disorientation, memory loss, 
frontal release signs (grasp, suck, snout), 
perseveration
Facial weakness
Peripheral seventh CN paresis
Double vision
Paresis of CNs III, IV, VI
Diminished vision
Papilledema, optic atrophy
Hearing loss
Eighth CN paresis
Arm or leg weakness
Myelopathy or radiculopathy
Numbness in arms or legs
Myelopathy or radiculopathy
Urinary retention/incontinence
Myelopathy or radiculopathy
Frontal lobe dysfunction (hydrocephalus)
Clumsiness
Ataxia
Abbreviation: CN, cranial nerve.


--- PDF PAGE 1054 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
1008 and symptoms of raised intracranial pressure (ICP), including head-
ache, vomiting, apathy or drowsiness, gait instability, papilledema, 
visual loss, impaired upgaze, or palsy of the sixth cranial nerve (CN) 
(Chap. 433). Cognitive and behavioral changes during the course 
of chronic meningitis may also result from vascular damage due to 
inflammation around the blood vessels that course in the subarach-
noid space, causing infarction. Inflammatory deposits seeded via the 
CSF circulation are often prominent around the brainstem and cranial 
nerves and along the undersurface of the frontal and temporal lobes. 
Such cases, termed basal meningitis, often present as multiple cranial 
neuropathies, with decreased vision (CN II), facial weakness (CN VII), 
decreased hearing (CN VIII), diplopia (CNs III, IV, and VI), sensory or 
motor abnormalities of the oropharynx (CNs IX, X, and XII), decreased 
olfaction (CN I), or decreased facial sensation and masseter weakness 
(CN V).
Spinal Meningitis  Injury may occur to motor and sensory nerve 
roots as they traverse the subarachnoid space and penetrate the menin-
ges. These cases present as multiple radiculopathies with combinations 
of radicular pain, sensory loss, motor weakness, and urinary or fecal 
incontinence. In some cases chronic inflammation causes clumping 
of the lower nerve roots and thickening of the meninges, so called 
pachymeningitis. Meningeal inflammation can encircle and damage 
the cord, resulting in a myelopathy. Patients with slowly progressive 
involvement of multiple cranial nerves and/or spinal nerve roots are 
likely to have chronic meningitis. Electrophysiologic testing (electro-
myography, nerve conduction studies, and evoked response testing) 
may be helpful in determining whether there is involvement of cranial 
and spinal nerve roots.
Systemic Manifestations  In some patients, evidence of systemic 
disease provides clues to the underlying cause of chronic meningitis. A 
complete history of travel, sexual practice, and exposure to infectious 
agents should be sought. Infectious causes are often associated with 
fever, malaise, anorexia, and signs of localized or disseminated infec-
tion outside the nervous system. Infectious causes are of major concern 
in the immunosuppressed patient, especially in patients with HIV 
infection, in whom chronic meningitis may present without headache 
or fever. Noninfectious inflammatory disorders most often produce 
systemic manifestations first, but meningitis may be the initial mani-
festation. Carcinomatous meningitis may or may not be accompanied 
by clinical evidence of the primary neoplasm.
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Chronic Meningitis
The occurrence of chronic headache, hydrocephalus, cranial neur-
opathy, radiculopathy, and/or cognitive decline in a patient should 
prompt consideration of a lumbar puncture for evidence of men-
ingeal inflammation. On occasion, the diagnosis is made when a  
contrast-enhanced imaging study (CT or MRI) shows leakage of 
contrast agent into the meninges. Meningeal enhancement is always 
concerning with the exception of dural enhancement after lumbar 
puncture, neurosurgical procedures, concussion, or spontaneous 
CSF leakage. Once chronic meningitis is confirmed by CSF exami-
nation, effort is focused on identifying the cause (Tables 134-2 and  
134-3) by (1) further analysis of the CSF, (2) diagnosis of an underly-
ing systemic infection or noninfectious inflammatory condition, or 
(3) pathologic examination of meningeal biopsy specimens.
Two clinical forms of chronic meningitis exist. In the first, the 
symptoms are chronic and persistent, whereas in the second there 
are recurrent, discrete episodes of illness. In the latter group, all 
TABLE 134-2  Infectious Causes of Chronic Meningitis
CAUSATIVE AGENT
CSF FORMULA
HELPFUL DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
RISK FACTORS AND SYSTEMIC MANIFESTATIONS
Common Bacterial Causes
Partially treated 
suppurative meningitis
Mononuclear or 
mixed mononuclear-
polymorphonuclear cells
CSF culture and Gram’s stain; CSF 16s rRNA PCR
History consistent with acute bacterial meningitis and 
incomplete treatment
Parameningeal infection
Mononuclear or 
mixed mononuclear-
polymorphonuclear cells
Contrast-enhanced CT or MRI to detect 
parenchymal, subdural, epidural, or sinus infection
Otitis media, pleuropulmonary infection, right-to-
left cardiopulmonary shunt for brain abscess; focal 
neurologic signs; neck, back, ear, or sinus tenderness
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis
Mononuclear cells except 
polymorphonuclear cells in 
early infection (commonly 
<500 WBC/μL); low CSF 
glucose; high protein
Tuberculin skin test may be negative; interferon 
gamma release assay; PCR and AFB culture of 
CSF (sputum, urine, gastric contents if indicated); 
identify tubercle bacillus on acid-fast stain of CSF 
or protein pellicle
Exposure history; previous tuberculous illness; 
immunosuppressed, anti-TNF therapy or AIDS; young 
children; fever, meningismus, night sweats, miliary TB 
on x-ray or liver biopsy; stroke due to arteritis
Lyme disease 
(Bannwarth’s syndrome) 
Borrelia burgdorferi
Mononuclear cells; elevated 
protein
Serum Lyme antibody titer; western blot 
confirmation; (patients with syphilis may have 
false-positive Lyme titer)
History of tick bite or appropriate exposure history; 
erythema chronicum migrans skin rash; arthritis, 
radiculopathy, Bell’s palsy, meningoencephalitis–
multiple sclerosis-like syndrome
Syphilis (secondary, 
tertiary) Treponema 
pallidum
Mononuclear cells; elevated 
protein
CSF VDRL; serum VDRL (or RPR); fluorescent 
treponemal antibody-absorbed (FTA) or MHA-TP; 
serum VDRL may be negative in tertiary syphilis
Appropriate exposure history; HIV-seropositive 
individuals at increased risk of aggressive infection; 
“dementia”; cerebral infarction due to endarteritis
Uncommon Bacterial Causes
Actinomyces
Polymorphonuclear cells
Anaerobic culture
Parameningeal abscess or sinus tract (oral or dental 
focus); pneumonitis
Nocardia
Polymorphonuclear; 
occasionally mononuclear 
cells; often low glucose
Isolation may require weeks; weakly acid fast
Associated brain abscess may be present
Brucella
Mononuclear cells (rarely 
polymorphonuclear); 
elevated protein; often low 
glucose
CSF antibody detection; serum antibody detection
Intake of unpasteurized dairy products; exposure 
to goats, sheep, cows; fever, arthralgia, myalgia, 
vertebral osteomyelitis
Whipple’s disease 
Tropheryma whipplei
Mononuclear cells
Biopsy of small bowel or lymph node; CSF PCR for 
T. whipplei; brain and meningeal biopsy (with PAS 
stain and EM examination)
Diarrhea, weight loss, arthralgias, fever; dementia, 
ataxia, paresis, ophthalmoplegia, oculomasticatory 
myoclonus
Rare Bacterial Causes
Leptospirosis (occasionally if left untreated may last 3–4 weeks)
(Continued)


--- PDF PAGE 1055 ---

CHAPTER 134 Chronic and Recurrent Meningitis
1009
TABLE 134-2  Infectious Causes of Chronic Meningitis
CAUSATIVE AGENT
CSF FORMULA
HELPFUL DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
RISK FACTORS AND SYSTEMIC MANIFESTATIONS
Fungal Causes
Cryptococcus 
neoformans and var. 
gatti
Mononuclear cells; count 
not elevated in some 
patients with AIDS
India ink or fungal wet mount of CSF (budding 
yeast); blood and urine cultures; antigen 
detection in CSF
AIDS and immune suppression; pigeon exposure for 
neoformans, decaying wood exposure for var. gatti; 
skin and other organ involvement due to disseminated 
infection
Coccidioides immitis
Mononuclear cells 
(sometimes 10–20% 
eosinophils); often low 
glucose
Antibody detection in CSF and serum, antigen 
detection in CSF
Exposure history—southwestern United States; 
increased virulence in dark-skinned races
Candida sp.
Polymorphonuclear or 
mononuclear
Fungal stain and culture of CSF
IV drug abuse; postsurgery; prolonged IV therapy; 
disseminated candidiasis, recent epidural injection
Histoplasma capsulatum Mononuclear cells; low 
glucose
Fungal stain and culture of large volumes of 
CSF; antigen detection in CSF, serum, and urine; 
antibody detection in serum, CSF
Exposure history—Ohio and central Mississippi River 
Valley; AIDS; mucosal lesions
Blastomyces 
dermatitidis
Mononuclear cells
Fungal stain and culture of CSF; biopsy and 
culture of skin, lung lesions; antibody detection 
in serum
Midwestern and southeastern United States; usually 
systemic infection; abscesses, draining sinus, ulcers
Aspergillus sp.
Mononuclear or 
polymorphonuclear
CSF culture
Sinusitis; granulocytopenia or immunosuppression
Sporothrix schenckii
Mononuclear cells
Antibody detection in CSF and serum; CSF culture
Traumatic inoculation; IV drug use; ulcerated skin 
lesion
Rare Fungal Causes
Xylohypha (formerly Cladosporium) trichoides and other dark-walled (dematiaceous) fungi such as Curvularia; Drechslera; Mucor; and, after water aspiration, 
Pseudallescheria boydii; iatrogenic Exserohilum rostratum infection following spinal blocks
Protozoal Causes
Toxoplasma gondii
Mononuclear cells
Biopsy or response to empirical therapy in 
clinically appropriate context (including presence 
of antibody in serum)
Usually with intracerebral abscesses; common in HIV-
seropositive patients
Trypanosomiasis 
Trypanosoma 
gambiense, T. 
rhodesiense
Mononuclear cells; elevated 
protein
Elevated CSF IgM; identification of trypanosomes 
in CSF and blood smear
Endemic in Africa; chancre, lymphadenopathy; 
prominent sleep disorder
Rare Protozoal Causes
Acanthamoeba sp. causing granulomatous amebic encephalitis and meningoencephalitis in immunocompromised and debilitated individuals. Balamuthia 
mandrillaris causing chronic meningoencephalitis in immunocompetent hosts.
Helminthic Causes
Cysticercosis (infection 
with cysts of Taenia 
solium)
Mononuclear cells; may 
have eosinophils; glucose 
level may be low
Indirect hemagglutination assay in CSF; ELISA 
immunoblotting in serum
Usually with multiple cysts in basal meninges and 
hydrocephalus; cerebral cysts, muscle calcification
Gnathostoma 
spinigerum
Eosinophils, mononuclear 
cells
Peripheral eosinophilia
History of eating raw fish; common in Thailand 
and Japan; subarachnoid hemorrhage; painful 
radiculopathy
Angiostrongylus 
cantonensis
Eosinophils, mononuclear 
cells
Recovery of worms from CSF
History of eating raw shellfish; common in tropical 
Pacific regions; often benign
Baylisascaris procyonis 
(raccoon ascarid)
Eosinophils, mononuclear 
cells
Infection follows accidental ingestion of B. procyonis 
eggs from raccoon feces; fatal meningoencephalitis
Rare Helminthic Causes
Trichinella spiralis (trichinosis); Fasciola hepatica (liver fluke), Echinococcus cysts; Schistosoma sp. The former may produce a lymphocytic pleocytosis whereas the 
latter two may produce an eosinophilic response in CSF associated with cerebral cysts (Echinococcus) or granulomatous lesions of brain or spinal cord
Viral Causes
Mumps
Mononuclear cells
Antibody in serum
No prior mumps or immunization; may produce 
meningoencephalitis; may persist for 3–4 weeks
Lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis
Mononuclear cells; may 
have low glucose
Antibody in serum; PCR for LCMV in CSF
Contact with rodents or their excreta; may persist for 
3–4 weeks
Echovirus
Mononuclear cells; may 
have low glucose
Virus isolation from CSF
Congenital hypogammaglobulinemia; history of 
recurrent meningitis
HIV (acute retroviral 
syndrome)
Mononuclear cells
PCR for HIV in blood and CSF
HIV risk factors; rash, fever, lymphadenopathy; 
lymphopenia in peripheral blood; syndrome may 
persist long enough to be considered as “chronic 
meningitis”; or chronic meningitis may develop in later 
stages (AIDS) due to HIV
Human herpes viruses
Mononuclear cells
PCR for HSV, CMV DNA; CSF antibody for HSV, 
EBV
Recurrent meningitis due to HSV-2 (rarely HSV-1) 
often associated with genital recurrences; EBV 
associated with myeloradiculopathy, CMV with 
polyradiculopathy
Abbreviations: AFB, acid-fast bacillus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ELISA, enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay; EM, electron microscopy; FTA, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test; HSV, herpes simplex virus; MHA-TP, microhemagglutination 
assay–T. pallidum; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PAS, periodic acid–Schiff; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid plasma reagin test; TB, tuberculosis; VDRL, 
Venereal Disease Research Laboratories test.
(Continued)


--- PDF PAGE 1056 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
1010
symptoms, signs, and CSF parameters of meningeal inflammation 
resolve completely between episodes either spontaneously or in 
response to a specific therapy. In such patients, the likely etiologies 
include Mollaret’s meningitis which is most often due to herpes sim-
plex virus (HSV) type 2; chemical meningitis due to episodic leakage 
from an epidermoid tumor, craniopharyngioma, or cholesteatoma 
into CSF; primary autoimmune inflammatory conditions, includ-
ing Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, Behçet’s syndrome, systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis, IgG4-related  
disease and drug hypersensitivity with repeated administration of 
the offending agent.
The epidemiologic history is of considerable importance in diag-
nosis of chronic meningitis and may provide direction for selection of 
laboratory studies. Pertinent features include a history of tuberculosis 
or exposure; recent epidural injection that led to epidemic of fungal 
meningitis by Exserohilum rostratum; past travel to areas endemic 
for fungal infections (the San Joaquin Valley in California and 
southwestern states for coccidioidomycosis, midwestern states for 
histoplasmosis, southeastern states for blastomycosis); travel to the 
Mediterranean region or ingestion of imported unpasteurized dairy 
products (Brucella); time spent in wooded areas endemic for Lyme 
disease; exposure to sexually transmitted disease (syphilis); exposure 
of an immunocompromised host to pigeons and their droppings 
(Cryptococcus neoformans); exposure to decaying wood in Vancouver 
Island, South Africa, and Australia (Cryptococcus neoformans var. 
gatti); gardening (Sporothrix schenckii); ingestion of poorly cooked 
meat or contact with a household cat (Toxoplasma gondii); resi-
dence in Thailand or Japan (Gnathostoma spinigerum), Latin America 
TABLE 134-3  Noninfectious Causes of Chronic Meningitis
CAUSATIVE AGENTS
CSF FORMULA
HELPFUL DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
RISK FACTORS AND SYSTEMIC MANIFESTATIONS
Malignancy
Mononuclear cells; elevated protein; 
low glucose
Repeated cytologic examination of 
large volumes of CSF; CSF exam 
by polarizing microscopy; clonal 
lymphocyte markers; deposits on nerve 
roots or meninges seen on myelogram 
or contrast-enhanced MRI; meningeal 
biopsy
Metastatic cancer of breast, lung, stomach, or 
pancreas; melanoma, lymphoma, leukemia; meningeal 
gliomatosis; sarcoma; cerebral dysgerminoma
Chemical compounds 
(may cause recurrent 
meningitis)
Mononuclear or PMNs; low glucose, 
elevated protein; xanthochromia from 
subarachnoid hemorrhage in week 
prior to presentation with “meningitis”
Contrast-enhanced CT scan or 
MRI; cerebral angiogram to detect 
aneurysm. Enhancement and clumping 
of nerve roots of the cauda equina in 
arachnoiditis/pachymeningitis
History of recent injection into the subarachnoid 
space; history of sudden onset of headache; recent 
resection of acoustic neuroma or craniopharyngioma; 
epidermoid tumor of brain or spine, sometimes with 
dermoid sinus tract; pituitary apoplexy
Primary Inflammation
CNS sarcoidosis
Mononuclear cells; elevated protein; 
often low glucose
Serum and CSF angiotensin-converting 
enzyme levels; biopsy of extraneural 
affected tissues or brain lesion/
meningeal biopsy
CN palsy, especially CN VII; hypothalamic dysfunction, 
especially diabetes insipidus; abnormal chest 
radiograph; peripheral neuropathy or myopathy
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada 
syndrome (recurrent 
meningitis)
Mononuclear cells
Recurrent meningoencephalitis with uveitis, retinal 
detachment, alopecia, lightening of eyebrows and 
lashes, dysacousia, cataracts, glaucoma
Isolated granulomatous 
angiitis of the nervous 
system
Mononuclear cells; elevated protein
Angiography; meningeal biopsy may be 
necessary if confined to small vessels. 
VZV PCR in blood and biopsy tissue
Subacute dementia; multiple cerebral infarctions; 
recent zoster ophthalmicus
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Mononuclear or PMNs
Anti-DNA antibody, antinuclear 
antibodies
Encephalopathy; seizures; stroke; transverse 
myelopathy; rash; arthritis
Behçet’s syndrome 
(recurrent meningitis)
Mononuclear or PMNs; elevated 
protein
Oral and genital aphthous ulcers; iridocyclitis; retinal 
hemorrhages; pathergic lesions at site of skin 
puncture
Chronic benign 
lymphocytic meningitis
Mononuclear cells
Recovery in 2–6 months, diagnosis by exclusion
Mollaret’s meningitis 
(recurrent meningitis)
Large endothelial cells and PMNs in 
first hours, followed by mononuclear 
cells
PCR for herpes; MRI/CT to rule out 
epidermoid tumor or dural cyst
Recurrent meningitis; exclude HSV-2; rare cases due 
to HSV-1; occasional case associated with dural cyst
Drug hypersensitivity
PMNs; occasionally mononuclear cells 
or eosinophils
Complete blood count (eosinophilia)
Exposure to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, 
sulfonamides, isoniazid, tolmetin, ciprofloxacin, 
penicillin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, IV 
immunoglobulin, OKT3 antibodies, phenazopyridine; 
improvement after discontinuation of drug; recurrence 
with repeat exposure
Granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
Mononuclear cells
Chest and sinus radiographs; 
urinalysis; ANCA antibodies in serum
Associated sinus, pulmonary, or renal lesions; CN 
palsies; skin lesions; peripheral neuropathy
Neonatal-Onset 
Multisystem 
Inflammatory Disorder
Mononuclear and PMNs
Gain of function mutation in NLRP3 
gene leading to elevated IL-1β
Recurrent fever, urticaria, arthralgia, sensorineural 
hearing loss, papilledema, increased ICP
IgG4-Related 
Hypertrophic 
Pachymeningitis
Mild lymphocytic pleocytosis in some 
cases; normal to mildly increased 
protein; normal glucose
Serum IgG4 levels frequently elevated; 
ESR and C-reactive protein; meningeal 
biopsy shows swirling “storiform” 
fibrosis with lymphocytic infiltrates, 
obliterative phlebitis and IgG4+ plasma 
cells
Headache; seizures; focal symptoms from dural 
involvement in spinal cord/nerve roots, clivus, 
periorbital, vestibular and brainstem structures. 
Systemic IgG4-related disease can involve many 
tissues including pancreas, thyroid, lungs, and 
retroperitoneum
Other: multiple sclerosis, Sjögren’s syndrome, and rarer forms of vasculitis (e.g., Cogan’s syndrome)
Abbreviations: ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; CN, cranial nerve; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; HSV, herpes simplex virus; MRI, 
magnetic resonance imaging; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PMNs, polymorphonuclear cells.


--- PDF PAGE 1057 ---

CHAPTER 134 Chronic and Recurrent Meningitis
1011
(Paracoccidioides brasiliensis), or the South Pacific (Angiostrongylus 
cantonensis); rural residence and raccoon exposure (Baylisascaris pro-
cyonis); and residence in Latin America, the Philippines, sub-Saharan 
Africa, or Southeast Asia (Taenia solium/cysticercosis).
The presence of focal cerebral signs in a patient with chronic 
meningitis suggests the possibility of a brain abscess, parameningeal 
infection or infarct; identification of a potential source of infection 
(chronic draining ear, sinusitis, right-to-left cardiac or pulmonary 
shunt, chronic pleuropulmonary infection) supports this diagnosis. 
In some cases, diagnosis may be established by recognition and 
biopsy of unusual skin lesions (Behçet’s syndrome, SLE, cryptococ-
cosis, blastomycosis, Lyme disease, sporotrichosis, trypanosomiasis, 
IV drug use) or enlarged lymph nodes (lymphoma, sarcoid, tubercu-
losis, HIV, secondary syphilis, or Whipple’s disease). A careful oph-
thalmologic examination may reveal uveitis (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada 
syndrome, sarcoid, or central nervous system [CNS] lymphoma), 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Sjögren’s syndrome), or iridocyclitis 
(Behçet’s syndrome) and is essential to assess visual loss from 
papilledema. Aphthous oral lesions, genital ulcers, and hypopyon 
suggest Behçet’s syndrome. Hepatosplenomegaly suggests lym-
phoma, sarcoid, tuberculosis, or brucellosis. Herpetic lesions in 
the genital area or on the thighs suggest HSV-2 infection. A breast 
nodule, a suspicious hyperpigmented skin lesion, focal bone pain, 
hard, fixed lymph nodes, or an abdominal mass directs attention to 
possible carcinomatous meningitis.
IMAGING
Once the clinical syndrome is recognized as a potential manifesta-
tion of chronic meningitis, proper analysis of the CSF is essential. 
However, if the possibility of raised ICP exists, a brain imaging 
study should be performed before lumbar puncture. If ICP is ele-
vated because of a mass lesion, brain swelling, or a block in ventricu-
lar CSF outflow (obstructive hydrocephalus), then lumbar puncture 
carries the potential risk of brain herniation. Obstructive hydro-
cephalus usually requires direct ventricular drainage. In patients 
with open CSF flow pathways, elevated ICP can still occur due to 
impaired resorption of CSF by arachnoid villi. In such patients, lum-
bar puncture is usually safe and may be therapeutic, but repetitive 
or continuous lumbar drainage may be necessary to prevent abrupt 
deterioration and death from raised ICP. In some patients, especially 
those with cryptococcal meningitis, fatal levels of raised ICP can 
occur without enlarged ventricles.
Contrast-enhanced MRI or CT studies of the brain and spinal 
cord can identify meningeal enhancement, parameningeal infections 
(including brain abscess), encasement of the spinal cord (malig-
nancy, inflammation or infection), or nodular deposits on the menin-
ges or nerve roots (malignancy or sarcoidosis) (Fig. 134-1). Imaging 
studies are also useful to guide biopsy of affected meninges.
Angiographic studies can identify evidence of cerebral arteritis in 
patients with chronic meningitis and stroke.
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID ANALYSIS
The CSF pressure should be measured and samples sent for bac-
terial, fungal, and tuberculous culture; Venereal Disease Research 
Laboratories (VDRL) test; cell count and differential; Gram’s stain; 
and measurement of glucose and protein. Wet mount for fungus and 
parasites, india ink preparation, culture for fastidious bacteria and 
fungi, assays for cryptococcal antigen and oligoclonal immuno-
globulin bands, and cytology should be performed. Other specific 
CSF tests (Tables 134-2 and 134-3) or blood tests and cultures 
should be ordered as indicated on the basis of the history, physical 
examination, or preliminary CSF results (i.e., eosinophilic, mononu-
clear, or polymorphonuclear meningitis). Rapid diagnosis may be 
facilitated by serologic tests and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
testing to identify DNA sequences in the CSF that are specific for 
the suspected pathogen. 16s ribosomal RNA (rRNA) PCR can be 
used to detect a broad range of bacterial causes of meningitis and 
can be particularly useful in partially treated meningitis when the 
yield of culture is low. 18s and 28s rRNA can similarly be useful for 
detecting a broad range of fungal species. In patients with suspected 
fungal infections, when other tests are negative, assays for beta- 
glucans may be a useful adjunct in establishing the diagnosis. 
Building on progress in parallel deep sequencing and informatics, 
unbiased metagenomic next-generation sequencing is becoming 
generally available, representing an efficient and powerful method 
for diagnosis of challenging diagnostic cases.
In most categories of chronic (not recurrent) meningitis, mono-
nuclear cells predominate in the CSF. When neutrophils predomi-
nate after 3 weeks of illness, the principal etiologic considerations 
are Nocardia asteroides, Actinomyces israelii, Brucella, Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (5–10% of early cases only), various fungi (Blastomyces 
dermatitidis, Candida albicans, Histoplasma capsulatum, Aspergillus spp., 
Pseudallescheria boydii, Cladophialophora bantiana), and noninfectious 
causes (SLE, exogenous chemical meningitis). When eosinophils 
predominate or are present in limited numbers in a primarily mono-
nuclear cell response in the CSF, the differential diagnosis includes 
parasitic diseases (A. cantonensis, G. spinigerum, B. procyonis, or 
Toxocara canis infection, cysticercosis, schistosomiasis, echinococcal 
disease, T. gondii infection), fungal infections (6–20% eosinophils 
along with a predominantly lymphocyte pleocytosis, particularly 
with coccidioidal meningitis), neoplastic disease (lymphoma,  
leukemia, metastatic carcinoma), or other inflammatory processes 
(sarcoidosis, hypereosinophilic syndrome).
It is often necessary to broaden the number of diagnostic tests if 
the initial workup does not reveal the cause. In addition, repeated 
samples (three or more) of large volumes of lumbar CSF may be 
required to diagnose certain infectious and malignant causes of 
chronic meningitis. Lymphomatous or carcinomatous meningitis 
may be diagnosed by examination of sections cut from a cell block 
formed by spinning down the sediment from a large volume of CSF. 
Flow cytometry for malignant cells may also be useful in patients 
with suspected carcinomatous meningitis. The diagnosis of fungal 
meningitis may also require large volumes of CSF for culture of 
sediment. If standard lumbar puncture is unrewarding, a cervical 
cisternal tap to sample CSF near to the basal meninges may be fruit-
ful. Ventricular fluid may appear sterile in cases with active infection 
in the lower lumbar space.
LABORATORY INVESTIGATION
In addition to the CSF examination, an attempt should be made to 
uncover pertinent underlying illnesses. Tuberculin skin test, chest 
radiograph, urine analysis and culture, blood count and differential, 
renal and liver function tests, alkaline phosphatase, sedimentation 
rate, antinuclear antibody, anti-Ro antibody, anti-La antibody, rheu-
matoid factor, and IgG4 level are often indicated. In some cases, a 
thorough search for a systemic site of infection is indicated. Pulmo-
nary foci of infection may be present, particularly with fungal or 
tuberculous disease. Hence a CT or MRI of the chest and a sputum 
examination may be helpful. Abnormalities can be pursued by bron-
choscopy or transthoracic needle biopsy. A tuberculin skin test is 
often placed, although the test has limited specificity and sensitivity 
for diagnosis of active disease. Where available gamma interferon 
release assays may be used to diagnose latent tuberculosis. Liver, 
bone marrow, or lymph node biopsy may be diagnostic in some cases 
of miliary tuberculosis, disseminated fungal infection, sarcoidosis, or 
metastatic malignancy. Positron emission tomography with fluoro-
deoxyglucose may be useful in identifying a systemic site for biopsy 
in patients with suspected carcinomatous meningitis or sarcoidosis 
when other tests are unrevealing. Genetic testing can identify muta-
tions that cause rare monogenic autoinflammatory disorders.
MENINGEAL BIOPSY
If CSF is not diagnostic then a meningeal biopsy should be strongly 
considered in patients who are severely disabled, who need chronic 
ventricular decompression, or whose illness is progressing rap-
idly. The activities of the surgeon, pathologist, microbiologist, and 


--- PDF PAGE 1058 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
1012
cytologist should be coordinated so that a large enough sample is 
obtained and the appropriate cultures and histologic and molecular 
studies, including electron-microscopic and PCR studies, are per-
formed. The diagnostic yield of meningeal biopsy can be increased 
by targeting regions that enhance with contrast on MRI or CT. With 
current microsurgical techniques, most areas of the basal menin-
ges can be accessed for biopsy via a limited craniotomy. In one 
series, MRI demonstrated meningeal enhancement in 47% of patients 
undergoing meningeal biopsy; biopsy of an enhancing region was 
diagnostic in 80% of cases, biopsy of nonenhancing regions was diag-
nostic in only 9%, and sarcoid (31%) and metastatic adenocarcinoma 
(25%) were the most common conditions identified. Tuberculosis is 
the most common condition identified in many reports from outside 
the United States.
APPROACH TO THE ENIGMATIC CASE
In approximately one-third of cases, the diagnosis is not known 
despite careful evaluation of CSF and potential extraneural sites of 
disease. A number of the organisms that cause chronic meningitis 
may take weeks to be identified by cultures. In enigmatic cases, 
several options are available, determined by the extent of the clinical 
deficits and rate of progression. It is prudent to wait until cultures 
are finalized if the patient is asymptomatic or symptoms are mild 
and not progressive. Unfortunately, in many cases progressive 
neurologic deterioration occurs, and rapid treatment is required.  
Ventricular-peritoneal shunts may be placed to relieve hydrocepha-
lus, but the risk of disseminating the undiagnosed inflammatory 
process into the abdomen must be considered.
Empirical Treatment  Diagnosis of the causative agent is essential 
because effective therapies exist for many etiologies of chronic men-
ingitis, but if the condition is left untreated, progressive damage 
to the CNS and cranial nerves and roots is likely to occur. Occa-
sionally, empirical therapy must be initiated when all attempts at 
diagnosis fail. In general, empirical therapy in the United States con-
sists of antimycobacterial agents, amphotericin for fungal infection,  
FIGURE 134-1  Chronic meningitis illustrating meningeal enhancement on contrast MRI scan. A and B are images from a patient with chronic meningitis due to 
carcinoma. C and D are from a patient with chronic meningitis due to Cryptococcus infection. Arrows point to the most prominent areas of meningeal inflammation 
around the brainstem and cerebellar folia (A), cerebellum (C), along the dorsal spinal cord (B), and clumping of roots in the cauda equina (D).
A
B
C
D


================================================================================
Ch135 Brain Abscess and Empyema
Pages 1059-1064
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 1059 ---

CHAPTER 135 Brain Abscess and Empyema
1013
and/or glucocorticoids for noninfectious inflammatory causes. It is 
important to direct empirical therapy of lymphocytic meningitis at 
tuberculosis, particularly if the condition is associated with low CSF 
glucose, since untreated disease can be devastating within weeks. 
Prolonged anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy and anti-programmed 
death-1 (PD-1) inhibitors can cause reactivation of TB, and such 
patients who develop chronic meningitis should be treated empiri-
cally with antituberculous therapy if the etiology is uncertain. In the 
Mayo Clinic series, the most useful empirical therapy was adminis-
tration of glucocorticoids rather than antituberculous therapy. When 
proceeding with empiric glucocorticoids, caution should be main-
tained whenever a transient response to treatment is noted, as some 
infectious (e.g., tuberculosis and cysticercosis) and non-infectious 
(e.g., lymphoma) etiologies may temporarily respond to glucocor-
ticoid monotherapy. Carcinomatous or lymphomatous meningitis 
may be difficult to diagnose initially, but the diagnosis becomes 
evident with time.
■
■THE IMMUNOSUPPRESSED PATIENT
Chronic meningitis is not uncommon in the course of HIV infection. 
Pleocytosis and mild meningeal signs often occur at the onset of HIV 
infection, and occasionally low-grade meningitis persists. Toxoplas-
mosis commonly presents as intracranial abscesses and also may be 
associated with meningitis. Other important causes of chronic men-
ingitis in AIDS include infection with Cryptococcus, Nocardia, Candida, 
or other fungi; syphilis; and lymphoma (Fig. 134-1). Toxoplasmosis, 
cryptococcosis, nocardiosis, and other fungal infections are important 
etiologic considerations in individuals with immunodeficiency states 
other than AIDS, including those due to immunosuppressive medica-
tions. Because of the increased risk of chronic meningitis and the atten-
uation of clinical signs of meningeal irritation in immunosuppressed 
individuals, CSF examination should be performed for any persistent 
headache or unexplained change in mental state.
■
■FURTHER READING
Baldwin K, Whiting C: Chronic meningitis: Simplifying a diagnostic 
challenge. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 16:30, 2016.
Cheng TM et al: Chronic meningitis: The role of meningeal or cortical 
biopsy. Neurosurgery 34:590, 1994.
Le LT, Spudich SS: HIV-associated neurologic disorders and central 
nervous system opportunistic infections in HIV. Semin Neurol 36:373, 
2016.
Lu LX et al: IgG4-related hypertrophic pachymeningitis: Clinical 
features, diagnostic criteria and treatment. JAMA Neurol 71:785, 2014.
Torok ME: Tuberculous meningitis: Advances in diagnosis and 
treatment. Br Med Bull 113:117, 2015.
Brain Abscess and Empyema
Karen L. Roos, Kenneth L. Tyler 
135
BRAIN ABSCESS
■
■DEFINITION
A brain abscess is a focal, suppurative infection within the brain par-
enchyma, typically surrounded by a vascularized capsule. The term 
cerebritis is often employed to describe a nonencapsulated brain abscess.
■
■EPIDEMIOLOGY
A bacterial brain abscess is a relatively uncommon intracranial 
infection, with an incidence of ~0.3–1.3:100,000 persons per 
year. Predisposing conditions include otitis media and mas-
toiditis, paranasal sinusitis, pyogenic infections in the chest or other 
body sites, penetrating head trauma or neurosurgical procedures, and 
dental infections. In immunocompetent individuals the most important 
pathogens are Streptococcus spp. (anaerobic, aerobic, and viridans [40%]), 
Enterobacteriaceae (Proteus spp., E. coli sp., Klebsiella spp. [25%]), anaero-
bes (e.g., Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium spp. [30%]), and staphylococci 
(10%). In immunocompromised hosts with underlying HIV infection, 
organ transplantation, cancer, or immunosuppressive therapy, most 
brain abscesses are caused by Nocardia spp., Toxoplasma gondii, Aspergillus 
spp., Candida spp., and C. neoformans. In Latin America and in immi-
grants from Latin America, the most common cause of brain abscess is 
Taenia solium (neurocysticercosis). In India and East Asia, mycobacterial 
infection (tuberculoma) remains a major cause of focal CNS mass lesions.
■
■ETIOLOGY
A brain abscess may develop (1) by direct spread from a contiguous 
cranial site of infection, such as paranasal sinusitis, otitis media, mas-
toiditis, or dental infection; (2) following head trauma or a neurosurgi-
cal procedure; or (3) as a result of hematogenous spread from a remote 
site of infection. In up to 25% of cases, no obvious primary source of 
infection is apparent (cryptogenic brain abscess).
Approximately one-third of brain abscesses are associated with otitis 
media and mastoiditis, often with an associated cholesteatoma. Otoge-
nic abscesses occur predominantly in the temporal lobe (55–75%) and 
cerebellum (20–30%). In some series, up to 90% of cerebellar abscesses 
are otogenic. Common organisms include streptococci, Bacteroides spp., 
Pseudomonas spp., Haemophilus spp., and Enterobacteriaceae. Abscesses 
that develop as a result of direct spread of infection from the frontal, eth-
moidal, or sphenoidal sinuses and those that occur due to dental infec-
tions are usually located in the frontal lobes. Approximately 10% of brain 
abscesses are associated with paranasal sinusitis, and this association is 
particularly strong in young males in their second and third decades 
of life. The most common pathogens in brain abscesses associated with 
paranasal sinusitis are streptococci (especially Streptococcus milleri), 
Haemophilus spp., Bacteroides spp., Pseudomonas spp., and Staphylococcus 
aureus. Dental infections are associated with ~2% of brain abscesses, 
although it is often suggested that many “cryptogenic” abscesses are in 
fact due to dental infections. The most common pathogens in this setting 
are streptococci, staphylococci, Bacteroides spp., and Fusobacterium spp.
Hematogenous abscesses account for ~25% of brain abscesses. 
Hematogenous abscesses are often multiple, and multiple abscesses 
often (50%) have a hematogenous origin. These abscesses show a pre-
dilection for the territory of the middle cerebral artery (i.e., posterior 
frontal or parietal lobes). Hematogenous abscesses are often located at 
the junction of the gray and white matter and are often poorly encap-
sulated. The microbiology of hematogenous abscesses is dependent 
on the primary source of infection. For example, brain abscesses that 
develop as a complication of infective endocarditis are often due to 
viridans streptococci or S. aureus. Abscesses associated with pyogenic 
lung infections such as lung abscess or bronchiectasis are often due 
to streptococci, staphylococci, Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium spp., or 
Enterobacteriaceae. Abscesses that follow penetrating head trauma or 
neurosurgical procedures are frequently due to methicillin-resistant 
S. aureus (MRSA), S. epidermidis, Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonas spp., 
and Clostridium spp. Enterobacteriaceae and P. aeruginosa are important 
causes of abscesses associated with urinary sepsis. Congenital cardiac 
malformations that produce a right-to-left shunt, such as tetralogy 
of Fallot, patent ductus arteriosus, and atrial and ventricular septal 
defects, allow bloodborne bacteria to bypass the pulmonary capillary 
bed and reach the brain. Similar phenomena can occur with pulmonary 
arteriovenous malformations. The decreased arterial oxygenation and 
saturation from the right-to-left shunt and polycythemia may cause 
focal areas of cerebral ischemia, thus providing a nidus for microorgan-
isms that bypassed the pulmonary circulation to multiply and form an 
abscess. Streptococci are the most common pathogens in this setting.
■
■PATHOGENESIS AND HISTOPATHOLOGY
Results of experimental models of brain abscess formation suggest 
that for bacterial invasion of brain parenchyma to occur, there must be 
preexisting or concomitant areas of ischemia, necrosis, or hypoxemia 


--- PDF PAGE 1060 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
1014 in brain tissue. The intact brain parenchyma is relatively resistant to 
infection. Once bacteria have established infection, brain abscess fre-
quently evolves through a series of stages, influenced by the nature 
of the infecting organism and by the immunocompetence of the host. 
The early cerebritis stage (days 1–3) is characterized by a perivascu-
lar infiltration of inflammatory cells, which surround a central core 
of coagulative necrosis. Marked edema surrounds the lesion at this 
stage. In the late cerebritis stage (days 4–9), pus formation leads to 
enlargement of the necrotic center, which is surrounded at its border 
by an inflammatory infiltrate of macrophages and fibroblasts. A thin 
capsule of fibroblasts and reticular fibers gradually develops, and the 
surrounding area of cerebral edema becomes more distinct than in the 
previous stage. The third stage, early capsule formation (days 10–13), 
is characterized by the formation of a capsule that is better developed 
on the cortical than on the ventricular side of the lesion. This stage 
correlates with the appearance of a ring-enhancing capsule on neu-
roimaging studies. The final stage, late capsule formation (day 14 and 
beyond), is defined by a well-formed necrotic center surrounded by a 
dense collagenous capsule. The surrounding area of cerebral edema has 
regressed, but marked gliosis with large numbers of reactive astrocytes 
has developed outside the capsule. This gliotic process may contribute 
to the development of seizures as a sequela of brain abscess.
■
■CLINICAL PRESENTATION
A brain abscess typically presents as an expanding intracranial mass 
lesion rather than as an infectious process. Although the evolution 
of signs and symptoms is extremely variable, ranging from hours to 
weeks or even months, most patients present to the hospital 11–12 days 
following onset of symptoms. The classic clinical triad of headache, 
fever, and a focal neurologic deficit is present in <50% of cases. The 
most common symptom in patients with a brain abscess is headache, 
occurring in >75% of patients. The headache is often characterized as a 
constant, dull, aching sensation, either hemicranial or generalized, and 
it becomes progressively more severe and refractory to therapy. Fever is 
present in only 50% of patients at the time of diagnosis, and its absence 
should not exclude the diagnosis. The new onset of focal or generalized 
seizure activity is a presenting sign in 15–35% of patients. Focal neuro-
logic deficits including hemiparesis, aphasia, or visual field defects are 
part of the initial presentation in >60% of patients.
The clinical presentation of a brain abscess depends on its location, the 
nature of the primary infection if present, and the level of the ICP. Hemipa-
resis is the most common localizing sign of a frontal lobe abscess. A tempo-
ral lobe abscess may present with a disturbance of language (dysphasia) 
or an upper homonymous quadrantanopia. Nystagmus and ataxia are 
signs of a cerebellar abscess. Signs of raised ICP—papilledema, nausea 
and vomiting, and drowsiness or confusion—can be the dominant 
presentation of some abscesses, particularly those in the cerebellum. 
Meningismus is not present unless the abscess has ruptured into the 
ventricle or the infection has spread to the subarachnoid space.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis is made by neuroimaging studies. MRI (Fig. 135-1) is better 
than CT for demonstrating abscesses in the early (cerebritis) stages and 
is superior to CT for identifying abscesses in the posterior fossa. Cereb-
ritis appears on MRI as an area of low-signal intensity on T1-weighted 
images with irregular postgadolinium enhancement and as an area of 
increased signal intensity on T2-weighted images. Cerebritis is often 
not visualized by CT scan, but when present, appears as an area of 
hypodensity. On a contrast-enhanced CT scan, a mature brain abscess 
appears as a focal area of hypodensity surrounded by ring enhance-
ment with surrounding edema (hypodensity). On contrast-enhanced 
T1-weighted MRI, a mature brain abscess has a capsule that enhances 
surrounding a hypodense center and surrounded by a hypodense area 
of edema. On T2-weighted MRI, there is a hyperintense central area of 
pus surrounded by a well-defined hypointense capsule and a hyperin-
tense surrounding area of edema. It is important to recognize that the 
CT and MRI appearance, particularly of the capsule, may be altered by 
treatment with glucocorticoids. The distinction between a brain abscess 
and other focal CNS lesions such as primary or metastatic tumors may 
be facilitated by the use of diffusion-weighted imaging sequences on 
which a brain abscess typically shows increased signal due to restricted 
diffusion of the abscess cavity with corresponding low signal on appar-
ent diffusion coefficient images.
Microbiologic diagnosis of the etiologic agent is most accurately 
determined by Gram’s stain and culture of abscess material obtained by 
CT-guided stereotactic needle aspiration. Aerobic and anaerobic bacte-
rial cultures and mycobacterial and fungal cultures should be obtained. 
Up to 10% of patients will also have positive blood cultures. LP should 
not be performed in patients with known or suspected focal intracra-
nial infections such as abscess or empyema; CSF analysis contributes 
nothing to diagnosis or therapy, and LP increases the risk of herniation.
Additional laboratory studies may provide clues to the diagnosis of 
brain abscess in patients with a CNS mass lesion. About 50% of patients 
have a peripheral leukocytosis, 60% an elevated ESR, and 80% an elevated 
C-reactive protein. Blood cultures are positive in ~10% of cases overall but 
may be positive in >85% of patients with abscesses due to Listeria.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Conditions that can cause headache, fever, focal neurologic signs, and 
seizure activity include brain abscess, subdural empyema, bacterial 
meningitis, viral meningoencephalitis, superior sagittal sinus throm-
bosis, and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. When fever is absent, 
FIGURE 135-1  Pneumococcal brain abscess. Note that the abscess wall has hyperintense signal on the axial T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (A, black 
arrow), hypointense signal on the axial proton density images (B, black arrow), and enhances prominently after gadolinium administration on the coronal T1-weighted 
image (C). The abscess is surrounded by a large amount of vasogenic edema and has a small “daughter” abscess (C, white arrow). (Courtesy of Joseph Lurito, MD; 
with permission.)


--- PDF PAGE 1061 ---

CHAPTER 135 Brain Abscess and Empyema
1015
primary and metastatic brain tumors become the major differential 
diagnosis. Less commonly, cerebral infarction or hematoma can have 
an MRI or CT appearance resembling brain abscess.
TREATMENT
Brain Abscess
Optimal therapy of brain abscesses involves a combination of high-
dose parenteral antibiotics and neurosurgical drainage. Empirical 
therapy of community-acquired brain abscess in an immunocompe-
tent patient typically includes a third- or fourth-generation cephalo-
sporin (e.g., cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, or cefepime) and metronidazole 
(see Table 133-1 for antibiotic dosages). In patients with penetrat-
ing head trauma or recent neurosurgical procedures, treatment 
should include ceftazidime as the third-generation cephalosporin to 
enhance coverage of Pseudomonas spp. and vancomycin for coverage 
of staphylococci. Meropenem plus vancomycin also provides good 
coverage in this setting.
Aspiration and drainage of the abscess under stereotactic guidance 
are beneficial for both diagnosis and therapy. Empirical antibiotic 
coverage should be modified based on the results of Gram’s stain and 
culture of the abscess contents. Complete excision of a bacterial abscess 
via craniotomy or craniectomy is generally reserved for multiloculated 
abscesses or those in which stereotactic aspiration is unsuccessful.
Medical therapy alone is not optimal for treatment of brain 
abscess and should be reserved for patients whose abscesses are 
neurosurgically inaccessible, for patients with small (<2–3 cm) or 
nonencapsulated abscesses (cerebritis), and for patients whose con-
dition is too tenuous to allow performance of a neurosurgical 
procedure. All patients should receive a minimum of 6–8 weeks of 
parenteral antibiotic therapy. The role, if any, of supplemental oral 
antibiotic therapy following completion of a standard course of  
parenteral therapy has never been adequately studied.
In addition to surgical drainage and antibiotic therapy, patients 
should receive prophylactic anticonvulsant therapy because of the 
high risk (~35%) of focal or generalized seizures. Anticonvulsant 
therapy is continued for at least 3 months after resolution of the 
abscess, and decisions regarding withdrawal are then based on the 
EEG. If the EEG is abnormal, anticonvulsant therapy should be con-
tinued. If the EEG is normal, anticonvulsant therapy can be slowly 
withdrawn, with close follow-up and repeat EEG after the medica-
tion has been discontinued.
Glucocorticoids should not be given routinely to patients with 
brain abscesses. Intravenous dexamethasone therapy (10 mg every 
6 h) is usually reserved for patients with substantial periabscess 
edema and associated mass effect and increased ICP. Dexametha-
sone should be tapered as rapidly as possible to avoid delaying the 
natural process of encapsulation of the abscess.
Serial MRI or CT scans should be obtained on a monthly or twice-
monthly basis to document resolution of the abscess. More frequent stud-
ies (e.g., weekly) are probably warranted in the subset of patients who are 
receiving antibiotic therapy alone. A small amount of enhancement may 
remain for months after the abscess has been successfully treated.
■
■PROGNOSIS
The mortality rate of brain abscess has declined in parallel with the 
development of enhanced neuroimaging techniques, improved neuro-
surgical procedures for stereotactic aspiration, and improved antibiot-
ics. In modern series, the mortality rate is typically <15%. Significant 
sequelae, including seizures, persisting weakness, aphasia, or mental 
impairment, occur in ≥20% of survivors.
NONBACTERIAL CAUSES OF INFECTIOUS 
FOCAL CNS LESIONS
■
■ETIOLOGY
Neurocysticercosis is the most common parasitic disease of the CNS 
worldwide. Humans acquire cysticercosis by the ingestion of food 
contaminated with the eggs of the parasite T. solium. Toxoplasmosis is 
a parasitic disease caused by T. gondii and acquired from the ingestion 
of undercooked meat and from handling cat feces.
■
■CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The most common manifestation of neurocysticercosis is new-onset 
partial seizures with or without secondary generalization. Cysticerci 
may develop in the brain parenchyma and cause seizures or focal 
neurologic deficits. When present in the subarachnoid or ventricular 
spaces, cysticerci can produce increased ICP by interference with CSF 
flow. Spinal cysticerci can mimic the presentation of intraspinal tumors. 
When the cysticerci first lodge in the brain, they frequently cause little 
in the way of an inflammatory response. As the cysticercal cyst degen-
erates, it elicits an inflammatory response that may present clinically 
as a seizure. Eventually the cyst dies, a process that may take several 
years and is typically associated with resolution of the inflammatory 
response and, often, abatement of seizures.
Primary Toxoplasma infection is often asymptomatic. However, dur-
ing this phase parasites may spread to the CNS, where they become 
latent. Reactivation of CNS infection is almost exclusively associated 
with immunocompromised hosts, particularly those with HIV infec-
tion. During this phase patients present with headache, fever, seizures, 
and focal neurologic deficits.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
The lesions of neurocysticercosis are readily visualized by MRI or 
CT scans. Lesions with viable parasites appear as cystic lesions. The 
scolex can often be visualized on MRI. Lesions may appear as contrast- 
enhancing lesions surrounded by edema. A very early sign of cyst 
death is hypointensity of the vesicular fluid on T2-weighted images 
when compared with CSF. Parenchymal brain calcifications are the 
most common finding and evidence that the parasite is no longer 
viable. MRI findings of toxoplasmosis consist of multiple lesions in 
the deep white matter, the thalamus, and basal ganglia and at the 
gray-white junction in the cerebral hemispheres. With contrast admin-
istration, the majority of the lesions enhance in a ringed, nodular, or 
homogeneous pattern and are surrounded by edema. In the presence 
of the characteristic neuroimaging abnormalities of T. gondii infection, 
serum IgG antibody to T. gondii should be obtained and, when positive, 
the patient should be treated.
TREATMENT
Infectious Focal CNS Lesions
Anticonvulsant therapy is initiated when the patient with neuro-
cysticercosis presents with a seizure. There is controversy about 
whether or not anthelmintic therapy should be given to all patients, 
and recommendations are based on the stage of the lesion. Cysticerci 
appearing as cystic lesions in the brain parenchyma with or without 
pericystic edema or in the subarachnoid space at the convexity 
of the cerebral hemispheres should be treated with anticysticidal 
therapy. Cysticidal drugs accelerate the destruction of the para-
sites, resulting in a faster resolution of the infection. Albendazole 
and praziquantel are used in the treatment of neurocysticercosis. 
Approximately 85% of parenchymal cysts are destroyed by a single 
course of albendazole, and ~75% are destroyed by a single course 
of praziquantel. The dose of albendazole is 15 mg/kg per day in 
two doses for 8 days. The dose of praziquantel is 50 mg/kg per 
day for 15 days, although a number of other dosage regimens are 
also frequently cited. Prednisone or dexamethasone is given with 
anticysticidal therapy to reduce the host inflammatory response to 
degenerating parasites. Only cysts in the vesicular stage, where the 
cyst contains living larva (scolex seen on CT or MRI), and cysts in 
the colloidal stage as the larva degnerates (edema surrounds the 
lesion), are treated with anticysticidal therapy. Some, but not all, 
experts recommend anticysticidal therapy for lesions that are in the 
“granulo-nodular” stage (surrounded by a contrast-enhancing ring). 
There is universal agreement that calcified lesions do not need to 
be treated with anticysticidal therapy. Antiepileptic therapy can be 
stopped once the follow-up CT scan shows resolution of the lesion. 


--- PDF PAGE 1062 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
1016
Long-term antiepileptic therapy is recommended when seizures 
occur after resolution of edema and resorption or calcification of the 
degenerating cyst.
CNS toxoplasmosis is treated with a combination of sulfadiazine, 
1.5–2.0 g orally qid, plus pyrimethamine, 100 mg orally to load, then 
75–100 mg orally qd, plus folinic acid, 10–15 mg orally qd. Folinic 
acid is added to the regimen to prevent megaloblastic anemia. Ther-
apy is continued until there is no evidence of active disease on neu-
roimaging studies, which typically takes at least 6 weeks, and then 
the dose of sulfadiazine is reduced to 2–4 g/d and pyrimethamine 
to 50 mg/d. Clindamycin plus pyrimethamine is an alternative 
therapy for patients who cannot tolerate sulfadiazine, but the com-
bination of pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine is more effective.
■
■SUBDURAL EMPYEMA
A subdural empyema (SDE) is a collection of pus between the dura and 
arachnoid membranes (Fig. 135-2).
■
■EPIDEMIOLOGY
SDE is a rare disorder that accounts for 15–25% of focal suppurative 
CNS infections. Sinusitis is the most common predisposing condition 
and typically involves the frontal sinuses, either alone or in combi-
nation with the ethmoid and maxillary sinuses. Sinusitis-associated 
empyema has a striking predilection for young males, possibly reflect-
ing sex-related differences in sinus anatomy and development. It has 
been suggested that SDE may complicate 1–2% of cases of frontal 
sinusitis severe enough to require hospitalization. As a consequence 
of this epidemiology, SDE shows an ~3:1 male/female predominance, 
with 70% of cases occurring in the second and third decades of life. SDE 
may also develop as a complication of head trauma or neurosurgery. 
Secondary infection of a subdural effusion may also result in empyema, 
although secondary infection of hematomas, in the absence of a prior 
neurosurgical procedure, is rare.
■
■ETIOLOGY
Aerobic and anaerobic streptococci, staphylococci, Enterobacteriaceae, 
and anaerobic bacteria are the most common causative organisms of 
sinusitis-associated SDE. Staphylococci and gram-negative bacilli are 
often the etiologic organisms when SDE follows neurosurgical proce-
dures or head trauma. Up to one-third of cases are culture-negative, 
possibly reflecting difficulty in obtaining adequate anaerobic cultures.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Sinusitis-associated SDE develops as a result of either retrograde 
spread of infection from septic thrombophlebitis of the mucosal veins 
draining the sinuses or contiguous spread of infection to the brain from 
osteomyelitis in the posterior wall of the frontal or other sinuses. SDE 
may also develop from direct introduction of bacteria into the subdural 
space as a complication of a neurosurgical procedure. The evolution of 
SDE can be extremely rapid because the subdural space is a large com-
partment that offers few mechanical barriers to the spread of infection. 
In patients with sinusitis-associated SDE, suppuration typically begins 
in the upper and anterior portions of one cerebral hemisphere and then 
extends posteriorly. SDE is often associated with other intracranial 
infections, including epidural empyema (40%), cortical thrombophlebi-
tis (35%), and intracranial abscess or cerebritis (>25%). Cortical venous 
infarction produces necrosis of underlying cerebral cortex and subcorti-
cal white matter, with focal neurologic deficits and seizures (see below).
■
■CLINICAL PRESENTATION
A patient with SDE typically presents with fever and a progressively 
worsening headache. The diagnosis of SDE should always be sus-
pected in a patient with known sinusitis who presents with new CNS 
signs or symptoms. Patients with underlying sinusitis frequently have 
symptoms related to this infection. As the infection progresses, focal 
neurologic deficits, seizures, nuchal rigidity, and signs of increased 
ICP commonly occur. Headache is the most common complaint at the 
time of presentation; initially it is localized to the side of the subdural 
infection, but then it becomes more severe and generalized. Contralat-
eral hemiparesis or hemiplegia is the most common focal neurologic 
deficit and can occur from the direct effects of the SDE on the cortex or 
as a consequence of venous infarction. Seizures begin as partial motor 
seizures that then become secondarily generalized. Seizures may be 
due to the direct irritative effect of the SDE on the underlying cortex or 
result from cortical venous infarction (see above). In untreated SDE, the 
increasing mass effect and increase in ICP cause progressive deteriora-
tion in consciousness, leading ultimately to coma.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
MRI (Fig. 135-3) is superior to CT in identifying SDE and any associ-
ated intracranial infections. The administration of gadolinium greatly 
improves diagnosis by enhancing the rim of the empyema and allow-
ing the empyema to be clearly delineated from the underlying brain 
parenchyma. Cranial MRI is also extremely valuable in identifying 
sinusitis, other focal CNS infections, cortical venous infarction, cerebral 
edema, and cerebritis. CT may show a crescent-shaped hypodense 
lesion over one or both hemispheres or in the interhemispheric fissure. 
Frequently the degree of mass effect, exemplified by midline shift, ven-
tricular compression, and sulcal effacement, is far out of proportion to 
the mass of the SDE.
CSF examination should be avoided in patients with known or 
suspected SDE because it adds no useful information and is associated 
with the risk of cerebral herniation.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of the combination of headache, fever, focal 
neurologic signs, and seizure activity that progresses rapidly to an 
altered level of consciousness includes subdural hematoma, bacterial 
meningitis, viral encephalitis, brain abscess, superior sagittal sinus 
thrombosis, and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. The presence 
of nuchal rigidity is unusual with brain abscess or epidural empyema 
and should suggest the possibility of SDE when associated with signifi-
cant focal neurologic signs and fever. Patients with bacterial meningitis 
also have nuchal rigidity but do not typically have focal deficits of the 
severity seen with SDE.
TREATMENT
Subdural Empyema
SDE is a medical emergency. Emergent neurosurgical evacuation of 
the empyema, either through craniotomy, craniectomy, or burr-hole 
drainage, is the definitive step in the management of this infec-
tion. Empirical antimicrobial therapy for community-acquired SDE 
should include a combination of a third-generation cephalosporin 
Subdural
empyema
Thrombosed
veins
Arachnoid
Dura mater
FIGURE 135-2  Subdural empyema.


--- PDF PAGE 1063 ---

CHAPTER 135 Brain Abscess and Empyema
1017
(e.g., cefotaxime or ceftriaxone), vancomycin, and metronidazole 
(see Table 133-1 for dosages). Patients with hospital-acquired SDE 
may have infections due to Pseudomonas spp. or MRSA and should 
receive coverage with a carbapenem (e.g., meropenem) and van-
comycin. Metronidazole is not necessary for antianaerobic ther-
apy when meropenem is being used. Parenteral antibiotic therapy 
should be continued for a minimum of 3–4 weeks after SDE drain-
age. Patients with associated cranial osteomyelitis may require 
longer therapy. Specific diagnosis of the etiologic organisms is made 
based on Gram’s stain and culture of fluid obtained via either burr 
holes or craniotomy; the initial empirical antibiotic coverage can be 
modified accordingly.
■
■PROGNOSIS
Prognosis is influenced by the level of consciousness of the patient at 
the time of hospital presentation, the size of the empyema, and the 
speed with which therapy is instituted. Long-term neurologic sequelae, 
which include seizures and hemiparesis, occur in up to 50% of cases.
CRANIAL EPIDURAL ABSCESS
Cranial epidural abscess is a suppurative infection occurring in the 
potential space between the inner skull table and dura (Fig. 135-4).
■
■ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Cranial epidural abscess is less common than either brain abscess or 
SDE and accounts for <2% of focal suppurative CNS infections. A 
cranial epidural abscess develops as a complication of a craniotomy 
or compound skull fracture or as a result of spread of infection from 
the frontal sinuses, middle ear, mastoid, or orbit. An epidural abscess 
may develop contiguous to an area of osteomyelitis, when craniotomy 
is complicated by infection of the wound or bone flap, or as a result 
of direct infection of the epidural space. Infection in the frontal sinus, 
middle ear, mastoid, or orbit can reach the epidural space through 
retrograde spread of infection from septic thrombophlebitis in the 
emissary veins that drain these areas or by way of direct spread of 
infection through areas of osteomyelitis. Unlike the subdural space, 
the epidural space is really a potential rather than an actual compart-
ment. The dura is normally tightly adherent to the inner skull table, 
and infection must dissect the dura away from the skull table as it 
spreads. As a result, epidural abscesses are often smaller than SDEs. 
Cranial epidural abscesses, unlike brain abscesses, only rarely result 
from hematogenous spread of infection from extracranial primary sites. 
The bacteriology of a cranial epidural abscess is similar to that of SDE 
(see above). The etiologic organisms of an epidural abscess that arises 
from frontal sinusitis, middle-ear infections, or mastoiditis are usually 
streptococci or anaerobic organisms. Staphylococci or gram-negative 
organisms are the usual cause of an epidural abscess that develops as a 
complication of craniotomy or compound skull fracture.
■
■CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Patients present with fever (60%), headache (40%), nuchal rigidity 
(35%), seizures (10%), and focal deficits (5%). Development of symp-
toms may be insidious, as the empyema usually enlarges slowly in the 
confined anatomic space between the dura and the inner table of the 
skull. Periorbital edema and Pott’s puffy tumor, reflecting underlying 
associated frontal bone osteomyelitis, are present in ~40%. In patients 
with a recent neurosurgical procedure, wound infection is invariably 
present, but other symptoms may be subtle and can include altered 
mental status (45%), fever (35%), and headache (20%). The diagnosis 
should be considered when fever and headache follow recent head 
trauma or occur in the setting of frontal sinusitis, mastoiditis, or otitis 
media.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
Cranial MRI with gadolinium enhancement is the procedure of choice 
to demonstrate a cranial epidural abscess. The sensitivity of CT is 
limited by the presence of signal artifacts arising from the bone of the 
inner skull table. The CT appearance of an epidural empyema is that 
of a lens or crescent-shaped hypodense extraaxial lesion. On MRI, an 
epidural empyema appears as a lentiform or crescent-shaped fluid col-
lection that is hyperintense compared to CSF on T2-weighted images. 
On T1-weighted images, the fluid collection may be either isointense 
or hypointense compared to brain. Following the administration of 
gadolinium, there is linear enhancement of the dura on T1-weighted 
images. In distinction to subdural empyema, signs of mass effect or 
other parenchymal abnormalities are uncommon.
FIGURE 135-3  Subdural empyema. There is marked enhancement of the dura and leptomeninges (A, B, straight arrows) along the left medial hemisphere. The pus 
is hypointense on T1-weighted images (A, B) but markedly hyperintense on the proton density–weighted (C, curved arrow) image. (Courtesy of Joseph Lurito, MD; with 
permission.)
Epidural abscess
FIGURE 135-4  Cranial epidural abscess is a collection of pus between the dura 
and the inner table of the skull.


--- PDF PAGE 1064 ---

PART 5
Infectious Diseases
1018
Superior
ophthalmic
vein
Inferior
ophthalmic
vein
Cavernous
sinus
Internal
jugular
vein
Sigmoid
sinus
Straight
sinus
Transverse
sinus
Superior
sagittal sinus
FIGURE 135-5  Anatomy of the cerebral venous sinuses.
TREATMENT
Epidural Abscess
Immediate neurosurgical drainage is indicated. Empirical antimi-
crobial therapy, pending the results of Gram’s stain and culture of 
the purulent material obtained at surgery, should include a combi-
nation of a third-generation cephalosporin, vancomycin, and met-
ronidazole (see Table 133-1). Ceftazidime or meropenem should be 
substituted for ceftriaxone or cefotaxime in neurosurgical patients. 
Metronidazole is not necessary for antianaerobic coverage in patients 
receiving meropenem. When the organism has been identified, anti-
microbial therapy can be modified accordingly. Antibiotics should 
be continued for 3–6 weeks after surgical drainage. Patients with 
associated osteomyelitis may require additional therapy.
■
■PROGNOSIS
The mortality rate is <5% in modern series, and full recovery is the rule 
in most survivors.
SUPPURATIVE THROMBOPHLEBITIS
■
■DEFINITION
Suppurative intracranial thrombophlebitis is septic venous thrombosis 
of cortical veins and sinuses. This may occur as a complication of bac-
terial meningitis; SDE; epidural abscess; or infection in the skin of the 
face, paranasal sinuses, middle ear, or mastoid.
■
■ANATOMY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The cerebral veins and venous sinuses have no valves; therefore, 
blood within them can flow in either direction. The superior sagittal 
sinus is the largest of the venous sinuses (Fig. 135-5). It receives blood 
from the frontal, parietal, and occipital superior cerebral veins and the 
diploic veins, which communicate with the meningeal veins. Bacterial 
meningitis is a common predisposing condition for septic thrombosis 
of the superior sagittal sinus. The diploic veins, which drain into the 
superior sagittal sinus, provide a route for the spread of infection from 
the meninges, especially in cases where there is purulent exudate near 
areas of the superior sagittal sinus. Infection can also spread to the supe-
rior sagittal sinus from nearby SDE or epidural abscess. Dehydration 
from vomiting, hypercoagulable states, and immunologic abnormali-
ties, including the presence of circulating antiphospholipid antibodies, 
also contribute to cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. Thrombosis may 
extend from one sinus to another, and at autopsy, thrombi of different 
histologic ages can often be detected in several sinuses. Thrombosis of 
the superior sagittal sinus is often associated with thrombosis of supe-
rior cortical veins and small parenchymal hemorrhages.
The superior sagittal sinus drains into the transverse sinuses 
(Fig. 135-5). The transverse sinuses also receive venous drainage from 
small veins from both the middle ear and mastoid cells. The transverse 
sinus becomes the sigmoid sinus before draining into the internal 
jugular vein. Septic transverse/sigmoid sinus thrombosis can be a 
complication of acute and chronic otitis media or mastoiditis. Infec-
tion spreads from the mastoid air cells to the transverse sinus via the 
emissary veins or by direct invasion. The cavernous sinuses are inferior 
to the superior sagittal sinus at the base of the skull. The cavernous 
sinuses receive blood from the facial veins via the superior and infe-
rior ophthalmic veins. Bacteria in the facial veins enter the cavernous 
sinus via these veins. Bacteria in the sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses 
can spread to the cavernous sinuses via the small emissary veins. The 
sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses are the most common sites of primary 
infection resulting in septic cavernous sinus thrombosis.
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Septic thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus presents with headache, 
fever, nausea and vomiting, confusion, and focal or generalized 
seizures. There may be a rapid development of stupor and coma. 
Weakness of the lower extremities with bilateral Babinski’s signs or 
hemiparesis is often present. When superior sagittal sinus thrombosis 
occurs as a complication of bacterial meningitis, nuchal rigidity and 
Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs may be present.
The oculomotor nerve, the trochlear nerve, the abducens nerve, the 
ophthalmic and maxillary branches of the trigeminal nerve, and the inter-
nal carotid artery all pass through the cavernous sinus (see Fig. 433-4). 
The symptoms of septic cavernous sinus thrombosis are fever, headache, 
frontal and retroorbital pain, and diplopia. The classic signs are ptosis, 
proptosis, chemosis, and extraocular dysmotility due to deficits of 
cranial nerves III, IV, and VI; hyperesthesia of the ophthalmic and max-
illary divisions of the fifth cranial nerve and a decreased corneal reflex 
may be detected. There may be evidence of dilated, tortuous retinal 
veins and papilledema.
Headache and earache are the most frequent symptoms of trans-
verse sinus thrombosis. A transverse sinus thrombosis may also present 
with otitis media, sixth nerve palsy, and retroorbital or facial pain 
(Gradenigo’s syndrome). Sigmoid sinus and internal jugular vein throm-
bosis may present with neck pain.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of septic venous sinus thrombosis is suggested by an 
absent flow void within the affected venous sinus on MRI and con-
firmed by magnetic resonance venography, CT angiogram, or the 
venous phase of cerebral angiography. The diagnosis of thrombophle-
bitis of intracerebral and meningeal veins is suggested by the presence 
of intracerebral hemorrhage but requires cerebral angiography for 
definitive diagnosis.
TREATMENT
Suppurative Thrombophlebitis
Septic venous sinus thrombosis is treated with antibiotics, hydra-
tion, and removal of infected tissue and thrombus in septic lateral 
or cavernous sinus thrombosis. The choice of antimicrobial ther-
apy is based on the bacteria responsible for the predisposing or 
associated condition. Optimal duration of therapy is unknown, 
but antibiotics are usually continued for 6 weeks or until there is 
radiographic evidence of resolution of thrombosis. Anticoagulation 
with dose-adjusted intravenous heparin is recommended for aseptic 
venous sinus thrombosis and in the treatment of septic venous sinus 
thrombosis complicating bacterial meningitis in patients who have 
progressive neurologic deterioration despite antimicrobial therapy 
and intravenous fluids. The presence of a small intracerebral hem-
orrhage from septic thrombophlebitis is not an absolute contrain-
dication to heparin therapy. Successful management of aseptic 
venous sinus thrombosis has been reported with surgical thrombec-
tomy, catheter-directed urokinase therapy, and a combination of 


================================================================================
Ch415 Approach to Patient with Neurologic Disease
Pages 3071-3075
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3071 ---

Neurologic Disorders
PART 13
Section 1  Diagnosis of Neurologic Disorders
so, are motor or sensory nerves primarily affected, or is a lesion in the 
neuromuscular junction or muscle more likely?
The first clues to defining the anatomic area of involvement appear 
in the history, and the examination is then directed to confirm or rule 
out these impressions and to clarify uncertainties. A more detailed 
examination of a particular region of the CNS or PNS is often indi-
cated. For example, the examination of a patient who presents with 
a history of ascending paresthesias and weakness should be directed 
toward deciding, among other things, if the lesion is in the spinal cord 
or peripheral nerves. Focal back pain, a spinal cord sensory level, and 
incontinence suggest a spinal cord origin, whereas a stocking-glove 
pattern of sensory loss suggests peripheral nerve disease; areflexia 
usually indicates peripheral neuropathy but may also be present with 
spinal shock in acute spinal cord disorders.
Deciding “where the lesion is” accomplishes the task of limiting 
the possible etiologies to a manageable, finite number. In addition, 
this strategy safeguards against making serious errors. Symptoms of 
recurrent vertigo, diplopia, and nystagmus should not trigger “mul-
tiple sclerosis” as an answer (etiology) but “brainstem” or “pons” 
(location); then a diagnosis of brainstem arteriovenous malformation 
will not be missed for lack of consideration. Similarly, the combination 
of optic neuritis and spastic ataxic paraparesis suggests optic nerve and 
spinal cord disease; multiple sclerosis (MS), CNS syphilis, and vitamin 
B12 deficiency are treatable disorders that can produce this syndrome. 
Once the question, “Where is the lesion?” is answered, then the ques-
tion “What is the lesion?” can be addressed.
■
■IDENTIFY THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Clues to the pathophysiology of the disease process may also be pres-
ent in the history. Primary neuronal (gray matter) disorders often pres-
ent as early cognitive disturbances, movement disorders, or seizures, 
whereas white matter involvement produces “long tract” disorders 
of motor, sensory, visual, and cerebellar pathways. Progressive and 
symmetric symptoms often have a metabolic or degenerative origin; 
in such cases lesions are usually not sharply circumscribed. Thus, 
a patient with paraparesis and a clear spinal cord sensory level is 
unlikely to have vitamin B12 deficiency as the explanation. A Lhermitte 
symptom (electric shock–like sensations evoked by neck flexion) is due 
to ectopic impulse generation in white matter pathways and occurs 
with demyelination in the cervical spinal cord; among many possible 
causes, this symptom may indicate MS in a young adult or compres-
sive cervical spondylosis in an older person. Symptoms that worsen 
after exposure to heat or exercise may indicate conduction block in 
demyelinated axons, as occurs in MS. A patient with recurrent episodes 
of diplopia and dysarthria associated with exercise or fatigue may 
have a disorder of neuromuscular transmission such as myasthenia 
gravis. Slowly advancing visual scotoma with luminous edges, termed 
fortification spectra, indicates spreading cortical depression, typically 
with migraine.
THE NEUROLOGIC HISTORY
Attention to the description of the symptoms experienced by the 
patient and substantiated by family members and others often permits 
an accurate localization and determination of the probable cause, even 
before the neurologic examination is performed. The history also helps 
focus the neurologic examination that follows. Each complaint should 
be pursued as far as possible to identify the location of the lesion, 
the likely underlying pathophysiology, and potential etiologies. For 
example, a patient complains of weakness of the right arm. What are 
the associated features? Does the patient have difficulty with brushing 
hair or reaching upward (proximal) or buttoning buttons or opening a 
twist-top bottle (distal)? Negative associations may also be crucial. A 
patient with a right hemiparesis without a language deficit likely has a 
lesion (internal capsule, brainstem, or spinal cord) different from that of 
a patient with a right hemiparesis and aphasia (left hemisphere). Other 
pertinent features of the history include the following:
Neurologic diseases are common and costly. According to estimates by 
the World Health Organization, neurologic disorders affect over 1 billion 
people worldwide, constitute 12% of the global burden of disease, 
and cause 14% of global deaths (Table 415-1). These numbers are only 
expected to increase as the world’s population ages. Because therapies 
now exist for many neurologic disorders, a skillful approach to diagno-
sis is essential. Errors commonly result from an overreliance on costly 
neuroimaging procedures and laboratory tests, which, while useful, 
do not substitute for an adequate history and examination. The proper 
approach begins with the patient and focuses the clinical problem first 
in anatomic and then in pathophysiologic terms; only then should a 
specific neurologic diagnosis be entertained. This method ensures that 
technology is judiciously applied, a correct diagnosis is established in 
an efficient manner, and treatment is promptly initiated.
THE NEUROLOGIC METHOD
■
■DEFINE THE ANATOMY
The first priority is to identify the region of the nervous system that is 
likely to be responsible for the symptoms. Can the disorder be mapped 
to one specific location, is it multifocal, or is a diffuse process present? 
Are the symptoms restricted to the nervous system, or do they arise in 
the context of a systemic illness? Is the problem in the central nervous 
system (CNS), the peripheral nervous system (PNS), or both? In the 
CNS, is the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, brainstem, cerebellum, or 
spinal cord responsible? Are the pain-sensitive meninges involved? 
In the PNS, could the disorder be located in peripheral nerves and, if 
Approach to the Patient  
with Neurologic Disease
Daniel H. Lowenstein, Joseph B. Martin,   
Stephen L. Hauser 
415
TABLE 415-1  Global Disability-Adjusted Life-Years (DALYs) and 
Number of Annual Deaths for Selected Neurologic Disorders in 2015
DISORDER
DALYs
DEATHS
Low back and neck pain
94,941,000
—
Cerebrovascular 
diseases
118,627,000
6,326,000
Meningitis and 
encephalitis
33,848,000
529,000
Migraine
32,898,000
—
Epilepsy
12,418,000
125,000
Dementia
23,779,000
1,908,000
Parkinson’s disease
2,059,000
117,000
% of total DALYs or 
deaths for all causes 
that are neurologic
9.7%
16.3%
% change of DALYs for 
neurologic disorders 
between 2005 and 
2015
17.0%
35.2%
Source: GBD 2015 DALYs and HALE Collaborators: Global, Regional, and National 
Disability-Adjusted Life-Years (Dalys) for 315 Diseases and Injuries and Healthy 
Life Expectancy (HALE), 1990–2015: A Systematic Analysis for the Global Burden 
of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 388:1603, 2016; and GBD 2015 Mortality and 
Causes of Death Collaborators: Global, Regional, and National Life Expectancy, 
All-Cause Mortality, and Cause-Specific Mortality for 249 Causes of Death,  
1980–2015: A Systematic Analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015.
Lancet 388:1459, 2016.


--- PDF PAGE 3072 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3026 1.	 Temporal course of the illness. It is important to determine the precise 
time of appearance and rate of progression of the symptoms expe-
rienced by the patient. The rapid onset of a neurologic complaint, 
occurring within seconds or minutes, usually indicates a vascular 
event, a seizure, or migraine. The onset of sensory symptoms located 
in one extremity that spread over a few seconds to adjacent portions 
of that extremity and then to the other regions of the body sug-
gests a seizure. A similar but slower temporal march of symptoms 
accompanied by headache, nausea, or visual disturbance suggests 
migraine. Less well-localized symptoms that are either sudden or 
more gradual in onset point to the possibility of a transient ischemic 
attack (TIA). The presence of “positive” sensory symptoms (e.g., 
tingling or sensations that are difficult to describe) or involuntary 
motor movements suggests a seizure; in contrast, transient loss of 
function (negative symptoms) suggests a TIA. A stuttering onset 
where symptoms appear, stabilize, and then progress over hours or 
days also suggests cerebrovascular disease; an additional history of 
transient remission or regression indicates that the process is more 
likely due to ischemia rather than hemorrhage. A gradual evolution 
of symptoms over hours or days suggests a toxic, metabolic, infec-
tious, or inflammatory process. Progressing symptoms associated 
with the systemic manifestations of fever, stiff neck, and altered 
level of consciousness imply an infectious process. Relapsing and 
remitting symptoms involving different levels of the nervous system 
suggest MS or other inflammatory processes. Slowly progressive 
symptoms without remissions are characteristic of neurodegen-
erative disorders, chronic infections, gradual intoxications, and 
neoplasms.
2.	 Patients’ descriptions of the complaint. The same words often mean dif-
ferent things to different patients. “Dizziness” may imply impend-
ing syncope, a sense of disequilibrium, or true spinning vertigo. 
“Numbness” may mean a complete loss of feeling, a positive sen-
sation such as tingling, or even weakness. “Blurred vision” may 
be used to describe unilateral visual loss, as in transient monocular 
blindness, or diplopia. The interpretation of the true meaning of the 
words used by patients to describe symptoms obviously becomes 
even more complex when there are differences in primary languages 
and cultures.
3.	 Corroboration of the history by others. It is almost always helpful to 
obtain additional information from family, friends, or other observ-
ers to corroborate or expand the patient’s description. Memory loss, 
aphasia, loss of insight, intoxication, and other factors may impair 
the patient’s capacity to communicate normally with the examiner 
or prevent openness about factors that have contributed to the 
illness. Episodes of loss of consciousness necessitate that details be 
sought from observers to ascertain precisely what has happened 
during the event.
4.	 Family history. Many neurologic disorders have an underlying 
genetic component. The presence of a Mendelian disorder, such as 
Huntington’s disease or Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy, is often 
obvious if family data are available. More detailed questions about 
family history are often necessary in polygenic disorders such as 
MS, migraine, and many types of epilepsy. It is important to elicit 
family history about all illnesses, in addition to neurologic and 
psychiatric disorders. A familial propensity to hypertension or heart 
disease is relevant in a patient who presents with a stroke. There 
are numerous inherited neurologic diseases that are associated with 
multisystem manifestations that may provide clues to the correct 
diagnosis (e.g., neurofibromatosis, Wilson’s disease, mitochondrial 
disorders).
5.	 Medical illnesses. Many neurologic diseases occur in the context of 
systemic disorders. Diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and abnormali-
ties of blood lipids predispose to cerebrovascular disease. A solitary 
mass lesion in the brain may be an abscess in a patient with valvular 
heart disease, a primary hemorrhage in a patient with a coagulop-
athy, a lymphoma or toxoplasmosis in a patient with AIDS, or a 
metastasis in a patient with underlying cancer. Patients with malig-
nancy may also present with a neurologic paraneoplastic syndrome 
(Chap. 90) or complications from chemotherapy or radiotherapy. 
Marfan’s syndrome and related collagen disorders predispose to 
dissection of the cranial arteries and aneurysmal subarachnoid hem-
orrhage; the latter may also occur with polycystic kidney disease. 
Various neurologic disorders occur with dysthyroid states or other 
endocrinopathies. It is especially important to look for the presence 
of systemic diseases in patients with peripheral neuropathy. Most 
patients with coma in a hospital setting have a metabolic, toxic, or 
infectious cause.
6.	 Drug use and abuse and toxin exposure. It is essential to inquire about 
the history of drug use, both prescribed and illicit. Sedatives, anti-
depressants, and other psychoactive medications are frequently 
associated with acute confusional states, especially in the elderly. 
Aminoglycoside antibiotics may exacerbate symptoms of weakness 
in patients with disorders of neuromuscular transmission, such as 
myasthenia gravis, and may cause dizziness secondary to ototoxic-
ity. Vincristine and other antineoplastic drugs can cause peripheral 
neuropathy, and immunosuppressive agents such as cyclosporine 
can produce encephalopathy. Excessive vitamin ingestion can lead 
to disease; examples include vitamin A and pseudotumor cerebri or 
pyridoxine and peripheral neuropathy. Many patients are unaware 
that over-the-counter sleeping pills, cold preparations, and diet 
pills are actually drugs. Alcohol, the most prevalent neurotoxin, is 
often not recognized as such by patients, and other drugs of abuse 
such as cocaine and heroin can cause a wide range of neurologic 
abnormalities. A history of environmental or industrial exposure 
to neurotoxins may provide an essential clue; consultation with the 
patient’s coworkers or employer may be required.
7.	 Formulating an impression of the patient. Use the opportunity while 
taking the history to form an impression of the patient. Is the infor-
mation forthcoming, or does it take a circuitous course? Is there 
evidence of anxiety, depression, or hypochondriasis? Are there any 
clues to problems with language, memory, insight, comportment, or 
behavior? The neurologic assessment begins as soon as the patient 
comes into the room and the first introduction is made.
THE NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION
The neurologic examination is challenging and complex; it has many 
components and includes a number of skills that can be mastered 
only through repeated use of the same techniques on a large number 
of individuals with and without neurologic disease. Mastery of the 
complete neurologic examination is usually important only for phy-
sicians in neurology and associated specialties. However, knowledge 
of the basics of the examination, especially those components that are 
effective in screening for neurologic dysfunction, is essential for all 
clinicians, especially generalists.
There is no single, universally accepted sequence of the examina-
tion that must be followed, but most clinicians begin with assessment 
of mental status followed by the cranial nerves (CN), motor system, 
reflexes, sensory system, coordination, and gait. Whether the examina-
tion is basic or comprehensive, it is essential that it is performed in an 
orderly and systematic fashion to avoid errors and serious omissions. 
Thus, the best way to learn and gain expertise in the examination is to 
choose one’s own approach and practice it frequently and do it in the 
same exact sequence each time.
The detailed description that follows describes the more commonly 
used parts of the neurologic examination, with a particular emphasis 
on the components that are considered most helpful for the assess-
ment of common neurologic problems. Each section also includes a 
brief description of the minimal examination necessary to adequately 
screen for abnormalities in a patient who has no symptoms suggesting 
neurologic dysfunction. A screening examination done in this way can 
be completed in 3–5 min. Video demonstrations of the neurologic screening 
examination (V6) and the detailed neurologic examination (V7) can be found 
in the Harrison’s Video Collection included in this textbook.
Several additional points about the examination are worth noting. 
First, in recording observations, it is important to describe what is 
found rather than to apply a poorly defined medical term (e.g., “patient 
groans to sternal rub” rather than “obtunded”). Second, subtle CNS 
abnormalities are best detected by carefully comparing a patient’s 


--- PDF PAGE 3073 ---

CHAPTER 415 Approach to the Patient with Neurologic Disease 
3027
performance on tasks that require simultaneous activation of both 
cerebral hemispheres (e.g., eliciting a pronator drift of an outstretched 
arm with the eyes closed; extinction on one side of bilaterally applied 
light touch, also with eyes closed; or decreased arm swing or a slight 
asymmetry when walking). Third, if the patient’s complaint is brought 
on by some activity, reproduce the activity in the office. If the complaint 
is of dizziness when the head is turned in one direction, have the 
patient do this and also look for associated signs on examination (e.g., 
nystagmus or dysmetria). If pain occurs after walking two blocks, have 
the patient leave the office and walk this distance and immediately 
return, and repeat the relevant parts of the examination. Finally, the use 
of tests that are individually tailored to the patient’s problem can be of 
value in assessing changes over time. Tests of walking a 7.5-m (25-ft) 
distance (normal, 5–6 s; note assistance, if any), repetitive finger or toe 
tapping (normal, 20–25 taps in 5 s), or handwriting are examples.
■
■MENTAL STATUS EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: During the interview, look for difficulties with com-
munication and determine whether the patient has recall and insight into 
recent and past events.
The mental status examination is under way as soon as the physician 
begins observing and speaking with the patient. If the history raises 
any concern for abnormalities of higher cortical function or if cognitive 
problems are observed during the interview, then detailed testing of the 
mental status is indicated. The patient’s ability to understand the lan-
guage used for the examination, cultural background, educational expe-
rience, sensory or motor problems, or comorbid conditions needs to be 
factored into the applicability of the tests and interpretation of results.
The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) is a standardized 
screening examination of cognitive function that is extremely easy 
to administer and takes <10 min to complete (Chap. 25). Using age- 
adjusted values for defining normal performance, the test is ~85% 
sensitive and 85% specific for making the diagnosis of dementia that 
is moderate or severe, especially in educated patients. When there is 
sufficient time available, the MMSE is one of the best methods for doc-
umenting the current mental status of the patient, and this is especially 
useful as a baseline assessment to which future scores of the MMSE 
can be compared.
Individual elements of the mental status examination can be sub-
divided into level of consciousness, orientation, speech and language, 
memory, fund of information, insight and judgment, abstract thought, 
and calculations.
Level of consciousness is the patient’s relative state of awareness of the 
self and the environment, and ranges from fully awake to comatose. 
When the patient is not fully awake, the examiner should describe 
the responses to the minimum stimulus necessary to elicit a reaction, 
ranging from verbal commands to a brief, painful stimulus such as a 
squeeze of the trapezius muscle. Responses that are directed toward 
the stimulus and signify some degree of intact cerebral function (e.g., 
opening the eyes and looking at the examiner or reaching to push away 
a painful stimulus) must be distinguished from reflex responses of a 
spinal origin (e.g., triple flexion response—flexion at the ankle, knee, 
and hip in response to a painful stimulus to the foot).
Orientation is tested by asking the person to state his or her name, 
location, and time (day of the week and date); time is usually the first 
to be affected in a variety of conditions.
Speech is assessed by observing articulation, rate, rhythm, and pros-
ody (i.e., the changes in pitch and accentuation of syllables and words).
Language is assessed by observing the content of the patient’s verbal 
and written output, response to spoken commands, and ability to read. 
A typical testing sequence is to ask the patient to name successively 
more detailed components of clothing, a watch, or a pen; repeat the 
phrase “No ifs, ands, or buts”; follow a three-step, verbal command; 
write a sentence; and read and respond to a written command.
Memory should be analyzed according to three main time scales: 
(1) immediate memory is assessed by saying a list of three items and 
having the patient repeat the list immediately; (2) short-term memory 
is tested by asking the patient to recall the same three items 5 and 
15 min later; and (3) long-term memory is evaluated by determining 
how well the patient is able to provide a coherent chronologic history 
of his or her illness or personal events.
Fund of information is assessed by asking questions about major his-
toric or current events, with special attention to educational level and 
life experiences.
Abnormalities of insight and judgment are usually detected during 
the patient interview; a more detailed assessment can be elicited by 
asking the patient to describe how he or she would respond to situa-
tions having a variety of potential outcomes (e.g., “What would you do 
if you found a wallet on the sidewalk?”).
Abstract thought can be tested by asking the patient to describe sim-
ilarities between various objects or concepts (e.g., apple and orange, 
desk and chair, poetry and sculpture) or to list items having the same 
attributes (e.g., a list of four-legged animals).
Calculation ability is assessed by having the patient carry out a com-
putation that is appropriate to the patient’s age and education (e.g., 
serial subtraction of 7 from 100 or 3 from 20; or word problems involv-
ing simple arithmetic).
■
■CRANIAL NERVE EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: Check the fundi, visual fields, pupil size and reactivity, 
extraocular movements, and facial movements.
The CN are best examined in numerical order, except for grouping 
together CN III, IV, and VI because of their similar function.
CN I (Olfactory)  Testing is often omitted unless there is suspicion 
for inferior frontal lobe disease (e.g., meningioma). With eyes closed, 
ask the patient to sniff a mild stimulus such as toothpaste or coffee and 
identify the odorant.
CN II (Optic)  Check visual acuity (with eyeglasses or contact lens 
correction) using a Snellen chart or similar tool. Test the visual fields by 
confrontation, i.e., by comparing the patient’s visual fields to your own. 
As a screening test, it is usually sufficient to examine the visual fields 
of both eyes simultaneously; individual eye fields should be tested if 
there is any reason to suspect a problem of vision by the history or 
other elements of the examination, or if the screening test reveals an 
abnormality. Face the patient at a distance of ~0.6–1.0 m (2–3 ft) and 
place your hands at the periphery of your visual fields in the plane that 
is equidistant between you and the patient. Instruct the patient to look 
directly at the center of your face and to indicate when and where he 
or she sees one of your fingers moving. Beginning with the two infe-
rior quadrants and then the two superior quadrants, move your index 
finger of the right hand, left hand, or both hands simultaneously and 
observe whether the patient detects the movements. A single small-am-
plitude movement of the finger is sufficient for a normal response. 
Focal perimetry and tangent screen examinations should be used to 
map out visual field defects fully or to search for subtle abnormalities. 
Optic fundi should be examined with an ophthalmoscope, and the 
color, size, and degree of swelling or elevation of the optic disc noted, 
as well as the color and texture of the retina. The retinal vessels should 
be checked for size, regularity, arteriovenous nicking at crossing points, 
hemorrhage, exudates, etc.
CN III, IV, VI (Oculomotor, Trochlear, Abducens)  Describe 
the size and shape of pupils and reaction to light and accommodation 
(i.e., as the eyes converge while following your finger as it moves 
toward the bridge of the nose). To check extraocular movements, ask 
the patient to keep his or her head still while tracking the movement 
of the tip of your finger. Move the target slowly in the horizontal and 
vertical planes; observe any paresis, nystagmus, or abnormalities of 
smooth pursuit (saccades, oculomotor ataxia, etc.). If necessary, the 
relative position of the two eyes, both in primary and multidirectional 
gaze, can be assessed by comparing the reflections of a bright light 
off both pupils. However, in practice it is typically more useful to 
determine whether the patient describes diplopia in any direction of 
gaze; true diplopia should almost always resolve with one eye closed. 
Horizontal nystagmus is best assessed at 45° and not at extreme lateral 
gaze (which is uncomfortable for the patient); the target must often 


--- PDF PAGE 3074 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3028 be held at the lateral position for at least a few seconds to detect an 
abnormality.
CN V (Trigeminal)  Examine sensation within the three territories 
of the branches of the trigeminal nerve (ophthalmic, maxillary, and 
mandibular) on each side of the face. As with other parts of the sensory 
examination, testing of two sensory modalities derived from different 
anatomic pathways (e.g., light touch and temperature) is sufficient for 
a screening examination. Testing of other modalities, the corneal reflex, 
and the motor component of CN V (jaw clench—masseter muscle) is 
indicated when suggested by the history.
CN VII (Facial)  Look for facial asymmetry at rest and with spon-
taneous movements. Test eyebrow elevation, forehead wrinkling, eye 
closure, smiling, and cheek puff. Look in particular for differences in 
the lower versus upper facial muscles; weakness of the lower two-
thirds of the face with preservation of the upper third suggests an 
upper motor neuron lesion, whereas weakness of an entire side sug-
gests a lower motor neuron lesion.
CN VIII (Vestibulocochlear)  Check the patient’s ability to 
hear a finger rub or whispered voice with each ear. Further testing 
for air versus mastoid bone conduction (Rinne) and lateralization of a 
512-Hz tuning fork placed at the center of the forehead (Weber) should 
be done if an abnormality is detected by history or examination. Any 
suspected problem should be followed up with formal audiometry. 
For further discussion of assessing vestibular nerve function in the 
setting of dizziness, hearing loss, or coma, see Chaps. 19, 30, and 300, 
respectively.
CN IX, X (Glossopharyngeal, Vagus)  Observe the position 
and symmetry of the palate and uvula at rest and with phonation 
(“aah”). The pharyngeal (“gag”) reflex is evaluated by stimulating the 
posterior pharyngeal wall on each side with a sterile, blunt object (e.g., 
tongue blade), but the reflex is often absent in normal individuals.
CN XI (Spinal Accessory)  Check shoulder shrug (trapezius 
muscle) and head rotation to each side (sternocleidomastoid) against 
resistance.
CN XII (Hypoglossal)  Inspect the tongue for atrophy or fascicu-
lations, position with protrusion, and strength when extended against 
the inner surface of the cheeks on each side.
■
■MOTOR EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: Look for muscle atrophy and check extremity tone. 
Assess upper extremity strength by checking for pronator drift and strength 
of wrist or finger extensors. Assess lower extremity strength by checking 
strength of the toe extensors and having the patient walk normally and on 
heels and toes.
The motor examination includes observations of muscle appearance, 
tone, and strength. Although gait is in part a test of motor function, it 
is usually evaluated separately at the end of the examination.
Appearance  Inspect and palpate muscle groups under good light 
and with the patient in a comfortable and symmetric position. Check 
for muscle fasciculations, tenderness, and atrophy or hypertrophy. 
Involuntary movements may be present at rest (e.g., tics, myoclonus, 
choreoathetosis), during maintained posture (pill-rolling tremor of 
Parkinson’s disease), or with voluntary movements (intention tremor 
of cerebellar disease or familial tremor).
Tone  Muscle tone is tested by measuring the resistance to passive 
movement of a relaxed limb. Patients often have difficulty relaxing 
during this procedure, so it is useful to distract the patient to mini-
mize active movements. In the upper limbs, tone is assessed by rapid 
pronation and supination of the forearm and flexion and extension at 
the wrist. In the lower limbs, while the patient is supine the examiner’s 
hands are placed behind the knees and rapidly raised; with normal 
tone, the ankles drag along the table surface for a variable distance 
before rising, whereas increased tone results in an immediate lift of the 
heel off the surface. Decreased tone is most commonly due to lower 
motor neuron or peripheral nerve disorders. Increased tone may be 
evident as spasticity (resistance determined by the angle and velocity 
of motion; corticospinal tract disease), rigidity (similar resistance in 
all angles of motion; extrapyramidal disease), or paratonia (fluctuat-
ing changes in resistance; frontal lobe pathways or normal difficulty 
in relaxing). Cogwheel rigidity, in which passive motion elicits jerky 
interruptions in resistance, is seen in parkinsonism.
Strength  Testing for pronator drift is an extremely useful method 
for screening upper limb weakness. The patient is asked to hold both 
arms fully extended and parallel to the ground with eyes closed. This 
position should be maintained for ~10 s; any flexion at the elbow or 
fingers or pronation of the forearm, especially if asymmetric, is a sign of 
potential weakness. Muscle strength is further assessed by having the 
patient exert maximal effort for the particular muscle or muscle group 
being tested. It is important to isolate the muscles as much as possible, 
i.e., hold the limb so that only the muscles of interest are active. It is 
also helpful to palpate accessible muscles as they contract. Grading 
muscle strength and evaluating the patient’s effort is an art that takes 
time and practice. Muscle strength is traditionally graded using the 
following scale:
0 = no movement
1 = flicker or trace of contraction but no associated movement at 
a joint
2 = movement with gravity eliminated
3 = movement against gravity but not against resistance
4– = movement against a mild degree of resistance
4 = movement against moderate resistance
4+ = movement against strong resistance
5 = full power
However, in many cases, it is more practical to use the following 
terms:
Paralysis = no movement
Severe weakness = movement with gravity eliminated
Moderate weakness = movement against gravity but not against 
mild resistance
Mild weakness = movement against moderate resistance
Full strength
Noting the pattern of weakness is as important as assessing the mag-
nitude of weakness. Unilateral or bilateral weakness of the upper limb 
extensors and lower limb flexors (“pyramidal weakness”) suggests a 
lesion of the pyramidal tract, bilateral proximal weakness suggests myo-
pathy, and bilateral distal weakness suggests peripheral neuropathy.
■
■REFLEX EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: Check the biceps, patellar, and Achilles reflexes.
Muscle Stretch Reflexes  Those that are typically assessed 
include the biceps (C5, C6), brachioradialis (C5, C6), triceps (C6, 
C7), and sometimes finger flexor (C8, T1) reflexes in the upper limbs 
and the patellar or quadriceps (L3, L4) and Achilles (S1, S2) reflexes 
in the lower limbs. The patient should be relaxed and the muscle 
positioned midway between full contraction and extension. Reflexes 
may be enhanced by asking the patient to voluntarily contract other, 
distant muscle groups (Jendrassik maneuver). For example, upper 
limb reflexes may be reinforced by voluntary teeth-clenching, and the 
Achilles reflex by hooking the flexed fingers of the two hands together 
and attempting to pull them apart. For each reflex tested, the two sides 
should be tested sequentially, and it is important to determine the 
smallest stimulus required to elicit a reflex rather than the maximum 
response. Reflexes are graded according to the following scale:
0 = absent
1 = present but diminished
2 = normoactive
3 = exaggerated
4 = clonus


--- PDF PAGE 3075 ---

CHAPTER 415 Approach to the Patient with Neurologic Disease 
3029
Cutaneous Reflexes  The plantar reflex is elicited by stroking, 
with a noxious stimulus such as a tongue blade, the lateral surface of 
the sole of the foot beginning near the heel and moving across the ball 
of the foot to the great toe. The normal reflex consists of plantar flexion 
of the toes. With upper motor neuron lesions above the S1 level of 
the spinal cord, a paradoxical extension of the toe is observed, associ-
ated with fanning and extension of the other toes (termed an extensor 
plantar response, or Babinski sign). However, despite its popularity, the 
reliability and validity of the Babinski sign for identifying upper motor 
neuron weakness is limited—it is far more useful to rely on tests of 
tone, strength, stretch reflexes, and coordination. Superficial abdominal 
reflexes are elicited by gently stroking the abdominal surface near the 
umbilicus in a diagonal fashion with a sharp object (e.g., the wooden 
end of a cotton-tipped swab) and observing the movement of the 
umbilicus. Normally, the umbilicus will pull toward the stimulated 
quadrant. With upper motor neuron lesions, these reflexes are absent. 
They are most helpful when there is preservation of the upper (spinal 
cord level T9) but not lower (T12) abdominal reflexes, indicating a 
spinal lesion between T9 and T12, or when the response is asymmetric. 
Other useful cutaneous reflexes include the cremasteric (ipsilateral ele-
vation of the testicle following stroking of the medial thigh; mediated 
by L1 and L2) and anal (contraction of the anal sphincter when the peri-
anal skin is scratched; mediated by S2, S3, S4) reflexes. It is particularly 
important to test for these reflexes in any patient with suspected injury 
to the spinal cord or lumbosacral roots.
Primitive Reflexes  With disease of the frontal lobe pathways, 
several primitive reflexes not normally present in the adult may 
appear. The suck response is elicited by lightly touching with a tongue 
blade the center of the lips, and the root response the corner of the 
lips; the patient will move the lips to suck or root in the direction of 
the stimulus. The grasp reflex is elicited by touching the palm between 
the thumb and index finger with the examiner’s fingers; a positive 
response is a forced grasp of the examiner’s hand. In many instances, 
stroking the back of the hand will lead to its release. The palmomental 
response is contraction of the mentalis muscle (chin) ipsilateral to a 
scratch stimulus diagonally applied to the palm.
■
■SENSORY EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: Ask whether the patient can feel light touch and the 
temperature of a cool object in each distal extremity. Check double simul-
taneous stimulation using light touch on the hands. Perform the Romberg 
maneuver.
Evaluating sensation is usually the most unreliable part of the examina-
tion because it is subjective and is difficult to quantify. In the compliant 
and discerning patient, the sensory examination can be extremely 
helpful for the precise localization of a lesion. With patients who are 
uncooperative or lack an understanding of the tests, it may be useless. 
The examination should be focused on the suspected lesion. For exam-
ple, in spinal cord, spinal root, or peripheral nerve abnormalities, all 
major sensory modalities should be tested while looking for a pattern 
consistent with a spinal level and dermatomal or nerve distribution. In 
patients with lesions at or above the brainstem, screening the primary 
sensory modalities in the distal extremities along with tests of “cortical” 
sensation is usually sufficient.
The five primary sensory modalities—light touch, pain, tempera-
ture, vibration, and joint position—are tested in each limb. Light touch 
is assessed by stimulating the skin with single, very gentle touches of 
the examiner’s finger or a wisp of cotton. Pain is tested using a new 
pin, and temperature is assessed using a metal object (e.g., tuning fork) 
that has been immersed in cold and warm water. Vibration is tested 
using a 128-Hz tuning fork applied to the distal phalanx of the great toe 
or index finger just below the nail bed. By placing a finger on the oppo-
site side of the joint being tested, the examiner compares the patient’s 
threshold of vibration perception with his or her own. For joint position 
testing, the examiner grasps the digit or limb laterally and distal to the 
joint being assessed; small 1- to 2-mm excursions can usually be sensed. 
The Romberg maneuver is primarily a test of proprioception. The 
patient is asked to stand with the feet as close together as necessary to 
maintain balance while the eyes are open, and the eyes are then closed. 
A loss of balance with the eyes closed is an abnormal response.
“Cortical” sensation is mediated by the parietal lobes and represents 
an integration of the primary sensory modalities; testing cortical sen-
sation is only meaningful when primary sensation is intact. Double 
simultaneous stimulation is especially useful as a screening test for 
cortical function; with the patient’s eyes closed, the examiner lightly 
touches one or both hands and asks the patient to identify the stimuli. 
With a parietal lobe lesion, the patient may be unable to identify the 
stimulus on the contralateral side when both hands are touched. Other 
modalities relying on the parietal cortex include the discrimination of 
two closely placed stimuli as separate (two-point discrimination), iden-
tification of an object by touch and manipulation alone (stereognosis), 
and the identification of numbers or letters written on the skin surface 
(graphesthesia).
■
■COORDINATION EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: Observe the patient at rest and during spontaneous 
movements. Test rapid alternating movements of the hands and feet and 
finger to nose.
Coordination refers to the orchestration and fluidity of movements. 
Even simple acts require cooperation of agonist and antagonist mus-
cles, maintenance of posture, and complex servomechanisms to control 
the rate and range of movements. Part of this integration relies on 
normal function of the cerebellar and basal ganglia systems. However, 
coordination also requires intact muscle strength and kinesthetic and 
proprioceptive information. Thus, if the examination has disclosed 
abnormalities of the motor or sensory systems, the patient’s coordina-
tion should be assessed with these limitations in mind.
Rapid alternating movements in the upper limbs are tested sepa-
rately on each side by having the patient make a fist, partially extend 
the index finger, and then tap the index finger on the distal thumb 
as quickly as possible. In the lower limb, the patient rapidly taps the 
foot against the floor or the examiner’s hand. Finger-to-nose testing is 
primarily a test of cerebellar function; the patient is asked to touch his 
or her index finger repetitively to the nose and then to the examiner’s 
outstretched finger, which moves with each repetition. A similar test 
in the lower extremity is to have the patient raise the leg and touch 
the examiner’s finger with the great toe. Another cerebellar test in the 
lower limbs is the heel-knee-shin maneuver; in the supine position 
the patient is asked to slide the heel of each foot from the knee down 
the shin of the other leg. For all these movements, the accuracy, speed, 
and rhythm are noted.
■
■GAIT EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: Observe the patient while walking normally, on the 
heels and toes, and along a straight line.
Watching the patient walk is the most important part of the neurologic 
examination. Normal gait requires that multiple systems—including 
strength, sensation, and coordination—function in a highly integrated 
fashion. Unexpected abnormalities may be detected that prompt the 
examiner to return in more detail to other aspects of the examination. 
The patient should be observed while walking and turning normally, 
walking on the heels, walking on the toes, and walking heel-to-toe 
along a straight line. The examination may reveal decreased arm swing 
on one side (corticospinal tract disease), a stooped posture and short-
stepped gait (parkinsonism), a broad-based unstable gait (ataxia), scis-
soring (spasticity), or a high-stepped, slapping gait (posterior column 
or peripheral nerve disease), or the patient may appear to be stuck in 
place (apraxia with frontal lobe disease).
NEUROLOGIC DIAGNOSIS
The clinical data obtained from the history and examination are inter-
preted to arrive at an anatomic localization that best explains the clinical 
findings (Table 415-2), to narrow the list of diagnostic possibilities, and 
to select the laboratory tests most likely to be informative. The laboratory 
assessment may include (1) serum electrolytes; complete blood count; 
and renal, hepatic, endocrine, and immune studies; (2) cerebrospinal 


================================================================================
Ch416 Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
Pages 3076-3084
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3076 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3030
TABLE 415-2  Findings Helpful for Localizations within the Nervous 
System
 
SIGNS
Cerebrum
Abnormal mental status or cognitive impairment
 
Seizures
 
Unilateral weaknessa and sensory abnormalities 
including head and limbs
 
Visual field abnormalities
 
Movement abnormalities (e.g., diffuse incoordination, 
tremor, chorea)
Brainstem
Isolated cranial nerve abnormalities (single or multiple)
 
“Crossed” weaknessa and sensory abnormalities of  
head and limbs, e.g., weakness of right face and left arm 
and leg
Spinal cord
Back pain or tenderness
 
Weaknessa and sensory abnormalities sparing the head
 
Mixed upper and lower motor neuron findings
 
Sensory level
 
Sphincter dysfunction
Spinal roots
Radiating limb pain
 
Weaknessb or sensory abnormalities following root 
distribution (see Figs. 22-2 and 22-3)
 
Loss of reflexes
Peripheral nerve
Mid or distal limb pain
 
Weaknessb or sensory abnormalities following nerve 
distribution (see Figs. 22-2 and 22-3)
 
“Stocking or glove” distribution of sensory loss
 
Loss of reflexes
Neuromuscular 
junction
Bilateral weakness including face (ptosis, diplopia, 
dysphagia) and proximal limbs
 
Increasing weakness with exertion
 
Sparing of sensation
Muscle
Bilateral proximal or distal weakness
 
Sparing of sensation
aWeakness along with other abnormalities having an “upper motor neuron” 
pattern, i.e., spasticity, weakness of extensors > flexors in the upper extremity 
and flexors > extensors in the lower extremity, and hyperreflexia. bWeakness along 
with other abnormalities having a “lower motor neuron” pattern, i.e., flaccidity and 
hyporeflexia.
fluid examination; (3) focused neuroimaging studies (Chap. 416); or 
(4) electrophysiologic studies. The anatomic localization, mode of onset 
and course of illness, other medical data, and laboratory findings are 
then integrated to establish an etiologic diagnosis.
The neurologic examination may be normal even in patients with 
a serious neurologic disease, such as seizures, chronic meningitis, or a 
TIA. A comatose patient may arrive with no available history, and in 
such cases, the approach is as described in Chap. 300. In other patients, 
an inadequate history may be overcome by a succession of examina-
tions from which the course of the illness can be inferred. In perplexing 
cases it is useful to remember that uncommon presentations of common 
diseases are more likely than rare etiologies. Thus, even in tertiary care 
settings, multiple strokes are usually due to emboli and not vasculitis, 
and dementia with myoclonus is usually Alzheimer’s disease and not 
a prion disorder or a paraneoplastic illness. Finally, the most important 
task of a primary care physician faced with a patient who has a new 
neurologic complaint is to assess the urgency of referral to a specialist. 
Here, the imperative is to rapidly identify patients likely to have ner-
vous system infections, acute strokes, and spinal cord compression or 
other treatable mass lesions and arrange for immediate care.
■
■FURTHER READING
Campbell WW: DeJong’s Neurological Examination, 7th ed. Philadelphia, 
Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013.
O’Brien M: Aids to the Examination of the Peripheral Nervous System, 
5th ed. Edinburgh, WB Saunders, 2010.
Ropper AH et al: Adams and Victor’s Principles of Neurology, 10th ed. 
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2014.
Numerous noninvasive imaging options are available to clinicians 
evaluating patients with neurologic disorders. These include computed 
tomography (CT) and variations CT angiography (CTA), perfusion 
CT (pCT), and dual energy CT and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging 
(MRI) and variations MR angiography (MRA), MR vessel wall imag-
ing, functional MRI (fMRI), MR spectroscopy (MRS), MR neurography 
(MRN), diffusion and diffusion tensor MR imaging, susceptibility- 
weighted MR imaging (SWI), arterial spin label imaging (ASL) and 
perfusion MRI (pMRI). Furthermore, a number of interventional neu-
roradiologic techniques have matured including catheter embolization, 
stent retrieval thrombolysis, aneurysm coiling and stenting, as well as 
numerous techniques for spine disorders, including CT myelography, 
fluoroscopy and CT-guided transforaminal and translaminar epidural 
and nerve root injections, radiofrequency ablation and blood patches. 
Multidetector CTA (MDCTA) and gadolinium-enhanced MRA tech-
niques have reduced the need for catheter-based angiography, which is 
now reserved for patients in whom small-vessel detail is essential for 
diagnosis or for whom concurrent interventional therapy is planned 
(Table 416-1).
In general, MRI is more sensitive than CT for the detection of lesions 
affecting the peripheral and central nervous system (CNS), particularly 
those of the spinal cord, cranial nerves, and posterior fossa structures. 
Diffusion MR, a sequence sensitive to the microscopic motion of water, 
is the most sensitive technique for detecting acute ischemic stroke of 
the brain or spinal cord, and it is also useful in the detection and char-
acterization of encephalitis, abscess, Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, cerebral 
tumors and acute demyelinating lesions. CT, however, is acquired 
quickly, making it a pragmatic choice for patients with acute changes in 
mental status, suspected hemorrhage, and acute intracranial or spinal 
trauma. CT is also more sensitive than MRI for visualizing fine osseous 
detail and is indicated in the initial imaging evaluation of conductive 
hearing loss as well as lesions affecting the skull base and calvarium. 
MR may, however, add important diagnostic information regarding 
bone marrow infiltrative processes that are difficult to detect on CT.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
■
■TECHNIQUE
The CT image is a cross-sectional representation of anatomy created 
by a computer-generated analysis of the attenuation of x-ray beams 
passed through a section of the body. As the x-ray beam, collimated to 
the desired slice width, rotates around the patient, it passes through 
selected regions in the body. X-rays that are not attenuated by body 
structures are detected by sensitive x-ray detectors aligned 180° from 
the x-ray tube. A computer calculates a “back projection” image from 
the 360° x-ray attenuation profile. Greater x-ray attenuation (e.g., as 
caused by bone), results in areas of high “density” (whiter) on the scan, 
whereas soft tissue structures that have poor attenuation of x-rays, 
such as organs and air-filled cavities, are lower (blacker) in density. 
The resolution of an image depends on the radiation dose, the detector 
size, collimation (slice thickness), the field of view, and the matrix size 
of the display. A modern CT scanner is capable of obtaining sections as 
thin as 0.5–1 mm with 0.4-mm in-plane resolution at a speed of 0.3 s 
per rotation; complete studies of the brain can be completed in 1–10 s.
Multidetector CT (MDCT) is now standard. Single or multiple (from 
4 to 320) solid-state detectors positioned opposite to the x-ray source 
result in multiple slices per revolution of the beam around the patient. 
In helical mode, the table moves continuously through the rotating 
x-ray beam, generating a continuous “helix” of information that can 
be reformatted into various slice thicknesses and planes. Advantages 
of MDCT include shorter scan times and thus reduced patient and 
Neuroimaging in Neurologic 
Disorders
William P. Dillon 
416


--- PDF PAGE 3077 ---

CHAPTER 416 Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
3031
organ motion, and the ability to acquire images dynamically during 
the infusion of intravenous contrast, the basis of CTA and CT perfusion 
(Figs. 416-1B and C). CTA is displayed in three dimensions to yield 
angiogram-like images (Figs. 416-1C, 416-2E and F, and see Fig. 420-3).
Intravenous iodinated contrast is used to identify vascular struc-
tures and to detect defects in the blood-brain barrier (BBB) that are 
caused by tumors, infarcts, and infections. In the normal CNS, only 
vessels and structures lacking a BBB (e.g., the pituitary gland, choroid 
plexus, and dura) enhance after contrast administration. While helpful 
in characterizing mass lesions as well as essential for the acquisition 
of CTA studies, the decision to use contrast material should always be 
considered carefully as it carries a small risk of allergic reaction and 
adds additional expense.
■
■INDICATIONS
CT is the primary study of choice in the evaluation of an acute change 
in mental status, focal neurologic findings, acute trauma to the brain 
and spine, suspected subarachnoid hemorrhage, and conductive hear-
ing loss (Table 416-1). CT often is complementary to MR in the evalua-
tion of the skull base, orbit, and osseous structures of the spine. In the 
spine, CT is useful in evaluating patients with osseous spinal stenosis 
and spondylosis, but MRI is often preferred in those with neurologic 
deficits. CT is often acquired following intrathecal contrast injection to 
evaluate for spinal and intracranial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistula, as 
well as the spinal subarachnoid space (CT myelography) in failed back 
surgery syndromes.
■
■COMPLICATIONS
CT is safe, fast, and reliable. Radiation exposure depends on the 
dose used but is normally between 2 and 5 mSv (millisievert) for a 
routine brain CT study. Care must be taken to reduce exposure when 
imaging children, who are typically best studied with MR. With the 
advent of MDCT, CTA, and CT perfusion, the benefit must be weighed 
against the increased radiation doses associated with these techniques. 
Advances in postprocessing software now permit acceptable diagnos-
tic CT scans at 30–40% lower radiation doses.
The most frequent complications are those associated with use of 
intravenous contrast agents. While two broad categories of contrast 
media, ionic and nonionic, are in use, ionic agents have been largely 
replaced by safer nonionic compounds.
Contrast nephropathy is rare. It may result from hemodynamic changes, 
renal tubular obstruction and cell damage, or immunologic reactions 
to contrast agents. A rise in serum creatinine of at least 44 μmol/L 
(0.5 mg/dL) within 48 h of contrast administration is often used as a defi-
nition of contrast nephropathy, although there is no accepted definition 
and other causes of acute renal failure must be excluded. The prognosis 
is usually favorable, with serum creatinine levels returning to baseline 
TABLE 416-1  Guidelines for the Use of CT, Ultrasound, and MRI
CONDITION
RECOMMENDED TECHNIQUE
Hemorrhage
  Acute parenchymal
CT, MR
  Subacute/chronic
MRI
  Subarachnoid hemorrhage
CT, CTA, lumbar puncture → angiography
Aneurysm
Angiography > CTA, MRA
Ischemic infarction
  Hemorrhagic infarction
CT or MRI
  Bland infarction
MRI with diffusion > CT, CTA, angiography
  Carotid or vertebral dissection
MRI/MRA
  Vertebral basilar insufficiency
CTA, MRI/MRA
  Carotid stenosis
CTA, MRA > US
Suspected mass lesion
  Neoplasm, primary or metastatic
MRI + contrast
  Infection/abscess
MRI + contrast
  Immunosuppressed with focal 
findings
MRI + contrast
Vascular malformation
MRI ± angiography
White matter disorders
MRI
  Demyelinating disease
MRI ± contrast
Dementia
MRI > CT
Trauma
  Acute trauma
CT
  Shear injury/chronic hemorrhage
MRI + susceptibility-weighted imaging
Headache/migraine
CT/MRI
Seizure
  First time, no focal neurologic 
deficits
MRI > CT
  Partial complex/refractory
MRI
Cranial neuropathy
MRI with contrast
Meningeal disease
MRI with contrast
Spine
Low back pain
  No neurologic deficits
MRI or CT after >6 weeks
  With focal deficits
MRI > CT
Spinal stenosis
MRI or CT
Cervical spondylosis
MRI, CT, CT myelography
Infection
MRI + contrast, CT
Myelopathy
MRI + contrast
Arteriovenous malformation
MRI + contrast, angiography
Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; CTA, CT angiography; MRA, magnetic 
resonance angiography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
A
B
C
FIGURE 416-1  Computed tomography (CT) angiography (CTA) of ruptured anterior cerebral artery aneurysm in a patient presenting with acute headache. 
A. Noncontrast CT demonstrates subarachnoid hemorrhage and mild obstructive hydrocephalus. B. Axial maximum-intensity projection from CTA demonstrates 
enlargement of the anterior cerebral artery (arrow). C. Three-dimensional surface reconstruction using a workstation confirms the anterior cerebral aneurysm and 
demonstrates its orientation and relationship to nearby vessels (arrow). CTA image is produced by 0.5- to 1-mm helical CT scans performed during a rapid bolus 
infusion of intravenous contrast medium.


--- PDF PAGE 3078 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3032
A
B
D
E
H
C
F
G
I
FIGURE 416-2  Acute left hemiparesis due to middle cerebral artery occlusion. A. Axial noncontrast computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrates high density within 
the right middle cerebral artery (arrow) associated with subtle low density involving the right putamen (arrowheads). B. Mean transit time CT perfusion parametric 
map indicating prolonged mean transit time involving the right middle cerebral territory (arrows). C. Cerebral blood volume (CBV) map shows reduced CBV involving an 
area within the defect shown in B, indicating a high likelihood of infarction (arrows). D. Axial maximum-intensity projection from a CT angiography (CTA) study through 
the circle of Willis demonstrates an abrupt occlusion of the proximal right middle cerebral artery (arrow). E. Sagittal reformation through the right internal carotid 
artery demonstrates a low-density lipid-laden plaque (arrowheads) narrowing the lumen (black arrow). F. Three-dimensional surface-rendered CTA image demonstrates 
calcification and narrowing of the right internal carotid artery (arrow), consistent with atherosclerotic disease. G. Coronal maximum-intensity projection from magnetic 
resonance angiography shows right middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion (arrow). H. and I. Axial diffusion-weighted image (H) and apparent diffusion coefficient image 
(I) documents the presence of a right middle cerebral artery infarction.


--- PDF PAGE 3079 ---

CHAPTER 416 Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
3033
within 1–2 weeks. Risk factors for contrast nephropathy include age 
(>80 years), preexisting renal disease (serum creatinine exceeding 
2 mg/dL), solitary kidney, diabetes mellitus, dehydration, parapro-
teinemia, concurrent use of nephrotoxic medication or chemotherapeu-
tic agents, and high contrast dose. Patients with diabetes and those with 
mild renal failure should be well hydrated prior to the administration 
of contrast agents; careful consideration should be given to alternative 
imaging techniques such as MRI, noncontrast CT, or ultrasound (US). 
Nonionic, low-osmolar media produce fewer abnormalities in renal 
blood flow and less endothelial cell damage but should still be used 
carefully in patients at risk for allergic reaction. Estimated glomerular 
filtration rate (eGFR) is a more reliable indicator of renal function com-
pared to creatinine alone because it takes into account age, race, and 
sex. In one study, 15% of outpatients with a normal serum creatinine 
had an estimated creatinine clearance of ≤50 mL/min/1.73 m2 (normal 
is ≥90 mL/min/1.73 m2). The exact eGFR threshold, below which with-
holding intravenous contrast should be considered, is controversial. The 
risk of contrast nephropathy is minimal in patients with eGFR >30 mL/
min/1.73 m2; however, the majority of these patients will only have a 
temporary rise in creatinine. The risk of dialysis after receiving contrast 
significantly increases in patients with eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2. A 
creatinine of 1.6 in a 70-year-old, non-African-American male corre-
sponds to an eGFR of ~45 mL/min/1.73 m2. The American College of 
Radiology suggests using an eGFR of 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 as a threshold 
below which iodinated contrast should not be given without serious 
consideration of the potential for contrast nephropathy. If contrast must 
be administered to a patient with an eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2, the 
patient should be well hydrated, and a reduction in the dose of contrast 
should be considered. Use of other agents such as bicarbonate and acet-
ylcysteine may reduce the incidence of contrast nephropathy.
Suggested guidelines for creatinine testing prior to contrast 
administration:
If serum creatinine is not available, it should be performed IF the 
patient has ANY of the following risk factors:
• Age >60
• History of “kidney disease” as an adult, including tumor and 
transplant
• Family history of kidney failure
• Diabetes mellitus treated with insulin or other prescribed 
medications
• Hypertension
• Paraproteinemia syndromes or diseases (e.g., myeloma)
• Collagen vascular disease (e.g., SLE, scleroderma, rheumatoid 
arthritis)
• Solid organ transplant recipient
If creatinine testing is required, a creatinine level within the prior 
6 weeks is sufficient in most clinical settings.
Allergy  Immediate reactions following intravenous contrast media 
occur through several mechanisms. The most severe reactions are 
related to allergic hypersensitivity (anaphylaxis) and range from mild 
hives to bronchospasm and death. The pathogenesis of allergic hyper-
sensitivity reactions is thought to include the release of mediators such 
as histamine, antibody-antigen reactions, and complement activation. 
Severe allergic reactions occur in ~0.04% of patients receiving nonionic 
media, sixfold lower than with ionic media. Risk factors include a 
history of prior contrast reaction (fivefold increased likelihood), food 
and or drug allergies, and atopy (asthma and hay fever). The predic-
tive value of specific allergies, such as those to shellfish, once thought 
important, actually is now recognized to be unreliable. Nonetheless, in 
patients with a history worrisome for potential allergic reaction, a non-
contrast CT or MRI procedure should be considered as an alternative 
to contrast administration. If iodinated contrast is absolutely required, 
a nonionic agent should be used in conjunction with pretreatment with 
glucocorticoids and antihistamines (Table 416-2); however, pretreat-
ment does not guarantee safety. Patients with allergic reactions to iodi-
nated contrast material do not usually react to gadolinium-based MR 
contrast material, although such reactions can occur. It would be wise 
to pretreat patients with a prior allergic history to MR contrast adminis-
tration in a similar fashion. Subacute (>1 h after injection) reactions are 
frequent and probably related to T cell–mediated immune reactions. 
These are typically urticarial but can occasionally be more severe. Drug 
provocation and skin testing may be required to determine the culprit 
agent involved as well as determine a safe alternative.
Other side effects of CT scanning are rare but include a sensation of 
warmth throughout the body and a metallic taste during intravenous 
administration of iodinated contrast media. Extravasation of contrast 
media, although rare, can be painful and lead to compartment syn-
drome. When this occurs, consultation with plastic surgery is indicated. 
Patients with significant cardiac disease may be at increased risk for 
contrast reactions, and in these patients, limits to the volume and osmo-
lality of the contrast media should be considered. Patients who may 
undergo systemic radioactive iodine therapy for thyroid disease or can-
cer should not receive iodinated contrast media if possible, because this 
will decrease the uptake of the radioisotope into the tumor or thyroid 
(see the American College of Radiology Manual on Contrast Media, Ver-
sion 10.3, 2017; https://www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Clinical-Resources/ 
ContrastMedia.pdf ).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
■
■TECHNIQUE
MRI is a complex interaction between hydrogen protons in biologic 
tissues, a static magnetic field (the magnet), and energy in the form of 
radiofrequency (Rf) waves of a specific frequency introduced by coils 
placed next to the body part of interest. Images are made by computer-
ized processing of resonance information received from protons in the 
body. Field strength of the magnet is directly related to signal-to-noise 
ratio. While 1.5 Tesla (T) and 3-T magnets are now widely available 
and have distinct advantages in the brain and musculoskeletal systems, 
even igher field magnets (7-T) and positron emission tomography (PET) 
MR machines promise increased resolution and anatomic-functional 
information on a variety of disorders. Spatial localization is achieved 
by magnetic gradients surrounding the main magnet, which impart 
slight changes in magnetic field throughout the imaging volume. Rf 
pulses transiently excite the energy state of the hydrogen protons in 
the body. Rf is administered at a frequency specific for the field strength 
of the magnet. The subsequent return to equilibrium energy state 
(relaxation) of the hydrogen protons results in a release of Rf energy (the 
echo), which is detected by the coils that delivered the Rf pulses. Fourier 
analysis is used to transform the echo into the information used to form 
an MR image. The MR image thus consists of a map of the distribution 
of hydrogen protons, with signal intensity imparted by both density of 
hydrogen protons and differences in the relaxation times (see below) 
of hydrogen protons on different molecules. Although clinical MRI 
currently makes use of the ubiquitous hydrogen proton, research into 
sodium and carbon imaging and spectroscopy appears promising.
T1 and T2 Relaxation Times  The rate of return to equilibrium 
of perturbed protons is called the relaxation rate. The relaxation rate 
varies among normal and pathologic tissues. The relaxation rate of a 
hydrogen proton in a tissue is influenced by local interactions with 
surrounding molecules and atomic neighbors. Two relaxation rates, T1 
and T2, influence the signal intensity of the image. The T1 relaxation 
time is the time, measured in milliseconds, for 63% of the hydrogen 
protons to return to their normal equilibrium state, whereas the T2 
TABLE 416-2  Guidelines for Premedication of Patients with Prior 
Contrast Allergy
12 h prior to examination:
  Prednisone, 50 mg PO or methylprednisolone, 32 mg PO
2 h prior to examination:
  Prednisone, 50 mg PO or methylprednisolone, 32 mg PO and cimetidine, 
300 mg PO or ranitidine, 150 mg PO
Immediately prior to examination:
  Benadryl, 50 mg IV (alternatively, can be given PO 2 h prior to exam)


--- PDF PAGE 3080 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3034
FIGURE 416-3  Cerebral abscess in a patient with fever and a right hemiparesis. 
A. Coronal postcontrast T1-weighted image demonstrates a ring-enhancing mass 
in the left frontal lobe. B. Axial diffusion-weighted image demonstrates restricted 
diffusion (high signal intensity) within the lesion, which in this setting is highly 
suggestive of cerebral abscess.
A
B
relaxation is the time for 63% of the protons to become dephased owing 
to interactions among nearby protons. The intensity and image contrast 
of the signal within various tissues can be modulated by altering acqui-
sition parameters such as the interval between Rf pulses (TR) and the 
time between the Rf pulse and the signal reception (TE). T1-weighted 
(T1W) images are produced by keeping the TR and TE relatively 
short, whereas using longer TR and TE times produces T2-weighted 
(T2W) images. Fat and subacute hemorrhage have relatively shorter 
T1 relaxation rates and thus higher signal intensity than brain on T1W 
images. Structures containing more water, such as CSF and edema, 
have long T1 and T2 relaxation rates, resulting in relatively lower signal 
intensity on T1W images and higher signal intensity on T2W images 
(Table 416-3). Gray matter contains 10–15% more water than white 
matter, which accounts for much of the intrinsic contrast between the 
two on MRI (Fig. 416-4A). T2W images are more sensitive than T1W 
images to edema, demyelination, infarction, and chronic hemorrhage, 
whereas T1W imaging is more sensitive to subacute hemorrhage and 
fat-containing structures.
Many different MR pulse sequences exist, and each can be obtained 
in various planes (Figs. 416-2, 416-3, and 416-4). The selection of a 
proper protocol that will best answer a clinical question depends on 
an accurate clinical history and indication for the examination. Fluid- 
attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) is a very useful pulse sequence 
that produces T2W images in which the normally high signal intensity 
of CSF is suppressed (Fig. 416-4B). FLAIR images are more sensi-
tive than standard spin echo images for water-containing lesions or 
edema, especially those close to CSF filled cisterns and sulci. Diffusion 
weighted imaging is also routinely obtained in most brain protocols. 
This sequence interrogates the microscopic motion of water, which 
is restricted in areas of infarction, abscess, and some tumors. SWI is 
very sensitive to alterations in local magnetic field generated by blood, 
calcium, and air. SWI is routinely obtained and helps detects micro-
hemorrhages, such as is typical of amyloid, hemorrhagic metastases, 
traumatic brain injury, and thrombotic states (Fig. 416-5C). MR images 
can be generated in any plane without changing the patient’s posi-
tion. Each sequence, however, must be obtained separately and takes 
1–10 min on average to complete. Three-dimensional volumetric imag-
ing is also possible with MRI, resulting in a three-dimensional volume 
of data that can be reformatted in any orientation to highlight certain 
disease processes.
MR Contrast Material  The heavy-metal element gadolinium 
forms the basis of all currently approved intravenous MR contrast 
agents. Gadolinium is a paramagnetic substance that reduces the T1 
and T2 relaxation times of nearby water protons, resulting in a high sig-
nal on T1W images and a low signal on T2W images (the latter requires 
a sufficient local concentration, usually in the form of an intravenous 
bolus). Unlike iodinated contrast agents, the effect of MR contrast 
agents depends on the presence of local hydrogen protons on which 
it must act to achieve the desired effect. There are nine different gad-
olinium agents approved in the United States for use with MRI. These 
differ according to the attached chelated moiety, which also affects the 
strength of chelation of the otherwise toxic gadolinium element. The 
chelating carrier molecule for gadolinium can be classified by whether 
it is macrocyclic or has linear geometry and whether it is ionic or non-
ionic. Macrocyclic ligands (Group 2 agents) are considered more stable 
as the gadolinium ion is “caged” in the cavity of the ligand, and thus 
the rate of dissociation of gadolinium is slower compared to linear 
ligands (Group 1 agents). Most agents are excreted by the renal system. 
BRAIN ACCUMULATION OF GADOLINIUM  It recently has become evident 
that gadolinium accumulates in the dentate nuclei and globus pallidus 
of the brain after serial administration of some linear Group 1 gadolin-
ium agents. This has not been demonstrated for Group 2 macrocyclic 
agents. To date there is no clinical effect of this deposition that has been 
detected.
ALLERGIC HYPERSENSITIVITY  Gadolinium-DTPA (diethylenetriamine-
pentaacetic acid) does not normally cross the intact BBB immediately 
but will enhance lesions lacking a BBB (Fig. 416-3A) as well as areas of 
the brain that normally are devoid of the BBB (pituitary, dura, choroid 
plexus). However, gadolinium contrast slowly crosses an intact BBB 
over time and especially in the setting of reduced renal clearance or 
inflamed meninges. The agents are generally well tolerated; overall 
adverse events after injection range from 0.07 to 2.4%. True aller-
gic reactions are rare (0.004–0.7%) but have been reported. Severe 
life-threatening reactions are exceedingly rare; in one report, only 
55 reactions out of 20 million doses occurred. However, the adverse 
reaction rate in patients with a prior history of reaction to gadolinium 
is eight times higher than normal. Other risk factors include atopy or 
asthma (3.7%). There is no cross reactivity between different classes of 
contrast media; a prior reaction to gadolinium-based contrast does not 
predict a future reaction to iodinated contrast medium, or vice versa, 
more than any other unrelated allergy. Gadolinium contrast material 
can be administered safely to children as well as adults, although these 
agents are generally avoided in those aged <6 months.
NEPHROTOXICITY  Contrast-induced renal failure does not occur with 
gadolinium agents. A rare complication, nephrogenic systemic fibrosis 
(NSF), has occurred in patients with severe renal insufficiency who 
have been exposed to linear (Group 1 and 3) gadolinium contrast 
agents. The onset of NSF has been reported between 5 and 75 days 
TABLE 416-3  Some Common Intensities on T1- and T2-Weighted  
MRI Sequences
SIGNAL INTENSITY
IMAGE
TR
TE
CSF
FAT
BRAIN
EDEMA
T1W
Short
Short
Low
High
Low
Low
T2W
Long
Long
High
Low
High
High
FLAIR (T2)
Long
Long
Low
Medium
High
High
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; 
TE, interval between radiofrequency pulse and signal reception; TR, interval 
between radiofrequency pulses; T1W and T2W, T1- and T2-weighted.


--- PDF PAGE 3081 ---

CHAPTER 416 Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
3035
following exposure; histologic features include thickened collagen bun-
dles with surrounding clefts, mucin deposition, and increased numbers 
of fibrocytes and elastic fibers in skin. In addition to dermatologic 
symptoms, other manifestations include widespread fibrosis of the 
skeletal muscle, bone, lungs, pleura, pericardium, myocardium, kid-
ney, muscle, bone, testes, and dura. The American College of Radiology 
recommends that a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) assessment be 
obtained within 6 weeks prior to elective gadolinium-based MR con-
trast agent administration in patients with:
1.	 A history of renal disease (including solitary kidney, renal trans-
plant, renal tumor)
2.	 Age >60 years
3.	 History of hypertension
4.	 History of diabetes
5.	 History of severe hepatic disease, liver transplant, or pending 
liver transplant; for these patients, it is recommended that the 
patient’s GFR assessment be nearly contemporaneous with the MR 
examination.
The incidence of NSF in patients with severe renal dysfunction 
(GFR <30) varies from 0.19 to 4%. Other risk factors for NSF include 
acute kidney injury, the use of non-macrocyclic agents, and repeated 
or high-dose exposure to gadolinium. The American College of Radiol-
ogy Committee on Drugs and Contrast Media considers the risk of 
NSF among patients exposed to standard or lower doses of Group 2 
gadolinium agents (macrocyclic agents) is sufficiently low or possibly 
non-existent that the assessment of renal function is optimal prior to 
administration. However, patients receiving any Group 1 (linear) or 
3 gadolinium-containing agent should be considered at risk of NSF 
if they are on dialysis (of any form); have severe or end-stage chronic 
renal disease (eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2) without dialysis; eGFR of 
30–40 mL/min/1.73 m2 without dialysis (as the GFR may fluctuate); or 
have acute renal insufficiency. The use of gadolinium in young children 
and infants is discouraged due to the unknown risks and their imma-
ture renal systems.
■
■COMPLICATIONS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS
From the patient’s perspective, an MRI examination can be intimidat-
ing, and a higher level of cooperation is required than with CT. The 
patient lies on a table that is moved into a long, narrow gap within the 
magnet. Approximately 5% of the population experiences severe claus-
trophobia in the MR environment. This can be reduced by mild seda-
tion but remains a problem for some. Because it takes between 3 and 
10 min per sequence, movement of the patient during an MR examina-
tion distorts all of the images; therefore, uncooperative patients should 
either be sedated for the MR study or scanned with CT. Generally, 
children aged <8 years usually require conscious sedation in order to 
complete the MR examination without motion degradation.
MRI is considered safe for patients, even at very high field 
strengths. Serious injuries have been caused, however, by attraction of 
FIGURE 416-4  Herpes simplex encephalitis in a patient presenting with altered mental status and fever. A. and B. Coronal (A) and axial (B) T2-weighted fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery images demonstrate expansion and high signal intensity involving the right medial temporal lobe and insular cortex (arrows). C. Coronal 
diffusion-weighted image demonstrates high signal intensity indicating restricted diffusion involving the right medial temporal lobe and hippocampus (arrows) as 
well as subtle involvement of the left inferior temporal lobe (arrowhead). This is most consistent with neuronal death and can be seen in acute infarction as well 
as encephalitis and other inflammatory conditions. The suspected diagnosis of herpes simplex encephalitis was confirmed by cerebrospinal fluid polymerase chain 
reaction analysis.
A
B
C
FIGURE 416-5  Susceptibility-weighted imaging in a patient with familial cavernous malformations. A. Noncontrast computed tomography scan shows one hyperdense 
lesion in the right hemisphere (arrow). B. T2-weighted fast spin echo image shows subtle low-intensity lesions (arrows). C. Susceptibility-weighted image shows 
numerous low-intensity lesions consistent with hemosiderin-laden cavernous malformations (arrow).
A
C
B


--- PDF PAGE 3082 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3036
FIGURE 416-6  Diffusion tractography in cerebral glioma. Associative and descending pathways in a healthy subject (A) and in a patient with parietal lobe glioblastoma 
(B) presenting with a language deficit: the mass causes a disruption of the arcuate-SLF complex, in particular of its anterior portion (SLF III). Also shown are bilateral 
optic tract and left optic radiation pathways in a healthy subject (C) and in a patient with left occipital grade II oligoastrocytoma (D): the mass causes a disruption of the 
left optic radiation. Shown in neurologic orientation, i.e., the left brain appears on the left side of the image. AF, long segment of the arcuate fascicle; CST, corticospinal 
tract; IFOF: inferior fronto-occipital fascicle; ILF, inferior longitudinal fascicle; SLF III, superior longitudinal fascicle III or anterior segment of the arcuate fascicle; SLF-tp, 
temporo-parietal portion of the superior longitudinal fascicle or posterior segment of the arcuate fascicle; T, tumor; UF, uncinated fascicle. (Part D courtesy of Eduardo 
Caverzasi and Roland Henry.)
A
B
C
D
TABLE 416-4  Common Contraindications to Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging
Cardiac pacemaker or permanent pacemaker leads
Internal defibrillatory device
Cochlear prostheses
Bone growth stimulators
Spinal cord stimulators
Electronic infusion devices
Intracranial aneurysm clips (some but not all)
Ocular implants (some) or ocular metallic foreign body
McGee stapedectomy piston prosthesis
Duraphase penile implant
Swan-Ganz catheter
Magnetic stoma plugs
Magnetic dental implants
Magnetic sphincters
Ferromagnetic inferior vena cava filters, coils, stents—safe 6 weeks after 
implantation
Tattooed eyeliner (contains ferromagnetic material and may irritate eyes)
Note: See also http://www.mrisafety.com.
ferromagnetic objects into the magnet, which act as missiles if brought 
too close to the magnet. Likewise, ferromagnetic implants, such as 
aneurysm clips, may torque within the magnet, causing damage to 
vessels and even death. Metallic foreign bodies in the eye have moved 
and caused intraocular hemorrhage; screening for ocular metallic 
fragments is indicated in those with a history of metal work or ocular 
metallic foreign bodies. Implanted cardiac pacemakers are generally 
a contraindication to MRI owing to the risk of induced arrhythmias; 
however, some newer pacemakers have been shown to be safe. All 
health care personnel and patients must be screened and educated 
thoroughly to prevent such disasters because the magnet is always 
“on.” Table 416-4 lists common contraindications for MRI.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE ANGIOGRAPHY
MR angiography is a general term describing several MR techniques 
that result in vascular-weighted images. Non contrast MRA provides 
a flow map rather than the anatomic map shown by conventional 
angiography. On routine spin echo MR sequences, moving protons 
(e.g., flowing blood, CSF) exhibit complex MR signals that range from 
high- to low-signal intensity relative to background stationary tissue. 
Fast-flowing blood returns no signal (flow void) on routine T1W or 
T2W spin echo MR images. Slower-flowing blood, as occurs in veins 
or distal to arterial stenosis, may appear high in signal. However, 
using special pulse sequences called gradient echo sequences, it is pos-
sible to increase the signal intensity of moving protons in contrast to 
the low signal background intensity of stationary tissue. This creates 
angiography-like images, which can be manipulated in three dimen-
sions to highlight vascular anatomy and relationships.
So-called time-of-flight (TOF) MRA relies on the suppression of 
nonmoving tissue to provide a low-intensity background for the high 


--- PDF PAGE 3083 ---

CHAPTER 416 Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
3037
signal intensity of flowing blood entering the section; arterial or venous 
structures may be highlighted. A typical TOF MRA sequence results in a 
series of contiguous, thin MR sections (0.6–0.9 mm thick), which can be 
viewed as a stack and manipulated to create an angiographic image data 
set that can be reformatted and viewed in various planes and angles, 
much like that seen with conventional angiography (Fig. 416-2G).
Phase-contrast MRA has a longer acquisition time than TOF MRA, 
but in addition to providing anatomic information similar to that of 
TOF imaging, it can be used to reveal the velocity and direction of 
blood flow in a given vessel.
MRA is often acquired during infusion of contrast material. Advan-
tages include faster imaging times (1–2 min vs 10 min), fewer flow- 
related artifacts, and 4D temporal imaging resulting in arterial and 
venous phases. Recently, contrast-enhanced MRA has become the 
standard for extracranial vascular MRA. This technique entails rapid 
imaging using coronal three-dimensional TOF sequences during a 
bolus infusion of gadolinium contrast agent.
MRA has lower spatial resolution compared with conventional film-
based angiography, and therefore the detection of small-vessel abnor-
malities, such as vasculitis and distal vasospasm, is problematic. MRA 
is also less sensitive to slowly flowing blood and thus may not reliably 
differentiate complete from near-complete occlusions. Motion, either 
by the patient or by anatomic structures, may distort the MRA images, 
creating artifacts. These limitations notwithstanding, MRA has proved 
useful in evaluation of the extracranial carotid and vertebral circulation 
as well as of larger-caliber intracranial arteries and dural sinuses. It has 
also proved useful in the noninvasive detection of intracranial aneu-
rysms and vascular malformations.
ECHO-PLANAR MRI
Recent improvements in gradients, software, and high-speed com-
puter processors now permit extremely rapid MRI of the brain. With 
echo-planar MRI (EPI), fast gradients are switched on and off at high 
speeds to create the information used to form an image. With EPI, all 
of the information required for processing an image is accumulated in 
milliseconds, and the information for the entire brain can be obtained 
in <1–2 min, depending on the degree of resolution required or desired. 
Fast MRI reduces patient and organ motion and is the basis of perfu-
sion imaging during contrast infusion and kinematic motion studies. 
EPI is also the sequence used to obtain diffusion imaging and tractog-
raphy, as well as fMRI and arterial spin-labeled studies (Figs. 416-2H, 
416-3, 416-4C, and 416-6; and Fig. 419-13).
Perfusion and diffusion imaging are EPI techniques that are useful 
in early detection of ischemic injury of the brain and may be useful 
together to demonstrate infarcted tissue as well as ischemic but poten-
tially viable tissue at risk of infarction (e.g., the ischemic penumbra). 
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) assesses microscopic motion of 
water; abnormal restriction of motion appears as relative high-signal 
intensity on diffusion-weighted images. Infarcted tissue reduces the 
water motion within cells and in the interstitial tissues, resulting in 
high signal on DWI. DWI is the most sensitive technique for detection 
of acute cerebral infarction of <7 days in duration (Fig. 416-2H). It is 
also quite sensitive for detecting dying or dead brain tissue secondary 
to encephalitis, as well as abscess formation (Fig. 416-3B).
Perfusion MRI can be performed by the acquisition of fast echo pla-
nar gradient images during a rapid intravenous bolus of gadolinium 
contrast material or by arterial spin labeling (ASL) without the use of 
contrast material. With contrast perfusion imaging, relative cerebral 
blood volume, mean transit time, and cerebral blood flow maps are 
derived. Delay in mean transit time and reduction in cerebral blood 
volume and cerebral blood flow are typical of infarction. In the setting 
of reduced blood flow, a prolonged mean transit time of contrast but 
normal or elevated cerebral blood volume may indicate tissue supplied 
by collateral flow that is at risk of infarction. Perfusion MRI imaging can 
also be used in the assessment of brain tumors to differentiate intraaxial 
primary tumors, whose BBB is relatively intact, from extraaxial tumors 
or metastases, which demonstrate a relatively more permeable BBB.
Diffusion tensor imaging is derived from diffusion MRI imaging 
sequences. This technique assesses the direction and integrity of white 
matter architecture. It has proven valuable in preoperative assessment 
of subcortical white matter tract anatomy prior to brain tumor surgery, 
as well as determining normal and abnormal white matter architecture 
in congenital and acquired pathologies (Fig. 416-6).
fMRI of the brain is an EPI technique that localizes regions of activity 
in the brain following task activation or at rest (so-called resting state 
fMRI). Neuronal activity elicits a slight increase in the delivery of oxy-
genated blood flow to a specific region of activated brain. This results in 
an alteration in the balance of oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin, 
which yields a 2–3% increase in signal intensity within veins and local 
capillaries. Currently, preoperative somatosensory and auditory cortex 
localization is possible, and methods to assess motor and language func-
tion are in development. This technique has proved useful to neuroscien-
tists interested in interrogating the localization of certain brain functions.
ARTERIAL SPIN LABELING
ASL is a quantitative noninvasive MR technique that measures cerebral 
blood flow. Blood traversing in the neck is labeled by an MR pulse and 
then imaged in the brain after a short (2 second) delay. The signal in the 
brain is reflective of blood flow. ASL is an especially important technique 
for patients with kidney failure and for pediatric patients in whom the 
use of radioactive tracers or exogenous contrast agents is contraindicated. 
Increased cerebral flow is more easily identified than slow flow, which 
can be sometimes difficult to quantify. This technique has also been useful 
in detecting arterial venous shunting in arteriovenous malformations and 
arteriovenous fistulas, as well as increased blood flow in brain tumors, 
and patients post TIA, post-ictal, or post migrane.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE NEUROGRAPHY
MRN is a T2W MR technique that shows promise in detecting increased 
signal in irritated, inflamed, or infiltrated peripheral nerves. Images are 
obtained with fat-suppressed fast spin echo imaging or short inversion 
recovery sequences. Irritated or infiltrated nerves will demonstrate 
high signal on T2W imaging. This is indicated in patients with radicu-
lopathy whose conventional MR studies of the spine are normal, or in 
those suspected of peripheral nerve entrapment or trauma.
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
PET relies on the detection of positrons emitted during the decay 
of a radionuclide that has been injected into a patient. The most fre-
quently used moiety is 2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG), which 
is an analogue of glucose and is taken up by cells competitively with 
2-deoxyglucose. Multiple images of glucose uptake activity are formed 
after 45–60 min. Images reveal differences in regional glucose activity 
among normal and pathologic brain structures. FDG-PET is used 
primarily for the detection of extracranial metastatic disease; how-
ever, a lower activity of FDG in the parietal lobes is associated with 
Alzheimer’s disease, a finding that may simply reflect atrophy that 
occurs in the later stages of the disease. Combination PET-CT scanners, 
in which both CT and PET are obtained at one sitting, have largely 
replaced PET scans alone for most clinical indications. MR-PET scan-
ners have also been developed and may prove useful for imaging the 
brain and other organs without the radiation exposure of CT. More 
recent PET ligand developments include beta-amyloid tracers, such as 
Pittsburgh compound B (PIB) and 18-F AV-45 (florbetapir), and tau PET 
tracers, such as 18F-T807 and T808. Studies have shown an increased 
percentage of amyloid deposition in patients with Alzheimer’s disease 
compared with mild cognitive impairment and healthy controls; how-
ever, up to 25% of cognitively “normal” patients show abnormalities 
on amyloid PET imaging. This may either reflect subclinical disease 
processes or variation of normal. Tau imaging may be more specific for 
Alzheimer’s disease, and clinical studies are under way.
MYELOGRAPHY
■
■TECHNIQUE
Myelography involves the intrathecal instillation of specially formu-
lated water-soluble iodinated contrast medium into the lumbar or 
cervical subarachnoid space. CT scanning is typically performed after 


--- PDF PAGE 3084 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3038 myelography (CT myelography) to better demonstrate the spinal cord 
and roots, which appear as filling defects in the opacified subarachnoid 
space. Low-dose CT myelography, in which CT is performed after the 
subarachnoid injection of a small amount of relatively dilute contrast 
material, has replaced conventional myelography for many indica-
tions, thereby reducing exposure to radiation and contrast media. CT 
is obtained at a slice thickness ~ 2.5 mm and reconstructed at 0.625-mm 
thick slices which can quickly be reformated in sagittal and coronal 
planes, equivalent to traditional myelography projections.
■
■INDICATIONS
CT myelography and MRI have largely replaced conventional myel-
ography for the diagnosis of diseases of the spinal canal and cord 
(Table 416-1). Remaining indications for conventional plain-film myel-
ography include the evaluation of suspected meningeal or arachnoid 
cysts and the localization of CSF fistulas. Conventional myelography 
and CT myelography provide the most precise information in patients 
with failed back syndrome following spinal fusion procedures.
■
■CONTRAINDICATIONS
Myelography is relatively safe; however, it should be performed with 
caution in any patient with elevated intracranial pressure, evidence of 
a spinal block, or a history of allergic reaction to intrathecal contrast 
media. In patients with a suspected spinal block, MR is the preferred 
imaging technique. If myelography is necessary, only a small amount 
of contrast medium should be instilled below the block in order to 
minimize the risk of neurologic deterioration. Lumbar puncture is 
to be avoided in patients with bleeding disorders, including patients 
receiving anticoagulant therapy, as well as in those with infections of 
the overlying soft tissues.
■
■COMPLICATIONS
Headache is the most frequent complication of myelography and is 
reported to occur in 5–30% of patients. Nausea and vomiting may also 
occur rarely. Postural headache (post–lumbar puncture headache) is 
generally due to continued leakage of CSF from the dural puncture 
site. A higher incidence is noted among younger women and with 
the use of larger gauge cutting-type spinal needles. If significant head-
ache persists for >48 h, placement of an epidural blood patch should be 
considered. Management of lumbar puncture headache is discussed 
in Chap. 13. Vasovagal syncope may occur during lumbar puncture; it 
is accentuated by the upright position used during lumbar myelogra-
phy. Adequate hydration before and after myelography will reduce the 
incidence of this complication.
Hearing loss is a rare complication of myelography. It may result 
from a direct toxic effect of the contrast medium or from an alteration of 
the pressure equilibrium between CSF and perilymph in the inner ear. 
Puncture of the spinal cord is a rare but serious complication of cervical 
(C1–2) or high lumbar puncture. The risk of cord puncture is greatest 
in patients with spinal stenosis, Chiari malformations, or conditions 
that reduce CSF volume. In these settings, a low-dose lumbar injection 
followed by thin-section CT or MRI is a safer alternative to cervical 
puncture. Intrathecal contrast reactions are rare, but aseptic meningitis 
and encephalopathy are reported complications. The latter is usually 
dose related and associated with contrast entering the intracranial 
subarachnoid space. Seizures rarely occur following myelography, 
historically reported in 0.1–0.3% of patients. Risk factors include a pre-
existing seizure disorder and the use of a total iodine dose of >4500 mg. 
Other reported complications include hyperthermia, hallucinations, 
depression, and anxiety states. These side effects have been reduced 
by the development of nonionic, water-soluble contrast agents as well 
as by head elevation and generous hydration following myelography.
SPINE INTERVENTIONS
■
■DISKOGRAPHY
The evaluation of back pain and radiculopathy may require diagnostic 
procedures that attempt either to reproduce the patient’s pain or relieve 
it, indicating its correct source prior to lumbar fusion. Diskography is 
performed by fluoroscopic placement of a 22- to 25-gauge needle into 
the intervertebral disk and subsequent injection of 1–3 mL of contrast 
media. The intradiskal pressure is recorded, as is an assessment of the 
patient’s response to the injection of contrast material. Typically little or 
no pain is felt during injection of a normal disk, which does not accept 
much more than 1 mL of contrast material, even at pressures as high 
as 415–690 kPa (60–100 lb/in2). CT and plain films are obtained follow-
ing the procedure. Concerns have been raised that diskography may 
contribute to an accelerated rate of disk degeneration; furthermore, 
patients who suffer from depression or anxiety are more likely to find 
diskography painful and in some cases the procedure-associated pain 
became persistent, lasting a year or longer.
■
■SELECTIVE NERVE ROOT AND EPIDURAL SPINAL 
INJECTIONS
Percutaneous selective nerve root and epidural blocks with glucocorticoid 
and anesthetic mixtures may be both therapeutic and diagnostic, espe-
cially if a patient’s pain is relieved. Typically, 1–2 mL of an equal mixture 
of a long-acting glucocorticoid such as betamethasone and a long-acting 
anesthetic such as bupivacaine 0.75% is instilled under CT or fluoroscopic 
guidance in the intraspinal epidural space or adjacent to an existing nerve 
root. This can also be performed in the facet joints, or around the medial 
nerve branches that supply innervation to the facet joints.
ANGIOGRAPHY
Catheter angiography is indicated for evaluating intracranial small- 
vessel pathology (such as vasculitis), for assessing vascular malfor-
mations and aneurysms, and in endovascular therapeutic procedures 
(Table 416-1). As noted above, angiography has been replaced for many 
indications by CT/CTA or MRI/MRA.
Angiography carries the greatest risk of morbidity of all diagnostic 
imaging procedures, owing to the necessity of inserting a catheter into 
a blood vessel, directing the catheter to the required location, injecting 
contrast material to visualize the vessel, and removing the catheter 
while maintaining hemostasis. Therapeutic transcatheter procedures 
(see below) have become important options for the treatment of some 
cerebrovascular diseases. The decision to undertake a diagnostic or 
therapeutic angiographic procedure requires careful assessment of the 
goals of the investigation and its attendant risks.
To improve tolerance to contrast agents, patients undergoing 
angiography should be well hydrated before and after the procedure. 
Because the femoral route is used most commonly, the femoral artery 
must be compressed after the procedure to prevent a hematoma from 
developing. The puncture site and distal pulses should be evaluated 
carefully after the procedure; complications can include thigh hema-
toma or lower extremity emboli.
■
■COMPLICATIONS
A common femoral arterial puncture provides retrograde access via the 
aorta to the aortic arch and great vessels. The most feared complication 
of cerebral angiography is stroke. Thrombus can form on or inside the 
tip of the catheter, and atherosclerotic thrombus or plaque can be dis-
lodged by the catheter or guide wire or by the force of injection and can 
embolize distally in the cerebral circulation. Risk factors for ischemic 
complications include limited experience on the part of the angiogra-
pher, atherosclerosis, vasospasm, low cardiac output, decreased oxygen-
carrying capacity, advanced age, and prior history of migraine. The risk 
of a neurologic complication varies but is ~4% for transient ischemic 
attack and stroke, 1% for permanent deficit, and <0.1% for death.
Ionic contrast material injected into the cerebral vasculature can be 
neurotoxic if the BBB is breached, either by an underlying disease or 
by the injection of hyperosmolar contrast agent. Ionic contrast media 
are less well tolerated than nonionic media, probably because they can 
induce changes in cell membrane electrical potentials. Patients with 
dolichoectasia of the basilar artery can suffer reversible brainstem dys-
function and acute short-term memory loss during angiography, owing 
to the slow percolation of the contrast material and the consequent 
prolonged exposure of the brain. Rarely, an intracranial aneurysm rup-
tures during an angiographic contrast injection, causing subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, perhaps as a result of injection under high pressure.


================================================================================
Ch417 Pathobiology of Neurologic Diseases
Pages 3085-3095
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3085 ---

CHAPTER 417 Pathobiology of Neurologic Diseases
3039
■
■SPINAL ANGIOGRAPHY
Spinal angiography may be indicated to evaluate vascular mal-
formations and tumors and to identify the artery of Adamkiewicz 
(Chap. 434) prior to aortic aneurysm repair. The procedure is lengthy 
and requires the use of relatively large volumes of contrast; the inci-
dence of serious complications, including paraparesis, subjective visual 
blurring, and altered speech, is ~2%. Gadolinium-enhanced MRA has 
been used successfully in this setting, as has iodinated contrast CTA, 
which has promise for replacing diagnostic spinal angiography for 
some indications.
INTERVENTIONAL NEURORADIOLOGY
This rapidly developing field is providing new therapeutic options 
for patients with challenging neurovascular problems. Available pro-
cedures include detachable coil therapy for aneurysms, particulate or 
liquid adhesive embolization of arteriovenous malformations, stent 
retrieval systems for embolectomy, balloon angioplasty and stenting of 
arterial stenosis or vasospasm, transarterial or transvenous embolization 
of dural arteriovenous fistulas, balloon occlusion of carotid-cavernous 
and vertebral fistulas, endovascular treatment of vein-of-Galen mal-
formations, preoperative embolization of tumors, and thrombolysis of 
acute arterial or venous thrombosis. Many of these disorders place the 
patient at high risk of cerebral hemorrhage, stroke, or death.
The highest complication rates are found with the therapies designed 
to treat the highest risk diseases. The advent of electrolytically detach-
able coils ushered in a new era in the treatment of cerebral aneurysms. 
Two randomized trials found reductions of morbidity and mortality at 
1 year among those treated for aneurysm with detachable coils com-
pared with neurosurgical clipping. It remains to be determined what 
the role of coils will be relative to surgical options, but in many centers, 
coiling has become standard therapy for many aneurysms.
Finally, recent studies of stent retrieval systems used to withdraw 
emboli have shown improved clinical outcomes in patients presenting 
with large vessel occlusions and signs of stroke (Chap. 420).
■
■FURTHER READING
Haller S et al: Arterial spin labeling perfusion of the brain: Emerging 
clinical applications. Radiology 281:337, 2016.
Kim SJ, Kim KA: Safety issues and updates under MR environments. 
Eur J Radiol 89:7, 2017.
Mandell DM et al: Intracranial vessel wall MRI: Principles and expert 
consensus recommendations of the American Society of Neuroradiol-
ogy. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 38:218, 2017.
Nguyen HS et al: Progressing bevacizumab-induced diffusion restric-
tion is associated with coagulative necrosis surrounded by viable 
tumor and decreased overall survival in patients with recurrent 
glioblastoma. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 37:2201, 2016.
Ramalho J et al: Gadolinium-based contrast agent accumulation and 
toxicity: An update. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 37:1192, 2016.
Pathobiology of Neurologic 
Diseases
Stephen L. Hauser,  Arnold R. Kriegstein,  
Stanley B. Prusiner 
417
The human nervous system is the organ of consciousness, cognition, 
ethics, and behavior; as such, it is the most intricate structure known 
to exist. More than one-third of the 23,000 genes encoded in the human 
genome are expressed in the nervous system. Each mature brain is 
composed of 100 billion neurons, several million miles of axons and 
dendrites, and >1015 synapses. Neurons exist within a dense par-
enchyma of multifunctional glial cells that synthesize myelin, preserve 
homeostasis, and regulate immune responses. Measured against this 
background of complexity, the achievements of molecular neuroscience 
have been extraordinary. Advances have occurred in parallel with the 
development of new enabling technologies—in bioengineering and 
computational sciences, imaging, and cell, molecular and chemical 
biology—and moving forward it is likely that the pace of new discov-
eries will only increase. This chapter reviews a number of the most 
dynamic areas in neuroscience, specifically highlighting advances in 
immunology and inflammation, neurodegeneration, and stem cell 
biology. In each of these areas, recent discoveries are providing context 
for an understanding of the triggers and mechanisms of disease, and 
offering new hope for prevention, treatment, and repair of nervous 
system injuries. Discussions of the neurogenetics of behavior, advances 
in addiction science, and diseases caused by network dysfunction can 
be found in Chap. 443 (Biology of Psychiatric Disorders); and new 
approaches to rehabilitation via harnessing of neuroplasticity, neuro-
stimulation, and computer-brain interfaces are presented in Chap. 477 
(Emerging Neurotherapeutic Technologies).
NEUROIMMUNOLOGY AND 
NEUROINFLAMMATION
■
■OLIGODENDROCYTES AND MYELIN
Myelin is the multilayered insulating substance that surrounds axons 
and speeds impulse conduction by permitting action potentials to jump 
between naked regions of axons (nodes of Ranvier) and across myeli-
nated segments. Molecular interactions between the myelin membrane 
and axon are required to maintain the stability, function, and normal 
life span of both structures. A single oligodendrocyte usually ensheaths 
multiple axons in the central nervous system (CNS), whereas in the 
peripheral nervous system (PNS), each Schwann cell typically myeli-
nates a single axon. Myelin is a lipid-rich material formed by a spiral-
ing process of the membrane of the myelinating cell around the axon, 
creating multiple membrane bilayers that are tightly apposed (compact 
myelin) by charged protein interactions. Several inhibitors of axon 
growth are expressed on the innermost (periaxonal) lamellae of the 
myelin membrane (see below). A number of clinically important neu-
rologic disorders are caused by inherited mutations in myelin proteins 
of the CNS or PNS (Chap. 438), and constituents of myelin also have a 
propensity to be targeted as autoantigens in autoimmune demyelinat-
ing disorders (Chap. 436).
Premyelinating oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) are highly 
motile cells that migrate extensively during development and in the 
adult brain following injuries to the myelin sheath. OPCs migrate along 
the inner (or abluminal) surface of endothelial cells, a process regulated 
by Wnt pathway signaling and upregulation of the chemokine receptor 
Cxcr4 that drives their attachment and retention to the vasculature. 
Initial specification to OPCs is transcriptionally regulated by the Olig 2 
and Yin Yang 1 genes, whereas the later stage of myelination mediated 
by postmitotic oligodendrocytes depends on a different transcription 
factor, myelin gene regulatory factor (MRF). In the normal adult brain, 
large numbers of OPCs (expressing PDGFR-α and NG2) are widely 
distributed but do not myelinate axons, even in demyelinating envi-
ronments such as in lesions of multiple sclerosis (MS). In addition to 
Wnt, several families of molecules have been identified that regulate 
oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination, including LINGO-1, 
PSA-NCAM, hyaluronan, Nogo-A, the Wnt pathway, notch signaling 
(and its receptor Jagged), and the M1 muscarinic receptor Chrm1, all 
of which are inhibitory, and the retinoic acid receptor RXRγ, which is 
excitatory. All are also potential targets for myelin repair therapies. In 
an experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) model, oligodendro-
cyte-specific knockout of Chrm1 improved remyelination, protected 
axons and restored function, directly demonstrating that remyelination 
can be neuroprotective following injury. A recently reported pivotal 
trial of a monoclonal antibody against LINGO-1 failed to promote 
remyelination, a disappointing result given that the antibody appeared 
to have promising clinical effects in an earlier phase 2 trial.
A series of observations has called into question the traditional 
concept that axon-derived cues are always required for myelination 


--- PDF PAGE 3086 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3040 to occur. Fixed (i.e., dead) axons could be efficiently myelinated by 
oligodendrocytes in vitro, as could artificial polystyrene nanowires of 
a similar diameter. This led to development of new high-throughput 
screening assays based on myelination of polystyrene nanowires to 
identify compounds that could promote myelination and in a pre-
liminary human trial a molecule that emerged from this assay, the 
antihistamine clemastine, had clear efficacy as a remyelinating agent 
in patients with chronic optic neuropathy due to MS. Remarkably, the 
drug appears to work via binding to the Chrm1 muscarinic receptor.
■
■MACROPHAGES AND MICROGLIA
These represent the major cell types in the nervous system responsible 
for antigen presentation and innate immunity. Brain microglia migrate 
from the yolk sac early in embryogenesis before the blood-brain barrier 
is formed, and are believed to maintain their cell numbers through cell 
division within the nervous system and not via repopulation from the 
circulation. Depletion of microglia in adult mice by administration of a 
selective inhibitor of colony-stimulating factor receptor 1 (CSFR1) was 
followed by their rapid repopulation, suggesting that a pool of resident 
microglial precursor cells exist throughout the CNS. Additional roles 
for brain microglia are known to exist in neurogenesis, through secre-
tion of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and other molecules, 
as well as in the development and regulation of neural circuits through 
pruning of excitatory synapses and control of dendritic spine densities 
(Fig. 417-1). Mice depleted of microglia during development exhibit a 
variety of cognitive, learning and behavioral deficits, including abnor-
mal social behaviors; these processes are dependent on the classical 
complement pathway molecules and the chemokine receptor CX3CR1. 
A challenge to the field has been that tools to definitively separate 
brain microglia from perivascular macrophages do not currently exist. 
A recent advance that could provide a possible solution utilizes adult 
skin-derived pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), and the development of 
methods to generate microglia-like cells from iPSCs using media con-
taining IL-34 and colony-stimulating factor 1.
Microglia are located throughout the brain parenchyma, whereas 
brain macrophages occur primarily in perivascular regions, including 
Promote learning and memory
IL-1α  |  TNF  |  C1q
BDNF
Pruning or elimination of synapses
Uptake of aggregated proteins
Phagocytosis of debris
Proinflammatory (A1) astrocyte
FIGURE 417-1  The multifunctional microglial cell. Microglia have diverse functions that can support 
healthy development and maintain homeostasis, or contribute to tissue damage in pathologic conditions. 
Homeostatic functions include promotion of learning and memory through secretion of soluble proteins 
such as brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF); participation in normal synaptic pruning; and clearing 
cellular debris and protein aggregates via phagocytosis. However, in pathologic states activated microglia 
also contribute to tissue damage, by targeting normal healthy neurons and synapses; by promoting 
formation of β-amyloid or other misfolded proteins deposited in neurodegenerative diseases; and secreting 
cytokines (such as IL-1α, TNF, and the complement component C1q) incriminated in induction of neurotoxic 
A1 astrocytes. In addition, microglia have diverse functions in adaptive immunity, including roles in antigen 
presentation and immune regulation (Fig. 417-2). (Figure adapted from J Herz et al: Myeloid cells in the 
central nervous system. Immunity 46:943, 2017, Fig. 2.)
the meninges and choroid plexus. In contrast to microglia, brain mac-
rophages are derived from monocytes that enter the nervous system at 
low levels from the bloodstream on a continuing basis and in higher 
numbers during pathologic states. A possible exception to this rule 
are the meningeal macrophages, located primarily in the subdural 
space, that appear to enter the brain at an early developmental stage 
and remain throughout the life of the individual. In a murine model of 
autoimmune demyelination, EAE (Fig. 417-2), macrophages derived 
from bone marrow monocytes, but not microglia, were the critical 
population that initiated inflammatory demyelination at paraxonal 
regions near nodes of Ranvier. Brain macrophages have been found 
to have multiple pro-inflammatory functions, including promoting 
adhesion, attraction and activation of B and T lymphocytes; providing 
antigen-specific activation of T cells via antigen presentation of specific 
immunogenic peptides, including autoantigens, complexed to surface 
class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC II) molecules; and 
contributing to cell injury through generation of oxidative stress and 
cytotoxicity. By contrast, microglia have been traditionally thought to 
downregulate inflammatory responses and promote tissue repair. This 
model of M1 (pro-inflammatory) and M2 (regulatory/repair) macro-
phage/microglial functions, derived primarily from experimental 
models of autoimmunity, is certainly an oversimplification, and more 
nuanced functions of these cell types can be revealed depending on 
the specific context and environmental cues.
Evidence also supports a primary role for brain macrophages and 
microglia in neurodegenerative diseases, in contrast to earlier views in 
which their role was seen as largely secondary and involving phagocy-
tosis of cell debris. In different situations, macrophages and microglia 
can be either protective or pathogenic. In mice, macrophages contrib-
ute to spatial memory when activated in the presence of the cytokine 
interleukin (IL)-4 produced by invading lymphocytes, and microglia 
through secretion of BDNF support learning and memory through 
promoting synaptic plasticity. Experimentally, microglia and brain 
macrophages also participate in clearance of pathogenic β-amyloid 
aggregates in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) mice, and disruption of brain 
macrophages by knockout of CCR2, a chemokine required for entry of 
bloodstream monocytes into the CNS, exacer-
bated AD pathology. On the other hand, data 
indicate that disease exacerbating effects of 
microglia and macrophages may predominate 
in other situations. A direct role for microglia 
in human AD was suggested by genetic evi-
dence implicating the phagocytosis-associated 
gene TREM2, and other genes belonging to the 
complement system, in AD susceptibility. Acti-
vation of the classical complement cascade is 
also assuming an increased role in concepts of 
pathogenesis, as follows; synapses targeted for 
elimination express the complement proteins 
C1q and C3, the levels of which increase in 
the presence of excess β-amyloid; C3-bearing 
synapses are then targeted for elimination 
by microglia that express the complement 3 
receptor (CR3); and knockout of C3 can rescue 
the clinical and pathologic abnormalities asso-
ciated with neurodegeneration in AD-prone 
mice. In familial frontotemporal degeneration 
(FTD) due to mutations of progranulin (pgrn), 
a prominent immune pathology has also been 
identified, including the presence of acti-
vated microglia expressing high levels of pro- 
inflammatory cytokines. In pgrn-/- mice, an 
age-dependent microglial activation is asso-
ciated with upregulation of genes associated 
with innate immunity including complement 
proteins, and with enhanced pruning of inhib-
itory synapses in key regions of the CNS, 
leading to behavioral disorders reminis-
cent of human FTD. Moreover, inhibition of 


--- PDF PAGE 3087 ---

CHAPTER 417 Pathobiology of Neurologic Diseases
3041
Rolling
Activated
lymphocyte
Flow
LFA-1
α4 Integrin
VCAM
ICAM
Triggering
Strong adhesion
Gelatinases
Antibody
complement
B cell
B cell
B cell
T cell
Antigen
presentation
TNFα, LT, and
GM-CSF
Basal lamina
Microglia/macrophages
T cell
activation
Chemokines
and cytokines
TNF, IFN, free radicals,
vasoactive amines,
complement, proteases,
cytokines, eicosanoids
Chemokines
IL-1, IL-12
IFN-γ
IL-2
Heat shock
proteins?
Activated
Microglia/
macrophages
Astrocytes
Blood-brain
barrier
endothelium
Fc receptor
Extravasation
CD 31
Myelin damage
Brain tissue
FIGURE 417-2  A model for experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE). Crucial steps for disease initiation and progression include peripheral activation of preexisting 
autoreactive T cells; homing to the central nervous system (CNS) and extravasation across the blood-brain barrier; reactivation of T cells by exposed autoantigens; secretion 
of cytokines; activation of microglia and astrocytes and recruitment of a secondary inflammatory wave; and immune-mediated myelin destruction. ICAM, intercellular 
adhesion molecule; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; LFA-1, leukocyte function-associated antigen-1; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule.
complement activation rescued all of these deficits. Taken together, 
these data indicate a primary role for microglial activation in pgrn 
associated FTD, likely occurring through enhanced lysosomal traffick-
ing and increased production of cleavage products of the C3 comple-
ment component, and leading to enhanced and deleterious synaptic 
pruning in regions of the brain affected in FTD. Although it is likely 
that the specific mechanisms of complement dependent neurodegen-
eration will differ in distinct neurodegenerative conditions, these data 
provide hope that complement pathway interventions could represent 
a possible approach to control of neurodegenerative pathologies medi-
ated at least in part through the innate immune system.
ASTROCYTES
Astrocytes represent half or more of all cells in the CNS. Traditionally 
thought to function as simple interstitial supporting cells that pro-
vide scaffolds for neuronal migration and contribute to homeostasis, 
emerging data indicate far more pleiotropic functions for this cell type. 
Astrocytes exert profound roles in the life of synapses by secreting 
factors (such as apolipoprotein E, thrombospondins, and glypicans) 
that regulate development, maintenance, and pruning of presynaptic 
and postsynaptic structures. Influenced by local neuronal activity, 
astrocytes actively phagocytose synapses. Astrocytes also participate 
in dynamic regulation of vascular tone, in part through astrocyte- 
astrocyte communication mediated through gap junctions and calcium 
waves modulated by neuronal activity; support blood brain barrier and 
glymphatic (see below) integrity through extension of foot process to 
the vascular structures and expression of aquaporin-4 water channels; 
and carry out additional metabolic functions essential for the mainte-
nance of neuronal health.
One characteristic of the response to many types of brain injury is 
reactive astrocytosis, or the formation of a glial scar. Recent work has 
identified two fundamentally different types of reactive astrocytes 
that appear to have countervailing functions; the terms A1 and A2 
astrocytes have been proposed, by analogy to brain macrophage/
microglia M1 and M2 designations, described above. A2 astrocytes are 
induced by ischemia and may serve beneficial functions, including a 
contribution to tissue repair after injury. By contrast, A1 astrocytes are 
induced in diverse inflammatory and degenerative states, and appear 
to actively participate in the injury process. Interestingly, secreted prod-
ucts of activated microglia, specifically IL-1a, TNF, and C1q, induce 
astrocytes to transform to the A1 type. Functionally, A1 astrocytes lose 
the capacity to phagocytose synapses and myelin debris, and are strik-
ingly toxic in vitro to various populations of neurons and to mature 
oligodendrocytes, potentially at least in part via complement mediated 
damage. Interestingly, OPCs, abundant in active lesions of multiple 
sclerosis (MS; Chap. 436) despite the inflammatory milieu, are resistant 
to A1 mediated death. The nature of the toxic factor is unknown. There 
is speculation that products of A1 astrocytes could promote damage 
in conditions as varied as MS, AD (Chap. 423), Parkinson’s disease 
(PD) (Chap. 427), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Chap. 429), 
despite their distinct etiologies and pathologies.
GLYMPHATICS
Two newly identified lymphatic structures of the CNS are the glym-
phatic and deep dural lymphoid systems, responsible for clearance of 
debris in the CNS, and likely also serving a role in immune surveil-
lance. The brain has traditionally been considered to lack a classical 
lymphatic system, and immune responses against antigens are less 


--- PDF PAGE 3088 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3042 effectively generated in the CNS than in other organ systems, a concept 
termed “immune privilege.” However, there is abundant evidence that 
the immune privilege status of the brain is only relative and not abso-
lute. Furthermore, given the high metabolic demands of the brain some 
mechanism for efficient removal of solute and debris must be present. 
One well-established pathway involves the passive flow of solutes 
from the brain parenchyma into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and their 
exit via the arachnoid granulations, as well as along cranial and spinal 
nerve roots to a series of lymphoid structures located in the cribriform 
plate and nasal mucosa and elsewhere.
The glymphatic system derives its name from a distinctive archi-
tecture involving lymphoid-like structures and astroglial cells. CSF 
synthesized in the arachnoid villi circulates through the ventricles and 
subarachnoid space surrounding the convexities of the brain and spinal 
cord, and exits through conduits surrounding arterioles penetrating 
into the brain parenchyma. These spaces are lined by endothelial cells 
internally, and by astrocyte foot processes that form the external walls. 
Aided by arterial propulsion, CSF moves out of these specialized 
conduits and into astrocytes via foot processes rich in aquaporin-4 
water channels, and then in the interstitium of brain parenchyma picks 
up solutes and particulate debris that are then carried to perivenous 
spaces where they passage to exit the brain and drain into the lym-
phatic system. In mice, knockout of aquaporin-4 markedly reduced 
the flow of interstitial fluids in the brain, underscoring the critical role 
of astrocyte uptake of CSF in this process. Interstitial flow in the CNS 
is also impaired with aging, possibly related to changes in astrocytic 
aquaporin-4 expression. Another fascinating aspect of the glymphatic 
system is that the transport of fluids and solutes accelerates with sleep, 
arguing for a critical role for sleep in promoting clearance of debris 
needed to meet the high metabolic demands of the nervous system. 
Furthermore, in disease models, aggregated proteins associated with 
neurodegenerative disease, such as β-amyloid associated with AD 
(Chap. 423), were also more efficiently cleared during sleep. Indeed, in 
mice genetically engineered to produce excess β-amyloid and develop 
Alzheimer’s-like cognitive decline, sleep deprivation increased accu-
mulation of amyloid plaques. Glymphatic pathways are also likely to 
represent an important egress pathway for lymphocytes in the CNS 
and a route for lymphocyte encounter with CNS antigens in cervical 
lymph nodes. In this regard, recent data indicate that deep cervical 
lymph nodes might be a site for antigen-specific stimulation of B-cells 
in MS (Chap. 436).
A second recently identified pathway consists of a plexus of small 
lymphatic-like vessels located on the external surface of meningeal 
arteries and deep dural sinuses (including the sagittal and transverse 
sinuses), structures that exit the brain along the surface of veins and 
arteries and drain to the deep cervical lymph nodes. These conduits 
are comprised of cells that express a transcriptome indicating that they 
are components of a lymphoid drainage system distinct from vascular 
endothelium. These sinus-associated lymphoid structures may be most 
important in clearing solutes from the CSF, in contrast to the glym-
phatic system that likely functions to remove waste products from the 
brain interstitium; however, the exact functions of these two systems 
and their interrelationships are only beginning to be understood.
MICROBIOTA AND NEUROLOGIC DISEASE
The human microbiome (Chap. 459) represents the collective set of 
genes from the 1014 organisms living in our gut, skin, mucosa, and other 
sites. Different microbial communities are associated with different 
ethnicities, diets, and environments. In any individual, the predomi-
nant gut microbiota can be remarkably stable over decades, but also 
can be altered by exposure to certain microbial species, for example by 
ingestion of probiotics.
There is compelling evidence that gut microbes can shape immune 
responses through the interaction of their metabolism with that of 
humans. These gut-brain interactions are likely to be important in 
understanding the pathogenesis of many autoimmune neurologic 
diseases. For example, mice treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics 
are resistant to EAE, an effect associated with decreases in production 
of proinflammatory cytokines, and conversely more production of the 
immunosuppressive cytokines IL-10 and IL-13 and an increase in reg-
ulatory T and B lymphocytes. Oral administration of polysaccharide A 
(PSA) from Bacillus fragilis also protects mice from EAE, via increases 
in IL-10. Intestinal microbiota from patients with MS were found to 
promote EAE when transferred to germ free mice, possibly due to 
imbalances between bacterial species that promote inflammation (such 
as Akkermansia muciniphila and Acinetobacter calcoaceticus) and those 
that induce regulatory immune responses (such as Parabacteroides 
distasonis).
In addition to nonspecific effects on immune homeostasis mediated 
by cytokines and regulatory cells, some microbial proteins can trigger, 
in susceptible individuals, a cross-reactive immune response against a 
homologous protein in the nervous system, a mechanism termed molec-
ular mimicry. Examples include cross-reactivity between the astrocyte 
water channel aquaporin-4 and an ABC transporter permease from 
Clostridia perfringens in neuromyelitis optica (Chap. 437); the neural 
ganglioside Gm1 and similar sialic acid–containing structures from 
Campylobacter jejuni in Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chap. 439); and the 
sleep-promoting protein hypocretin and hemagglutinin from H1N1 
influenza virus in narcolepsy (Chap. 27).
Recently, a number of tantalizing observations have incriminated 
the microbial environment in the pathogenesis of a much wider spec-
trum of neurologic conditions and behaviors, extending well beyond 
the traditional boundaries of immune-mediated pathologies. It has 
long been known that gut bacteria can influence brain function, based 
mostly on classic studies demonstrating that products of gut microbes 
can worsen hepatic encephalopathy, forming the basis of treatment 
with antibiotics for this condition.
Mice that developed in a completely germ-free environment dis-
played less anxiety, lower responses to stressful situations, more 
exploratory locomotive behaviors, and impaired memory formation 
compared with non-germ-free counterparts. These behaviors were 
related to changes in gene expression in pathways related to neural sig-
naling, synaptic function, and modulation of neurotransmitters. More-
over, this behavior could be reversed when the germ-free mice were 
co-housed with non-germ-free mice. In other experiments, intestinal 
microbiota were also found to be required for the normal development 
and function of brain microglia, potentially linking these behavioral 
effects to specific cellular targets in the CNS.
The enteric autonomic nervous system in humans provides a bidi-
rectional neural connection between the brain and gut. The vagus 
nerve, which innervates the upper gut and proximal colon, has been 
implicated in anxiety- and depression-like behaviors in mice. Inges-
tion of Lactobacillus rhamnosus induced changes in expression of the 
inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA1b in neurons of the limbic cor-
tex, hippocampus, and amygdala, associated with reduced levels of 
corticosteroids and reduced anxiety- and depression-like behaviors. 
Remarkably, these changes could be blocked by vagotomy.
Another area of emerging interest is in a possible contribution of 
the gut microbiome to autism and related disorders. Children with 
autistic spectrum disorders have long been known to have gastro-
intestinal disturbances, and it has been claimed that the severity of 
dysbiosis correlates with the severity of autism. A murine model of 
autism was recently induced in offspring after injecting the pregnant 
mother with the viral RNA mimic polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid 
(poly I:C). Remarkably, oral treatment of offspring with B. fragilis 
corrected a range of autistic behaviors in these mice and also improved 
gut permeability.
PATHOLOGIC PROTEINS, PRIONS, AND 
NEURODEGENERATION (FIG. 417-3)
The term “protein aggregation” has become widely used to describe 
easily recognizable hallmarks of neurodegeneration. While such neu-
ropathologic hallmarks including plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and 
inclusion bodies are often thought to cause neurologic dysfunction, 
numerous new discoveries over the past several decades have rendered 
this view increasingly unlikely. Instead, protein aggregates represent 
accumulations of toxic proteins that become less harmful when they are 
sequestered into plaques, tangles, and inclusion bodies.


--- PDF PAGE 3089 ---

CHAPTER 417 Pathobiology of Neurologic Diseases
3043
Deposition of β-amyloid is strongly implicated in the pathogenesis 
of AD. Genetic mutations in familial AD cause increased production 
of β-amyloid with 42 amino acids, which has an increased propensity 
to aggregate, as compared to β-amyloid with 40 amino acids. Fur-
thermore, mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) which 
reduce the production of β-amyloid protect against the development 
of AD and are associated with preserved cognition in the elderly. 
Mutations in genes encoding MAPT lead to altered splicing of tau and 
the production of neurofibrillary tangles in frontotemporal dementia 
and progressive supranuclear palsy. Familial PD is associated with 
mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), α-synuclein, parkin, 
PINK1, and DJ-1. PINK1 is a mitochondrial kinase (see below), and 
DJ-1 is a protein involved in protection from oxidative stress. Parkin, 
which causes autosomal recessive early-onset PD, is a ubiquitin ligase. 
The characteristic histopathologic feature of PD is the Lewy body, an 
eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion that contains both neurofilaments 
and α-synuclein. Huntington’s disease (HD) and cerebellar degen-
erations are associated with expansions of polyglutamine repeats in 
proteins, which aggregate to produce neuronal intranuclear inclusions. 
Familial ALS is associated with superoxide dismutase mutations and 
cytoplasmic inclusions containing superoxide dismutase. An impor-
tant finding was the discovery that ubiquinated inclusions observed 
in most cases of ALS and the most common form of frontotemporal 
dementia are composed of TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43). 
Subsequently, mutations in the TDP-43 gene, and in the fused in sar-
coma gene (FUS), were found in familial ALS. Both of these proteins 
are involved in transcription regulation as well as RNA metabolism. In 
autosomal dominant neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus, mutations 
in vasopressin result in abnormal protein processing, accumulation in 
the endoplasmic reticulum, and cell death.
Another key mechanism linked to cell death is mitochondrial 
dynamics, which refers to the processes involved in movement of 
mitochondria, as well as in mitochondrial fission and fusion, which 
play a critical role in mitochondrial turnover and in replenishment of 
damaged mitochondria. Mitochondrial dysfunction is strongly linked 
to the pathogenesis of a number of neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Friedreich’s ataxia, which is caused by mutations in an iron-binding 
protein that plays an important role in transferring iron to iron-sulfur 
clusters in aconitase and complex I and II of the electron transport 
chain. Mitochondrial fission is dependent on the dynamin-related 
proteins (Drp1), which bind to its receptor Fis, whereas mitofuscins 1 
and 2 (MF 1/2) and optic atrophy protein 1 (OPA1) are responsible for 
fusion of the outer and inner mitochondrial membrane, respectively. 
Mutations in MFN2 cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2A, 
and mutations in OPA1 cause autosomal dominant optic atrophy. Both 
β-amyloid and mutant huntingtin protein induce mitochondrial frag-
mentation and neuronal cell death associated with increased activity 
of Drp1. In addition, mutations in genes causing autosomal recessive 
PD, parkin and PINK1, cause abnormal mitochondrial morphology and 
result in impairment of the ability of the cell to remove damaged mito-
chondria by autophagy.
One major scientific question is whether protein aggregates directly 
contribute to neuronal death or whether they are merely secondary 
bystanders. A current focus in all the neurodegenerative diseases is on 
small protein aggregates termed oligomers. These may be the toxic spe-
cies of β-amyloid, α-synuclein, and proteins with expanded polygluta-
mines such as are associated with HD. Protein aggregates are usually 
ubiquinated, which targets them for degradation by the 26S component 
of the proteasome. An inability to degrade protein aggregates could 
lead to cellular dysfunction, impaired axonal transport, and cell death 
by apoptotic mechanisms.
Autophagy is the degradation of cystolic components in lysosomes. 
There is increasing evidence that autophagy plays an important role in 
degradation of protein aggregates in the neurodegenerative diseases, 
Wt prion
form
Mutant
prion
form
Mutant
precursor
Wt
precursor
Age-dependent
mutant prion formation
Inherited NDs
Sporadic NDs
A
A
B
1
2
i
ii
3
Prions causing neurodegradation
Aβ plaque
α-Synuclein
Lewy body
Tau tangle
+
+
Amyloid
fibrils
FIGURE 417-3  Neurodegeneration caused by prions. A. In sporadic neurodegenerative diseases (NDs), wild-type (Wt) prions multiply through self-propagating cycles of 
posttranslational modification, during which the precursor protein (green circle) is converted into the prion form (red square), which generally is high in β-sheet content. 
Pathogenic prions are most toxic as oligomers and less toxic after polymerization into amyloid fibrils. The small polygons (blue) represent proteolytic cleavage products 
of the prion. Depending on the protein, the fibrils coalesce into Aβ amyloid plaques in AD, neurofibrillary tangles in AD and Pick’s disease, or Lewy bodies in PD and 
Lewy body dementia. Drug targets for the development of therapeutics include: (1) lowering the precursor protein, (2) inhibiting prion formation, and (3) enhancing 
prion clearance. B. Late-onset heritable neurodegeneration argues for two discrete events: The (i) first event is the synthesis of mutant precursor protein (green circle), 
and the (ii) second event is the age-dependent formation of mutant prions (red square). The highlighted yellow bar in the DNA structure represents mutation of a base 
pair within an exon, and the small yellow circles signify the corresponding mutant amino acid substitution. Green arrows represent a normal process; red arrows, a 
pathogenic process; and blue arrows, a process that is known to occur but unknown whether it is normal or pathogenic. (Micrographs prepared by Stephen J. DeArmond. 
Reprinted with permission from SB Prusiner: Biology and genetics of prions causing neurodegeneration. Annu Rev Genet 47:601, 2013.)


--- PDF PAGE 3090 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3044 and it is impaired in AD, PD, and HD. Autophagy is particularly 
important to the health of neurons, and failure of autophagy contrib-
utes to cell death. In HD, a failure of cargo recognition occurs, contrib-
uting to protein aggregates and cell death. Rapamycin, which induces 
autophagy, exerts beneficial therapeutic effects in transgenic mouse 
models of AD, PD, and HD.
There is other evidence for lysosomal dysfunction and impaired 
autophagy in PD. Mutations in glucocerebrosidase are associated with 
5% of all PD cases as well as 8–9% of patients with dementia with Lewy 
bodies. Therefore, this is the most important genetic cause of both 
disorders thus far identified. There appear to be reciprocal interactions 
between glucocerebrosidase and α-synuclein. It has been shown that 
glucocerebrosidase concentrations and enzymatic activity are reduced 
in the substantia nigra of sporadic PD patients. Furthermore, α-synuclein 
is degraded by chaperone-mediated and macro autophagy. The deg-
radation of α-synuclein has been shown to be impaired in transgenic 
mice deficient in glucocerebrosidase as well as in mice in which the 
enzyme has been inhibited. Finally, it is known that α-synuclein inhib-
its the activity of glucocerebrosidase. Therefore, there is bidirectional 
feedback between α-synuclein and glucocerebrosidase. An attractive 
therapeutic intervention could be to use protein chaperones to increase 
the activity and duration of action of glucocerebrosidase. This would 
also reduce α-synuclein levels and block the degeneration of dopamin-
ergic neurons.
The retromer complex is a conserved membrane-associated pro-
tein complex that functions in the endosome-to-Golgi complex. The 
retromer complex contains a cargo selective complex consisting of 
VPS35, VPS26, and VPS29, along with a sorting nexin dimer. Recently, 
mutations in VPS35 were shown to be a cause of late-onset autosomal 
dominant PD. The retromer also traffics APP away from endosomes, 
where it is cleaved to generate β-amyloid. Deficiencies of VPS35 and 
VPS26 were also identified in hippocampal brain tissue from AD. 
A new therapeutic approach to these diseases might therefore be to 
use chaperones to stabilize the retromer and reduce the generation of 
β-amyloid and α-synuclein.
The LRRK2 mutations were shown to have effects on clearance of 
Golgi-derived vesicles through the autophagy-lysosome system both in 
vitro and in vivo. LRRK2 mutations also are linked to elevated protein 
synthesis mediated by ribosomal protein s15 phosphorylation. Block-
ing this phosphorylation reduces LRRK2-mediated neurite loss and cell 
death in human dopamine and cortical neurons.
Interestingly, in experimental models of HD and cerebellar degener-
ation, protein aggregates are not well correlated with neuronal death 
and may be protective. A substantial body of evidence suggests that 
the mutant proteins with polyglutamine expansions in these diseases 
bind to transcription factors and that this contributes to disease 
pathogenesis. In HD, there is dysfunction of the transcriptional 
co-regulator, PGC-1α, a key regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis. 
There is evidence that impaired function of PGC-1α is also important in 
both PD and AD, making it an attractive target for treatments. Agents 
that upregulate gene transcription are neuroprotective in animal mod-
els of these diseases. A number of compounds have been developed 
to block β-amyloid production and/or aggregation, and these agents 
are being studied in early clinical trials in humans. Another approach 
under investigation is immunotherapy with antibodies that bind 
β-amyloid, tau, or α-synuclein. These studies have shown efficacy in 
preventing the spread of amyloid, tau, and α-synuclein in animal stud-
ies, raising hopes that this could lead to effective therapies by blocking 
neuron-to-neuron propagation. Two large clinical trials of β-amyloid 
immunotherapy, however, did not show efficacy, although this thera-
peutic strategy is still being studied.
PRIONS AND NEURODEGENERATIVE 
DISEASES
As we have learned more about the etiology and pathogenesis of the 
neurodegenerative diseases, it has become clear that the histologic 
abnormalities that were once curiosities, in fact, are likely to reflect the 
etiologies. For example, the amyloid plaques in kuru and Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease (CJD) are filled with the PrPSc prions that have assembled 
into fibrils. The past three decades have witnessed an explosion of new 
knowledge about prions. For many years, kuru, CJD, and scrapie of 
sheep were thought to be caused by slow-acting viruses, but a large 
body of experimental evidence argues that the infectious pathogens 
causing these diseases are devoid of nucleic acid. Such pathogens 
are called prions, which are composed of host-encoded proteins 
that adopt alternative conformations that undergo self-propagation 
(Chap. 430). Prions impose their conformations on the normal, precur-
sor proteins, which in turn become self-templating resulting in faithful 
copies; most prions are enriched for β-sheet and can assemble into 
amyloid fibrils.
Similar to the plaques in kuru and CJD that are composed of PrP 
prions, the amyloid plaques in AD are filled with Aβ prions that have 
polymerized into fibrils. This relationship between the neuropatho-
logic findings and the etiologic prion was strengthened by the genetic 
linkage between familial CJD and mutations in the PrP gene, as well 
as (as noted above) between familial AD and mutations in the APP 
gene. Moreover, a mutation in the APP gene that prevents Aβ peptide 
formation was correlated with a decreased incidence of AD in Iceland.
The heritable neurodegenerative diseases offer an important insight 
into the pathogenesis of the more common, sporadic ones. Although the 
mutant proteins that cause these disorders are expressed in the brains 
of people early in life, the diseases do not occur for many decades. 
Many explanations for the late onset of familial neurodegenerative 
diseases have been offered, but none are supported by substantial 
experimental evidence. The late onset might be due to a second event 
in which a mutant protein, after its conversion into a prion, begins to 
accumulate at some rather advanced age. Such a formulation is also 
consistent with data showing that the protein quality-control mecha-
nisms diminish in efficiency with age. Thus, the prion forms of both 
wild-type and mutant proteins are likely to be efficiently degraded in 
younger people but are less well handled in older individuals. This 
explanation is consistent with the view that neurodegenerative dis-
eases are disorders of the aging nervous system.
A new classification for neurodegenerative diseases can be proposed 
based on not only the traditional phenotypic presentation and neuropa-
thology, but also the prion etiology (Table 417-1). Over the past decade, 
an expanding body of experimental data has accumulated implicating 
prions in each of these illnesses. In addition to kuru and CJD, Gerst-
mann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease (GSS) and fatal insomnia in humans 
are caused by PrPSc prions. In animals, PrPSc prions cause scrapie of sheep 
and goats, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), chronic wasting 
disease (CWD) of deer and elk, feline spongiform encephalopathy, 
and transmissible mink encephalopathy (TME). Similar to PrP, Aβ, tau, 
TABLE 417-1  A Prion-Based Classification of Neurodegenerative 
Diseases
NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES
CAUSATIVE PRION 
PROTEINS
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)
Kuru
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker (GSS)
Fatal insomnia
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)
Scrapie
Chronic wasting disease (CWD)
Feline spongiform encephalopathy
Transmissible mink encephalopathy
PrPSc
Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
Aβ → tau
Parkinson’s disease
Multiple system atrophy
α-Synuclein
Frontotemporal dementias (FTDs)
Posttraumatic FTD, called chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy
Tau, TDP43, FUS (C9orf72, 
progranulin)
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
SOD1, TDP43, FUS 
(C9orf72)
Huntington’s disease
Huntingtin


--- PDF PAGE 3091 ---

CHAPTER 417 Pathobiology of Neurologic Diseases
3045
α-synuclein, superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), and possibly huntingtin 
all adopt alternative conformations that become self-propagating, and 
thus, each protein can become a prion and be transferred to synaptically 
connected neurons. Moreover, each of these prions causes a distinct 
constellation of neurodegenerative diseases.
Evidence for a prion etiology of AD comes from a series of transmis-
sion experiments initially performed in marmosets and more recently 
in transgenic (Tg) mice inoculated with a synthetic Aβ peptide folded 
into a prion. Studies with the tau protein have shown that it not only 
features in the pathogenesis of AD, but also causes such illnesses as 
the frontotemporal dementias including chronic traumatic encepha-
lopathy, which has been reported in both contact sport athletes and 
military personnel who have suffered traumatic brain injuries. A series 
of incisive studies using cultured cells and Tg mice has demonstrated 
that tau can become a prion and multiply in the brain. In contrast to the 
Aβ and tau prions, a strain of α-synuclein prions found in the brains 
of patients who died of multiple system atrophy (MSA) killed the Tg 
mouse host ~90 days after intracerebral inoculation, whereas mutant 
α-synuclein (A53T) prions formed spontaneously in Tg mouse brains 
killed recipient mice in ~200 days.
For many years, the most frequently cited argument against 
prions was the existence of strains that produced distinct clinical 
presentations and different patterns of neuropathologic lesions. Some 
investigators argued that the biologic information carried in different 
prion strains could only be encoded within a nucleic acid. Subse-
quently, many studies demonstrated that strain-specified variation is 
enciphered in the conformation of PrPSc, but the molecular mechanisms 
responsible for the storage of biologic information remains enigmatic. 
The neuroanatomical patterns of prion deposition have been shown to 
be dependent on the particular strain of prion. Convincing evidence in 
support of this proposition has been accumulated for PrP, Aβ, tau, and 
α-synuclein prions.
Although the number of prions identified in mammals and in 
fungi continues to expand, the existence of prions in other phylogeny 
remains undetermined. Some mammalian prions perform vital func-
tions and do not cause disease; such nonpathogenic prions include 
the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding (CPEB) protein, the 
mitochondrial antiviral-signaling (MAVS) protein, and T cell–restricted 
intracellular antigen 1 (TIA-1).
All mammalian prion proteins adopt a β-sheet-rich conforma-
tion and appear to readily oligomerize as this process becomes 
self-propagating. Control of the self-propagating state of benign mam-
malian prions is not well understood but is critical for the well-being of 
the host. In contrast, pathogenic mammalian prions appear to multiply 
exponentially, but the mechanisms by which they cause disease are 
poorly defined. We do not know if prions multiply as monomers or 
as oligomers; notably, the ionizing radiation target size of PrPSc prions 
seems to suggest it is a trimer. The oligomeric states of pathogenic 
mammalian prions are thought to be the toxic forms, and assembly into 
larger polymers, such as amyloid fibrils, seems to be a mechanism for 
minimizing toxicity.
To date, there is no medication that halts or even slows a human 
neurodegenerative disease. The development of drugs designed to 
inhibit the conversion of the normal precursor proteins into prions 
or to enhance the degradation of prions focuses on the initial step in 
prion accumulation. Although a dozen drugs that cross the blood-brain 
barrier have been identified that prolong the lives of mice infected 
with scrapie prions, none have been identified that extend the lives of 
Tg mice that replicate human CJD prions. Despite doubling or tripling 
the length of incubation times in mice inoculated with scrapie prions, 
all of the mice eventually succumb to illness. Because all of the treated 
mice develop neurologic dysfunction at the same time, the mutation 
rate as judged by drug resistance is likely to approach 100%, which 
is much higher than mutation rates recorded for bacteria and viruses. 
Mutations in prions seem likely to represent conformational variants 
that are selected for in mammals where survival becomes limited by 
the fastest-replicating prions. The results of these studies make it likely 
that cocktails of drugs that attack a variety of prion conformers will be 
required for the development of effective therapeutics.
■
■NEURAL STEM CELL BIOLOGY
Normal and genetically modified (“transgenic”) mice are the most 
widely used model systems to study features of human nervous system 
diseases. However, modeling genetic diseases in rodents is limited to 
the relatively small number of monogenic human diseases where the 
specific gene mutations are known, and is further limited by species 
differences. The latter can be particularly important in brain regions 
such as the cerebral cortex that have undergone significant evolution-
ary expansion in humans. These shortcomings, that likely contribute 
to the low probability that therapeutic efficacy translates from animal 
models to humans, can potentially be overcome through stem cell 
models that enable the use of human cells and tissues to model human 
diseases. The advent of new stem cell technologies is transforming 
our understanding of the pathobiology of human neurologic diseases. 
Stem cell platforms are being used to screen for therapeutic agents, to 
uncover adverse drug effects, and to discover novel therapeutic targets.
Among the most exciting recent advances in stem cell technology is 
the ability to convert somatic cells, either skin fibroblasts or blood cells, 
into pluripotent stem cells known as induced pluripotent stem cells 
(iPSCs). This technology has introduced an entirely new and powerful 
approach to study the pathobiology of heritable diseases. Pluripotent 
stem cells can be easily obtained through minimally invasive proce-
dures such as a skin biopsy or blood sample, and converted to pluripo-
tency through application of a cocktail of reprogramming factors to 
create iPSCs. Initially, a set of four programming factors, Oct3/4, Klf-4, 
Sox2, and c-Myc, were delivered to cells using lentiviruses which sta-
bly integrated the reprogramming factor genes into the iPSC genome, 
potentially altering disease phenotypes and also abrogating expression 
of native genes at the DNA sites where the factors integrated. Newer 
techniques have been developed that use non-integrating approaches 
such as through the use of Sendai virus, messenger RNA (mRNA), or 
episomal vectors that circumvent these problems. Once created, iPSC 
lines can be expanded indefinitely to produce a limitless supply of stem 
cells. These cells are the starting material for the derivation of specific 
cell types based on protocols that use small molecules, proteins, or 
direct gene induction to recapitulate developmental programs. Most 
current protocols derive neuronal progenitors through “dual-SMAD 
inhibition,” a step that involves the use of small molecule inhibitors 
to block endoderm and mesodermal cell fates, thereby creating neural 
cells by default. Multiple protocols have been developed over the last 
decade for creating large numbers of human neuron progenitor cell 
types and directing them toward specific nervous system cell fates, 
including neuron subtypes from multiple regions of brain and spinal 
cord as well as retinal cells, glial cells including astrocytes and oli-
godendrocytes, immune cells, and PNS cells.
The primary medical benefit of iPSC technology is that it enables the 
creation of patient-specific cells or tissues that are genetically matched 
to individual patients. This approach not only enables the study 
of monogenetic disorders, but also sporadic forms of disease, and 
complex polygenic disorders including those with unidentified risk 
loci. Furthermore, by deriving iPSC cell lines from multiple patients 
it would be possible to explore how disease phenotypes may vary 
according to genetic background. Another approach that has been used 
to generate specific neuron and glial cell types from somatic cells such 
as fibroblasts is through direct reprogramming. This approach relies 
on a cocktail of specific transcription factors to directly convert somatic 
cells into the alternate desired cell type. This approach bypasses the 
epigenetic reset that accompanies cells as they are reprogrammed to 
a pluripotent state. The advantage of this approach is that age-related 
epigenetic signatures are not erased, so that derived neurons may more 
readily reflect diseases that manifest in older cells.
Despite the advantages of using in vitro models of nervous system 
diseases derived from patient-specific iPSCs, several potential road-
blocks remain. There are no standard reprogramming or derivation 
protocols, and the different methods can result in considerable vari-
ability in the disease phenotypes reported by different laboratories. 
Confidence in the specificity of a particular phenotype is therefore 
increased if it has been validated across multiple laboratories. There is 
also the problem of inherent variability between patient lines that may 


--- PDF PAGE 3092 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3046 result from their different genetic backgrounds. One solution, available 
only in the case of monogenic disorders, is to use isogenic controls 
generated using gene editing, such as with CRISPR-Cas9 technology, 
to create disease and control lines on an identical genetic background. 
However, because differences in genetic background can influence the 
penetrance of a particular trait, it will still be necessary to compare dis-
ease lines from multiple patients to discern a true disease phenotype. 
For polygenic disorders where the causative mutations are unknown it 
will not be possible to create isogenic controls, and in these situations 
the best strategy for improving reliability and sensitivity is to compare 
lines from multiple patients.
Organoids 
Most nervous system disorders, including autism 
spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, PD, AD, and ALS are complex 
disorders, resulting from an unknown combination of gene mutations 
and manifest not only in specific cell types, but also in alterations of 
the local tissue environment. These disorders are difficult to model in 
animals, but they are approachable using three-dimensional human 
iPSC stem cell models, often referred to as “organoids.” Organoids 
are derived from pluripotent stem cells that are directed along a 
tissue-specific lineage through the timed application of growth fac-
tors, genes, or small molecule activators or inhibitors, and allowed to 
aggregate into three-dimensional structures. With time, cell intrinsic 
programs are spontaneously engaged and the cellular aggregates begin to 
self-organize and develop into structures that recapitulate the complex 
topographical and cellular diversity of normal organ development. In 
this way it has been possible to create, at least in part, in vitro brain-like 
organoids that resemble the human forebrain at early stages of devel-
opment. These structures, when allowed to develop from an anterior 
neural tube stage, can become heterogeneous containing regions with 
forebrain, midbrain, and/or hindbrain identity and can often include 
retina-like structures. The high degree of variability in such “cerebral 
organoids” can be a liability for controlled studies, and can be reduced 
by the use of more directed protocols that restrict outcomes to more 
defined brain regions, such as forebrain, cortex, or ganglionic emi-
nence. A variety of protocols have now been developed to generate 
organoids with specific regional identity, and fusing organoids of 
different regional identity with each other has been used to reproduce 
cellular interactions such as neuronal migration across regions. Many 
protocols are focused on modeling cortical development, and they can 
reproduce developmental features including a diversity of progenitor 
and neuronal cell types topographically distributed within ventricular 
and subventricular progenitor regions and rudimentary cortical layers. 
However, the organoids follow a human developmental timetable and 
still remain at stages roughly comparable to late fetal development 
after 6–9 months. Moreover they lack key cell types such as endothelial 
cells, pericytes, microglia, and have few if any astrocytes or oligoden-
drocytes. Nonetheless, while still only reflecting rudimentary organi-
zational and compositional features, organoids have become attractive 
models to study human brain development and the pathophysiology 
of human nervous system diseases in the context of an organized brain-
like structure.
Brain Development and Developmental Disorders: 
Microcephaly and Lissencephaly  Transcriptional analysis 
has suggested that the neurons produced by most stem cell protocols 
resemble early to mid-gestational stages of human brain development. 
The immaturity of stem cell-derived human neurons may limit their 
utility for modeling adult diseases, but makes them ideally suited for 
the study of brain development and the pathophysiology of neurode-
velopmental disorders.
Primary autosomal recessive microcephaly (MCPH) is a rare neu-
rodevelopmental disorder producing severe microcephaly with sim-
plified cortical gyration and intellectual disability. MCPH was one of 
the first disorders to be studied using cerebral organoids. Mutations in 
genes encoding microtubule spindle components and spindle-associated 
proteins are the most frequent causes of congenital microcephaly. 
Among them is cyclin-dependent kinase 5 related activator protein 
2 (CDK5RAP2). Skin fibroblasts derived from a single microcephalic 
patient carrying a mutation in CDK5RAP2 were used to generate four 
iPSC lines. Cerebral organoids grown from these cell lines contained 
fewer proliferating progenitor cells and showed premature neural 
differentiation compared to wild type controls. Introducing functional 
CDK5RAP2 by electroporation partially rescued the disease pheno-
type, supporting the notion that failure of the founder population of 
neural progenitors to properly expand underlies the smaller brain. This 
study demonstrated that brain organoids derived from patients with 
microcephaly can be used to reproduce features of the disease, but did 
not reveal new insights or disease features of CDK5RAP2 microcephaly 
that had not already been described in mouse models.
In a study using cortical organoids to model Miller-Dieker syndrome 
(MDS), a severe congenital form of lissencephaly or “smooth-brain,” 
features of the human disease were observed that had not been noted 
in murine models. Classical lissencephaly is a genetic neurological dis-
order associated with mental retardation and intractable epilepsy, and 
MDS is a severe form of the disorder. Cortical folding in humans begins 
toward the end of the second trimester, a stage of development that has 
not yet been modeled in organoids, but gyrencephaly depends upon 
earlier events such as neural progenitor cell proliferation and neuronal 
migration that can be modeled in organoids. The human organoid 
model of MDS exhibited several neural progenitor cell phenotypes that 
had already been reported in mouse models, including altered mitotic 
spindle orientation and neuronal migration defects. But the organoids 
also displayed a mitotic defect in a specific neural stem cell subtype, 
the outer radial glia cell (oRG) that had not been observed in mice. 
oRG cells are enriched in the outer subventricular zone, a proliferative 
region that is large in primates and not present in rodents. These cells 
are particularly numerous in the developing human cortex and are 
thought to underlie the developmental and evolutionary expansion of 
the human cortex. oRG cells from MDS patients behaved abnormally 
and had arrested or delayed mitoses. MDS organoids also identified 
non-cell autonomous defects in WNT signaling as an underlying mech-
anism. These insights into mechanistic and cell type specific features of 
human disease highlight how organoid technology can provide new 
and valuable perspectives on the pathophysiology of disorders of in 
utero development.
Acquired Neurodevelopmental Disorders: Zika  The recent 
outbreak of Zika virus (ZIKV) and associated microcephaly cases in 
the Americas provided a test case for the utility of brain organoids to 
model acquired human microcephaly. Despite a correlation between 
Zika infection rates and the incidence of congenital microcephaly, 
compelling evidence that ZIKV caused microcephaly was lacking in 
the early phases of the epidemic. The causal link between ZIKV and 
congenital microcephaly was buttressed by two studies in 2016 that 
used human iPSC-derived neural progenitor cells and organoids to 
demonstrate ZIKV tropism for human neural progenitor cells. Neural 
progenitor cells (radial glia) were readily infected in vitro with subse-
quent progenitor cell death and involution of organoid size. Forebrain 
organoids were further used to highlight the role of the flavivirus 
entry factor, AXL, in determining viral tropism, and were also used to 
explore the disease mechanism by demonstrating upregulation of the 
innate immune receptor toll-like receptor 3 (TLR) in response to ZIKV 
infection. Stem cell-derived models of human brain development have 
also demonstrated centrosomal abnormalities in radial glia and altera-
tion in the cleavage plane of mitotic radial glia associated with prema-
ture neural differentiation. Mouse models are also being used to study 
the pathophysiology of congenital ZIKV syndrome, but the availability 
of unlimited numbers of human neural cells produced using stem cell 
technology has enabled high-throughput screening assays to test librar-
ies of clinically approved compounds for potential therapeutic agents. 
This strategy has already highlighted several compounds that could 
potentially help protect against ZIKV microcephaly.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders: Autism and Schizophrenia  
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are complex and heterogeneous 
neurodevelopmental disorders usually manifesting in childhood with 
difficulties in social interaction, verbal and nonverbal communica-
tion and repetitive behaviors. The cellular and molecular mecha-
nisms underlying ASD are thought to arise at stages of fetal brain 


--- PDF PAGE 3093 ---

CHAPTER 417 Pathobiology of Neurologic Diseases
3047
development, making them well-suited for exploration using human 
iPSC-derived disease models. The pathophysiology of disorders asso-
ciated with ASD that are caused by monogenic mutations have been 
studied using iPSC-derived neurons; these include Fragile X, Rett, and 
Timothy syndromes.
Fragile X is the most common heritable cause of intellectual dis-
ability, affecting 1 in 4000 males and 1 in 8000 females, and is a lead-
ing genetic cause of ASD. Patients also have speech delay, growth 
and motor abnormalities, hyperactivity, and anxiety. The causative 
mutation lies in the FMR1 gene and produces a CGG triplet repeat 
expansion from a normal number of 5–20 to >200, leading to epigenetic 
silencing of the FMR1 gene and loss of the Fragile X mental retardation 
protein. The epigenetic mechanism means that unlike a simple gene 
deletion that would lead to ubiquitous loss of expression, the FMR1 
locus becomes hypermethylated and epigenetically silenced during 
differentiation, thus FMR1 protein is expressed by the early embryo 
and becomes absent only around the beginning of the second trimester. 
Interestingly, this expression pattern is recapitulated during cellular 
differentiation in stem cell models. Pluripotent Fragile X stem cell lines 
have been derived from embryos identified through pre-implantation 
genetic diagnosis and by reprogramming skin fibroblasts from Fragile 
X patients to create iPSC lines. In both cases, FMR1 was expressed by 
the pluripotent stem cells, but underwent transcriptional silencing fol-
lowing differentiation. Fragile X stem cell lines can therefore be used to 
study the mechanism of FMR1 silencing, an effort that is ongoing. Neu-
rons generated from Fragile X iPSC cells reproduce features observed 
in neurons from transgenic FMR1 mouse models and patients, includ-
ing stunted neurites with decreased branching, increasing confidence 
in the iPSC model. In addition to providing a model that can be used 
to study disease pathogenesis, Fragile X iPSC-derived neurons could 
be used to screen for potential therapeutic agents or gene editing 
strategies that could be able to remove the repressive epigenetic marks 
induced by the mutation and rescue the phenotype.
Rett syndrome is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder with 
dominant inheritance caused by a mutation in the MECP2 gene. 
Because males carrying one copy of the defect gene usually die in 
infancy, most patients are girls. Random inactivation of the X chro-
mosome in girls results in mosaic cellular expression of the mutation 
that circumvents fatality and produces a variable phenotype. The 
symptoms are present in early childhood and include microcephaly 
associated with developmental delay, autistic-like behaviors and cog-
nitive dysfunction, seizures, and repetitive motor actions; these then 
progress to include difficulties with gait, swallowing, and breathing 
before usually stabilizing with patients surviving to adulthood. The 
pathophysiology of RETT syndrome is presumed to involve abnormal 
epigenetic regulation leading to decreased transcriptional repression of 
genes whose overexpression produces the disease phenotype, although 
this concept has been contested. In one of the first studies to use iPSC 
modeling to study RETT syndrome, it was discovered that when 
fibroblasts from patients were reprogrammed to pluripotent stem 
cells, X inactivation was erased. In apparent recapitulation of endoge-
nous events, X chromosome inactivation re-occurred during neuronal 
differentiation, producing a mosaic of cells carrying the mutant gene 
intermingled with normal cells. RETT neurons had fewer dendritic 
spines and synapses, smaller cell bodies, and reduced network activity. 
Another iPSC model of RETT syndrome highlighted the potential role 
of altered inhibitory function. RETT neurons were found to have a def-
icit of a potassium/chloride cotransporter (KCC2) that is developmen-
tally regulated and normally leads to a switch in GABA signaling from 
excitatory at embryonic ages to inhibitory by birth. In RETT neurons 
KCC2 expression level was low, and the functional switch in GABA 
effects was delayed, contributing to some of the disease features and 
possibly accounting for the developmental onset of the disease. One 
curious feature of some iPSC RETT lines was that despite the mosaic 
expression of the mutation, disease phenotypes were observed in all 
cells. Possibly, this could reflect a non-cell autonomous effect, but as 
in all iPSC disease models, confidence in disease-specific features will 
be increased when similar phenotypes are seen across multiple inde-
pendent studies.
Timothy syndrome, another severe neurodevelopmental disease 
associated with ASD has been modeled using iPSC-derived organoids. 
Timothy syndrome is caused by a mutation in the CACNA1C gene cod-
ing for a voltage-gated calcium channel, and neuron defects in Timothy 
syndrome organoids were rescued by selectively altering calcium chan-
nel activity. In one study two separate organoids were produced with 
different regional identity, one represented neocortex and one a more 
ventral structure known as the medial ganglionic eminence, which is 
the source of most cortical interneurons. The two organoids were then 
fused together to allow the interneurons to migrate into the cortex, 
mimicking their endogenous behavior. The ability to model interneu-
ron migration led to the discovery of a cell-autonomous migration 
defect in the disease-carrying neurons.
The majority of nervous system diseases, including ASD, are mul-
tigenic and cannot be modeled in animals but can be modeled using 
patient-derived iPSCs. For example, a subset of patients with ASD have 
large head size, and a cohort of patients with this phenotype were used 
to generate iPSCs which were converted to neural progenitor cells and 
forebrain neurons. The progenitors had an accelerated cell cycle and 
produced an excess of inhibitory interneurons and had exuberant cellu-
lar overgrowth of neurites and synapses. This last feature is in contrast 
to the decrease in spines and synapses observed in other iPSC models 
of ASD such as Fragile X and Rett syndrome and underscores the 
need for replication and validation of purported disease phenotypes 
given the high variability based on differences between stem cell lines, 
protocols, patient genetic background, and other factors. Moreover, 
the clinical features of most neuropsychiatric diseases reflect disorders 
in processes such as circuit formation and refinement that occur after 
birth and may be difficult to capture at the fetal stage of development 
reflected in stem cell models.
Patient stem cells have also been used by multiple groups to study 
the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, producing a variety of diverse 
and sometimes contradictory results. Reports claim obvious pheno-
types such as disruptions in the adherens junctions of forebrain radial 
glia or aberrant neuronal migration, although such gross abnormalities 
observed at the equivalent of in utero stages of development seem very 
unlikely to underlie a disease that usually manifests at adolescence or 
young adulthood. Other studies report abnormalities related to abnor-
mal microRNA expression, disordered cyclic AMP and Wnt signaling, 
abnormal stress responses, diminished neuronal connectivity, fewer 
neuronal processes, problems with neuronal differentiation, and mito-
chondrial abnormalities among others. While the pathophysiology of 
as complex a neurodevelopmental disorder as schizophrenia may be 
multidimensional, it is unclear which, if any, of the reported findings in 
iPSC models reflect the true pathology of schizophrenia. Progress will 
likely depend on the adoption of more standard and reproducible pro-
tocols, more rigorous identification of cell types, markers of regional 
identity, and indicators of maturity.
Alzheimer’s Disease  As noted above, the leading concept of 
AD pathogenesis, the amyloid hypothesis, suggests that an imbalance 
between production and clearance of β-amyloid leads to excessive 
accumulation of β-amyloid peptide and the formation of neurofibril-
lary tangles within neurons, composed of aggregated hyperphospho-
rylated tau proteins. Additionally, aggregates of amyloid fibrils are 
deposited outside neurons in the form of neuritic plaques. Recent fail-
ures of anti-β-amyloid therapies, which were highly effective in mouse 
models, have led to a search for alternative models that might be more 
predictive of therapeutic effectiveness in humans. Among the causes of 
familial AD are mutations in genes involved in β-amyloid production, 
including APP and presenilin 1 and 2. Shortly after the introduction 
of iPSC technology, human stem cell-derived neurons were generated 
from patients carrying mutations in AD causative genes as well as from 
sporadic AD cases. The disease neurons developed hallmarks of AD 
including intracellular accumulation of β-amyloid and phosphorylated 
tau, as well as secretion of APP cleavage products, features that could 
be reduced by adding β- or γ-secretase inhibitors or β-amyloid specific 
antibodies. The neurons also demonstrated other disease features 
observed in postmortem AD tissues. However, extracellular β-amyloid 


--- PDF PAGE 3094 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3048 aggregation and neurofibrillary tangles were not robustly modeled 
in these two-dimensional systems, presumably because secreted fac-
tors were able to readily diffuse away. The use of three-dimensional 
organoids to model AD overcame this limitation, presumably by recre-
ating a more faithful extracellular matrix. Organoid models promoted 
the aggregation of β-amyloid, and more readily recapitulated the 
pathologic features of AD, including the formation of neurofibrillary 
tangles and neuritic plaques.
It is hoped that the new stem cell models, particularly organoid 
models, will accelerate our understanding of AD by enabling the study 
of human disease-carrying cells in a quasi in situ setting. These new 
models may lead to discovery of novel druggable targets and new 
diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. One concern is that the patho-
genic features of AD usually appear in the sixth or seventh decade 
of life and progress slowly over years, while most protocols for the 
derivation of human cortical neurons generate cells over weeks or 
months and most remain comparable to immature neurons at fetal 
stages of development. Nonetheless, these young cells have been used 
to model neurodegenerative diseases such as AD and HD that strike 
patients in mid to late adulthood. Possibly the onset of disease pheno-
type is accelerated in stem cell models due to increased cellular stress, 
or disease features may actually have a subtle onset at earlier stages 
than generally suspected. Indeed, 3-year-old children at genetic risk of 
developing early-onset AD appear to have smaller hippocampal size 
and lower scores on memory tests than children in a non-risk group. 
The phenotypes of adult neurodegenerative diseases that are visible 
at fetal stages may or may not correspond to those manifest at later, 
adult stages, but they may offer the possibility of devising preventative 
strategies effective at very early stages of the disease.
Cell Type Disorders: ALS and HD  In diseases such as ALS, 
PD, and HD, that mostly target specific neuron subtypes, stem cells 
provide an ideal means to study the vulnerable human cell popula-
tions. By enabling the production of unlimited numbers of normal and 
diseased human midbrain dopaminergic neurons for the study of PD, 
medium spiny striatal neurons for HD, and spinal and cortical motor 
neurons for ALS, iPSC approaches have the potential to transform our 
understanding and management of these diseases. Stem cell-derived 
neurons serve as platforms to explore mechanisms of cell vulnerability, 
to screen drugs for neural protection, and potentially to derive neurons 
for replacement therapy.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis  One of the first protocols for 
producing neurons of a specific subtype from embryonic stem cells 
recapitulated normal developmental programs to generate mouse 
spinal motor neurons. Pluripotent mouse stem cells underwent neural 
induction and adopted a caudal identity through the application of 
retinoic acid, and subsequently adopted motor neuron fate through 
the action of sonic hedgehog, a ventralizing factor. Generating human 
motor neurons proved more complex, requiring additional steps, such 
as early exposure to the growth factor, FGF2. The first application of 
stem cell-derived motor neurons to study ALS involved the use of 
mouse motor neurons generated from transgenic mice expressing a 
mutation in the SOD1 gene, the most common mutation responsible 
for familial ALS. Only 5–10% of ALS cases are familial, but the known 
mutations provide a useful entry point to tease apart the causative 
pathophysiology. Mutations in SOD1 produce ALS through a toxic 
gain of function for which the mechanism remains unclear, despite the 
use of multiple transgenic animal and iPSC models. The use of mouse 
ESC-derived motor neurons, however, demonstrated that toxic factors 
secreted by SOD1 astrocytes contribute to the death of motor neurons. 
Interestingly, stem cell-derived interneurons were spared, indicating a 
specific vulnerability of motor neurons. These findings helped estab-
lish the notion that a non-cell autonomous toxic mechanism contributes 
to ALS pathogenesis and may ultimately lead to novel treatment strat-
egies. These findings also highlight that modeling the full pathophysi-
ology of ALS may require the reproduction of a complex environment 
including motor neurons, astrocytes, and possibly additional cell 
types such as microglia. A variety of approaches including co-culture 
of specific cell types, three-dimensional spinal cord organoids, and 
microfluidic organ-on-chip models are being explored to achieve a 
more complete facscimile of spinal cord organization. Similar to other 
neurologic disorders where a clearly defined phenotype has been 
observed in human stem cell-derived models, there is hope that drug 
screening using human disease-expressing cells will identify a poten-
tial therapeutic compound.
Huntington’s Disease  HD is caused by an expansion in CAG 
triplet repeats in the huntingtin gene which leads to an expanded poly-
glutamine tract in the huntingtin protein. HD is dominantly inherited, 
with symptoms of cognitive decline and uncontrollable gait and limb 
motions beginning in the third to fifth decade of life with progression 
to dementia and death ~20 years later. Mutant huntingtin causes a 
toxic gain-of-function, with the degree of effect related to the CAG 
repeat length. For example, a CAG length of 40–60 repeats produces 
adult onset HD, while repeats of ≥60 produce juvenile onset disease. 
Although it has been 25 years since the discovery of this causative 
mutation, the disease mechanism remains poorly understood. Excess 
huntingtin protein and protein fragments accumulate in specific sub-
types of neurons where they misfold and form aggregates that are 
visible as cellular inclusions. Affected cells eventually die, possibly 
as a result of metabolic toxicity. The medium spiny neurons of the 
striatum are the most vulnerable neurons, spurring ongoing attempts 
to produce replacement cells derived from stem cells, but neuron loss 
is widespread including in the cortex, complicating a cell replacement 
approach for this disease. HD iPSCs have been generated from patients 
with various CAG repeat lengths, but those from juvenile onset dis-
ease with the longest repeat lengths have been favored as being most 
likely to express robust disease phenotypes at an early stage. This is 
particularly important given the immature stage of maturation of stem 
cell-derived human neurons. This approach has been able to produce 
disease phenotypes observed in patients including huntingtin protein 
aggregation, decreased metabolic capacity, increased oxidative stress 
with mitochondrial fragmentation, and apoptosis enhanced by with-
drawal of growth factor support. However, many of these phenotypes 
were observed in pluripotent cells prior to neural differentiation and 
in neural progenitors and a broad array of CNS neurons in contrast 
to the cell type specific features of the disease. Nonetheless, neurons 
that assumed striatal fate appear to be more vulnerable to stress and 
apoptosis than other cell types. As with other iPSC models of nervous 
system diseases, there have so far been few efforts to validate results 
in multiple iPSC lines having different genetic backgrounds but with 
similar CAG repeat lengths. An HD consortium has been formed to 
address this problem by generating a series of iPSC lines from multiple 
patients. An alternative strategy to validate disease phenotypes has 
been to use gene editing to create isogenic iPSC lines that are corrected 
to produce wild type control and HD iPSC lines against the same 
genetic background.
Future Perspectives  Despite early successes, it may prove dif-
ficult to reconstitute neurodegenerative disease conditions in human 
cells in vitro over a short time-course because the pathogenic changes 
of degenerative diseases progress slowly and commence in the later 
stages of life. The differentiation and maturation of human neurons 
from stem cell lines occurs over a span of months, which may not 
be long enough to establish the aged brain conditions under which 
patients develop robust neurodegenerative pathology. Possible manip-
ulation through gene editing or by application of aging-associated 
stresses, such as DNA damaging agents or proteasome inhibitors, 
may accelerate the expression of degenerative phenotypes in human 
iPSC-derived cellular models. Stem cell-derived organoid models are 
also ideal platforms to apply methods for cellular level visualization 
such as clarity and multi-electrode recording techniques to better eval-
uate three-dimensional organoid structures and explore early-forming 
circuits. These applications are only just beginning.
Two-dimensional cell cultures are ideal for production and evalua-
tion of large numbers of specific cells of a particular identity, but may 
not provide the complex extracellular environment necessary to model 


--- PDF PAGE 3095 ---

CHAPTER 417 Pathobiology of Neurologic Diseases
3049
certain disease processes, such as extracellular protein aggregation. 
These features can be best modeled using three-dimensional organoids, 
but current methods do not reproduce all the relevant features of brain 
tissue. Optimization will be needed to better reproduce the cellular 
composition of brain, including endothelial cells, astrocytes, microglia, 
and oligodendrocytes. It may also be necessary to combine different 
brain regions generated separately, possibly by fusion of tissues such 
as dorsal cortex, subpallium, thalamus, retina, and others. However, 
currently there is a limited ability to recreate tissues or neurons with 
regional brain identity, such as hippocampus, thalamus, or cerebellum. 
More faithful organoid models could also emerge through the appli-
cation of bioengineered scaffolds, matrices, or perfusion systems that 
might allow the growth of larger structures. Of course, not all aspects of 
mature brain architecture and function will be modeled by these tissue 
structures, particularly as they represent fetal stages of development, 
but perhaps the most precocious events in disease etiology can be 
captured and investigated and these may share mechanistic pathways 
with disease features that manifest at later stages.
The current excitement surrounding human stem cells has more to 
do with their promise to improve on animal models of disease than 
their potential as a source for cell based therapies. Even without new 
insights into disease pathogenesis, there is promise that iPSC models 
such as brain organoids will act as drug screening platforms for dis-
covery of novel therapeutics and for detection of off-target and toxic 
effects. The failure of many neurotherapeutic approaches to translate 
from animal models to clinical practice underscores the need for better 
predictive models, and stem cell models and brain organoids based on 
human cells may be ideally suited to bridge this divide.
A Current Perspective on Neural Stem Cells in the 
Clinic  The prospect of stem cell therapies to treat diseases or inju-
ries of the nervous system has captured the attention of researchers, 
clinicians, and the public. The pace of research is usually slow and 
deliberate, but in the stem cell arena there has been enormous pressure 
to accelerate the pace of progress in order to bring cell-based therapies 
to the clinic. Expectations have been raised, and clinics have already 
begun offering unproven or dangerous treatments to a public that 
is ill-informed and vulnerable to exploitation. Nonetheless, there is 
cautious optimism that stem cells will eventually realize the promise 
of regenerative therapy for at least some currently untreatable or incur-
able nervous system diseases.
Pursuit of a cell-based therapy for PD has been ongoing for many 
decades. Following anecdotal success in a handful of patients who 
appeared to improve following striatal grafts of fetal midbrain dopa-
minergic cells, two NIH-funded double-blind control studies were 
launched in the 1990s. However, only a small number of younger 
patients showed some benefit, and several patients developed spon-
taneous dyskinetic movements related to the therapy. These efforts 
constituted a failed trial as the treated patients who did not experi-
ence side effects failed to improve significantly. The dyskinesias that 
curtailed the trials were eventually ascribed to an abundance of sero-
tonergic neurons that were inadvertently included in some of the cell 
grafts. Protocols for deriving dopaminergic neurons from stem cells 
could potentially avoid this complication by providing a more purified 
cell population, and several groups in the United States and Europe 
have been aggressively pursuing a stem cell-based approach and are 
nearing clinical trials. Meanwhile, techniques to extract dopaminergic 
cells from fetal tissue have been improved, and on the basis of encour-
aging results in individual transplanted patients, some of whom have 
managed to go off their Parkinson’s medication, a new trial of fetal 
cell transplantation for PD has started in Europe. This is a very con-
sequential trial, as a poor clinical outcome could dampen enthusiasm 
for the planned follow-on stem cell trials in PD and possibly in other 
disorders as well.
One of the first cell-based clinical trials for a neurological disease 
targeted patients suffering from an untreatable childhood disorder, 
Batten disease. Batten disease is an autosomal recessive metabolic 
disorder resulting from an inability to synthesize a lysosomal enzyme 
critical to brain function. The Phase 1 trial involved six patients with 
infantile and late infantile forms of the disease who received neural 
stem cells rather than any specific postmitotic cell type. Neural stem 
cells derived from donated fetal tissue were expanded in vitro prior to 
surgical grafting into the brain. This approach was not without risk, as 
the neural stem cells were proliferating and could potentially form an 
abnormal growth. The rationale was that the cells would be capable of 
synthesizing and secreting the missing lysosomal enzyme and would 
therefore serve as a delivery device. Animal studies using a transgenic 
mouse model of Batten disease demonstrated rescue, and this promis-
ing result led to a small Phase 1 trial. The Phase 1 study was considered 
a success as no adverse events were reported and the cells appeared 
to be safe, though there was no clinical improvement and no clear 
evidence of whether the cells had dispersed, transformed into neurons 
or glia, or indeed survived at all. Despite clearing the Phase 1 trial, the 
company did not pursue further trials for Batten disease, but instead 
initiated clinical trials using the same cell product for several other 
indications, including an inherited fatal dysmyelination syndrome 
known as Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD). The human neural 
stem cells have both neurogenic and gliogenic potential, and when 
delivered to white matter regions in experimental animals most persist-
ing cells had become oligodendrocytes. This supported use of the cells 
to promote myelin formation in conditions such as PMD. The company 
also initiated trials in spinal cord injury. However, the spinal cord trial 
failed to achieve sufficient benefit in Phase II and the company ceased 
its work on stem cell therapies.
Spinal cord injury is an attractive target for novel therapies since 
there are no effective treatment options currently. A series of stem cell 
trials designed to treat subacute spinal cord injury are underway in 
the United States and Europe. The first to enter clinical trials in the 
United States was based on a protocol designed to generate oligoden-
drocytes from pluripotent embryonic stem cells. Evidence of efficacy 
was obtained in animal models following surgical grafting of cells to 
sites of spinal cord injury. However, evidence of myelination of host 
axons was minimal, and other mechanisms were invoked for improve-
ment in gait, including trophic support and immune modulation. Regu-
latory permission for a Phase 1 trial for subacute mid-thoracic injury was 
initially stalled by concern over abnormal growths at sites of cell deposit 
in some animals, but this was satisfactorily addressed and patient trials 
commenced. However, following a change in leadership, the stem cell 
program was terminated. The program was acquired by another com-
pany that has resumed the spinal cord injury trial and received regula-
tory approval to advance to include cervical level injuries.
The possibility of treating ALS by replacing dying motor neurons 
with stem cell–derived substitutes has excited interest but this pros-
pect seems very remote. Even if new neurons are able to integrate 
into spinal cord circuits and become properly innervated, they would 
have to grow long axons that would take many months to years to 
project to appropriate targets and attract myelinating Schwann cells. 
Furthermore, cells would need to be grafted at multiple spinal cord 
and brainstem levels, and the upper motor neuron deficit would need 
to be treated by replacing projecting neurons in the motor cortex. An 
additional complication is the recent finding that spinal motor neurons 
have unique segmental identity, and replacement cells might need to 
be generated with a range of molecular identities in order to integrate 
at multiple spinal levels. This would still leave unaddressed the toxic 
effects recently shown to be produced in ALS by diseased astrocytes 
and microglia that could attack the replacement cells. A more tractable 
near-term solution would be to graft support cells that could rescue 
or protect endogenous motor neurons from damage. This approach 
was tried in a mouse model of ALS. Human stem cell–derived neural 
progenitor cells engineered to express GDNF, a growth factor known 
to provide trophic support for neurons, were grafted to the spinal cord 
of young ALS mice. The cells dispersed and were able to rescue motor 
neurons, a very promising result, but disappointingly, the animals 
became weak and died at the same rate as untreated control animals. 
However, ALS is a deadly disease with no known treatment. In the 
hope that patients will respond differently than mice, a clinical trial 
based on this approach has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) and will begin soon.


================================================================================
Ch418 Seizures and Epilepsy
Pages 3096-3113
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3096 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3050
Following Shinya Yamanaka’s discovery of iPSCs, the Japanese 
government has invested in bringing iPSC-derived cell therapy to the 
clinic. Banks of iPSC lines selected to capture the diversity of HLA 
haplotypes found in the Japanese population are being produced in 
the hope that these will allow cell therapies to be matched to indi-
vidual patient haplotypes in order to avoid immune rejection. While 
these stem cell banks were still being produced, the first Japanese 
study to use stem cells was approved in August, 2013, and involved 
patients who were to receive customized therapy using cells derived 
from their own skin fibroblasts. The targeted disease was age-related 
macular degeneration, a common cause of blindness in the elderly that 
results from loss of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells. RPE cells are 
relatively easy to generate from pluripotent stem cells, making replace-
ment therapy an attractive target in this condition. A challenge is to 
coax the replacement cells to recreate an epithelium in the subretinal 
space. The Japanese approach involves surgical insertion of a biofilm 
seeded with RPE cells into the retina. One patient was treated with 
his/her own stem cell-derived RPE cells, but prior to treating a second 
patient, the genome of the RPE cell line was sequenced, and a mutation 
was discovered in a known oncogene. The trial was halted and a deci-
sion made to discontinue the effort for customized cell therapy in favor 
of using RPE cells derived from the national repository of banked iPSC 
lines which undergo extensive gene sequencing and quality controls. 
This outcome serves as a caution for the challenges involved in bring-
ing a customized cell therapy to the clinic.
By far the largest number of human trials have been performed 
using mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) sourced from a variety of sites 
including bone marrow, peripheral blood, adipose tissue, umbilical 
cord, etc. Interest in the potential utility of MSCs for regenerative 
therapy began with the optimistic report that bone marrow stem cells 
were pluripotent and capable of generating nerve and heart muscle as 
well as blood cells. The possibility that easily obtainable MSCs could be 
used to regenerate injured or diseased cells or organs to treat diseases 
ranging from stroke, neurodegenerative disease, myocardial infarct, 
and even diabetes, generated enormous enthusiasm. The enthusiasm 
proved irresistible to many, and even after the initial reports were dis-
credited—MSCs turned out not to be pluripotent stem cells as initially 
thought—a veritable flood of papers began to appear claiming disease-
modifying activity of MSCs in mouse models of almost every degener-
ative disease and injury model. But when it became clear that the MSCs 
were not transforming into or generating new neurons or cardiac myo-
cytes, alternative mechanisms of action were invoked, including the 
release of trophic factors, cytokines, or inflammatory modulators that 
were credited with producing their remarkable restorative effects. The 
relative ease with which blood or adipose tissue can be harvested from 
patients or donors and MSCs extracted has led to a rapidly expanding 
number of clinical trials for conditions ranging from stroke and MS 
to AD and PD. Furthermore, a loophole in the regulatory framework 
of the FDA allows autologous cell therapy to escape regulation pro-
vided that the cells have not been significantly processed. This lax 
regulation has spawned a veritable industry of stem cell clinics making 
unsubstantiated claims of success in treating nervous system diseases. 
Patients have died from treatments in unregulated clinics operating 
in countries around the world and three patients became blind in 
a well-publicized incident following stem cell treatments delivered 
by a Florida clinic. The “stem cells” were derived from the patients’ 
own fat tissue and blood. These activities represent the dark side of 
the stem cell revolution perpetrated by practitioners who exploit the 
desperation of patients and their families. Legitimate and effective 
stem cell therapies will emerge over time, but given the prevalence 
and abundance of misleading information available on the internet and 
elsewhere, a trusted and well-informed physician can play a key role in 
helping patients navigate the current cell therapy minefield.
■
■FURTHER READING
Chung WS et al: Do glia drive synaptic and cognitive impairment in 
disease? Nat Neurosci 18:1539, 2015.
Di Lullo E, Kriegstein AR: The use of brain organoids to investigate 
neural development and disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:573, 2017.
Fung TC et al: Interactions between the microbiota, immune and ner-
vous systems in health and disease. Nat Neurosci 20:145, 2017.
Herz J et al: Myeloid cells in the central nervous system. Immunity 
46:943, 2017.
Hong S et al: Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in 
Alzheimer mouse models. Science 352:712, 2016.
Liddelow SA et al: Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by acti-
vated microglia. Nature 481:541, 2017.
Prusiner SB et al: Evidence for α-synuclein prions causing multiple 
system atrophy in humans with parkinsonism. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 112:E5308, 2015.
Turner L, Knoepfler P: Selling stem cells in the USA: Assessing the 
direct-to-consumer industry. Cell Stem Cell 19:154, 2016. 
Yoo BB, Masmanian SK: The Enteric Network: Interactions between 
the immune and nervous systems of the gut. Immunity 46:910, 2016. 
Section 2	
Diseases of the Central Nervous System
A seizure (from the Latin sacire, “to take possession of”) is a transient 
occurrence of signs or symptoms due to abnormal excessive or syn-
chronous neuronal activity in the brain. Depending on the distribution 
of discharges, this abnormal brain activity can have various mani-
festations, ranging from dramatic convulsive activity to experiential 
phenomena not readily discernible by an observer. Although a variety 
of factors influence the incidence and prevalence of seizures, ~5–10% of 
the population will have at least one seizure, with the highest incidence 
occurring in early childhood and late adulthood.
The meaning of the term seizure needs to be carefully distinguished 
from that of epilepsy. Epilepsy describes a condition in which a person 
has a risk of recurrent seizures due to a chronic, underlying process. 
This definition implies that a person with a single seizure, or recur-
rent seizures due to correctable or avoidable circumstances, does not 
necessarily have epilepsy (although a single seizure associated with 
particular clinical or electroencephalographic features may establish 
the diagnosis of epilepsy). Epilepsy refers to a clinical phenomenon 
rather than a single disease entity, because there are many forms and 
causes of epilepsy. However, among the many causes of epilepsy there 
are various epilepsy syndromes in which the clinical and pathologic char-
acteristics are distinctive and suggest a specific underlying etiology.
Using the definition of epilepsy as two or more unprovoked sei-
zures, the incidence of epilepsy is ~0.3–0.5% in different populations 
throughout the world, and the prevalence of epilepsy has been esti-
mated at 5–30 persons per 1000.
CLASSIFICATION OF SEIZURES
Determining the type of seizure that has occurred is essential for 
focusing the diagnostic approach on particular etiologies, selecting 
the appropriate therapy, and providing potentially vital informa-
tion regarding prognosis. The International League Against Epilepsy 
(ILAE) Commission on Classification and Terminology provided an 
updated approach to classification of seizures in 2017 (Table 418-1). 
This system is based on the clinical features of seizures and associated 
electroencephalographic findings. Other potentially distinctive fea-
tures such as etiology or cellular substrate are not considered in this 
classification system, although this will undoubtedly change in the 
future as more is learned about the pathophysiologic mechanisms that 
underlie specific seizure types.
A fundamental principle is that seizures may be either focal or gen-
eralized. Focal seizures originate within networks limited to one brain 
region (note that the term partial seizures is no longer used). Generalized 
418 Seizures and Epilepsy
Daniel H. Lowenstein 


--- PDF PAGE 3097 ---

CHAPTER 418 Seizures and Epilepsy
3051
(flushing, sweating, piloerection). Focal seizures arising from the tem-
poral or frontal cortex may also cause alterations in hearing, olfaction, 
or emotional state. This includes the sensation of unusual, intense 
odors (e.g., burning rubber or kerosene) or sounds (crude or highly 
complex sounds), or an epigastric sensation that rises from the stomach 
or chest to the head. Some patients describe odd, internal feelings such 
as fear, a sense of impending change, detachment, depersonalization, 
déjá vu, or illusions that objects are growing smaller (micropsia) or 
larger (macropsia). These subjective, “internal” events that are not 
directly observable by someone else are referred to as auras.
Focal Seizures with Impaired Awareness  Focal seizures 
may also be accompanied by a transient impairment of the patient’s 
ability to maintain normal contact with the environment. The patient 
is unable to respond appropriately to visual or verbal commands 
during the seizure and has impaired recollection or awareness of the 
ictal phase. The seizures frequently begin with an aura (i.e., a focal sei-
zure without cognitive disturbance) that is stereotypic for the patient. 
The start of the ictal phase is often a motionless stare, which marks the 
onset of the period of impaired awareness. The impaired awareness is 
usually accompanied by automatisms, which are involuntary, automatic 
behaviors that have a wide range of manifestations. Automatisms 
may consist of very basic behaviors such as chewing, lip smacking, 
swallowing, or “picking” movements of the hands, or more elabo-
rate behaviors such as a display of emotion or running. The patient 
is typically confused following the seizure, and the transition to full 
recovery of consciousness may range from seconds up to an hour or 
longer. Examination immediately following the seizure may show an 
anterograde amnesia or transient neurological deficits (such as aphasia, 
hemi-neglect, or visual loss) caused by postictal inhibition of the corti-
cal regions most involved in the seizure itself.
The range of potential clinical behaviors linked to focal seizures is 
so broad that extreme caution is advised before concluding that ste-
reotypic episodes of bizarre or atypical behavior are not due to seizure 
activity. In such cases additional, detailed EEG studies may be helpful.
■
■EVOLUTION OF FOCAL SEIZURES TO  
GENERALIZED SEIZURES
Focal seizures can spread to involve both cerebral hemispheres and 
produce a generalized seizure, usually of the tonic-clonic variety 
(discussed below). This evolution is observed frequently following 
focal seizures arising from a region in the frontal lobe, but may also 
be associated with focal seizures occurring elsewhere in the brain. A 
focal seizure that evolves into a generalized seizure is often difficult 
to distinguish from a primary generalized onset tonic-clonic seizure, 
because bystanders tend to emphasize the more dramatic, generalized 
convulsive phase of the seizure and overlook the more subtle, focal 
symptoms present at onset. In some cases, the focal onset of the seizure 
becomes apparent only when a careful history identifies a preceding 
aura. Often, however, the focal onset is not clinically evident and may 
be established only through careful EEG analysis. Nonetheless, distin-
guishing between these two entities is extremely important, because 
there may be substantial differences in the evaluation and treatment 
of epilepsies characterized by focal versus generalized onset seizures.
■
■GENERALIZED ONSET SEIZURES
Generalized seizures arise at some point in the brain but immediately 
and rapidly engage neuronal networks in both cerebral hemispheres. 
Several types of generalized seizures have features that place them in 
distinctive categories and facilitate clinical diagnosis.
Typical Absence Seizures  Typical absence seizures are charac-
terized by sudden, brief lapses of consciousness without loss of pos-
tural control. The seizure usually lasts for only seconds, consciousness 
returns as suddenly as it was lost, and there is no postictal confusion. 
Although the brief loss of consciousness may be clinically inapparent 
or the sole manifestation of the seizure discharge, absence seizures are 
usually accompanied by subtle, bilateral motor signs such as rapid 
blinking of the eyelids, chewing movements, or small-amplitude, 
clonic movements of the hands.
TABLE 418-1  Classification of Seizures*
1.  Focal Onset
(Can be further described as having intact or impaired awareness, motor or 
nonmotor onset, or evolve from focal to bilateral tonic clonic)
2.  Generalized Onset
a.  Motor
  Tonic-clonic
  Other motor (e.g., atonic, myoclonic)
b.  Nonmotor (absence)
3.  Unknown Onset
(Can be further described as motor or nonmotor, or unclassified)
*Based on the new 2017 International League Against Epilepsy classification of 
seizure types (RS Fisher et al: Epilepsia 58: 522, 2017).
seizures arise within and rapidly engage networks distributed across 
both cerebral hemispheres. Focal seizures are usually associated with 
structural abnormalities of the brain. In contrast, generalized seizures 
may result from cellular, biochemical, or structural abnormalities that 
have a more widespread distribution. There are clear exceptions in both 
cases, however.
■
■FOCAL ONSET SEIZURES
Focal seizures arise from a neuronal network either discretely localized 
within one brain region or more broadly distributed but still within a 
cerebral hemisphere. With the new classification system, the subcatego-
ries of “simple focal seizures” and “complex focal seizures” have been 
eliminated. Instead, the classification emphasizes the effect on aware-
ness (intact or impaired) and nature of the onset (motor or nonmotor). 
Focal seizures can also evolve into generalized seizures. In the past this 
was referred to as focal seizures with secondary generalization, but the new 
system relies on descriptions of the type of generalized seizures that 
evolve from the focal seizure.
The routine interictal (i.e., between seizures) electroencephalogram 
(EEG) in patients with focal seizures is often normal or may show brief 
discharges termed epileptiform spikes, or sharp waves. Because focal sei-
zures can arise from the medial temporal lobe or inferior frontal lobe 
(i.e., regions distant from the scalp), the EEG recorded during the sei-
zure may be nonlocalizing. However, the region of seizure onset may 
be detected using surgically placed intracranial electrodes.
Focal Seizures with Intact Awareness  Focal seizures can have 
motor manifestations (such as tonic, clonic, or myoclonic movements) 
or nonmotor manifestations (such as sensory, autonomic, or emotional 
symptoms) without impairment of awareness. For example, a patient 
having a focal motor seizure arising from the right primary motor 
cortex near the area controlling hand movement will note the onset 
of involuntary movements of the contralateral, left hand. Since the 
cortical region controlling hand movement is immediately adjacent to 
the region for facial expression, the seizure may also cause abnormal 
movements of the face synchronous with the movements of the hand. 
The EEG recorded with scalp electrodes during the seizure (i.e., an ictal 
EEG) may show abnormal discharges in a very limited region over the 
appropriate area of cerebral cortex if the seizure focus involves the 
cerebral convexity.
Three additional features of focal motor seizures are worth noting. 
First, in some patients, the abnormal motor movements may begin 
in a very restricted region such as the fingers and gradually progress 
(over seconds to minutes) to include a larger portion of the extremity. 
This phenomenon, described by Hughlings Jackson and known as a 
“Jacksonian march,” represents the spread of seizure activity over a 
progressively larger region of motor cortex. Second, patients may expe-
rience a localized paresis (Todd’s paralysis) for minutes to many hours 
in the involved region following the seizure. Third, in rare instances, 
the seizure may continue for hours or days. This condition, termed 
epilepsia partialis continua, is often refractory to medical therapy.
Focal seizures may also manifest as changes in somatic sensation 
(e.g., paresthesias), vision (flashing lights or formed hallucinations), 
equilibrium (sensation of falling or vertigo), or autonomic function 


--- PDF PAGE 3098 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3052
Typical absence seizures are associated with a group of genetically 
determined epilepsies with onset usually in childhood (ages 4–10 years) 
or early adolescence and are the main seizure type in 15–20% of chil-
dren with epilepsy. The seizures can occur hundreds of times per day, 
but the child may be unaware of or unable to convey their existence. 
Because the clinical signs of the seizures are subtle, especially to par-
ents who may not have had previous experience with seizures, it is not 
surprising that the first clue to absence epilepsy is often unexplained 
“daydreaming” and a decline in school performance recognized by a 
teacher.
The electrophysiologic hallmark of typical absence seizures is a 
generalized, symmetric, 3-Hz spike-and-slow-wave discharges that 
begins and ends suddenly, superimposed on a normal EEG back-
ground. Periods of spike-and-slow-wave discharges lasting more than 
a few seconds usually correlate with clinical signs, but the EEG often 
shows many more brief bursts of abnormal cortical activity than were 
suspected clinically. Hyperventilation tends to provoke these electro-
graphic discharges and even the seizures themselves and is routinely 
used when recording the EEG.
Atypical Absence Seizures  Atypical absence seizures have fea-
tures that deviate both clinically and electrophysiologically from typi-
cal absence seizures. For example, the lapse of consciousness is usually 
of longer duration and less abrupt in onset and cessation, and the 
seizure is accompanied by more obvious motor signs that may include 
focal or lateralizing features. The EEG shows a generalized, slow spike-
and-slow-wave pattern with a frequency of ≤2.5 per second, as well as 
other abnormal activity. Atypical absence seizures are usually associ-
ated with diffuse or multifocal structural abnormalities of the brain and 
therefore may accompany other signs of neurologic dysfunction such 
as mental retardation. Furthermore, the seizures are less responsive to 
anticonvulsants compared to typical absence seizures.
Generalized, Tonic-Clonic Seizures  Generalized onset tonic-
clonic seizures are the main seizure type in ~10% of all persons with 
epilepsy. They are also the most common seizure type resulting from 
metabolic derangements and are therefore frequently encountered in 
many different clinical settings. The seizure usually begins abruptly 
without warning, although some patients describe vague premonitory 
symptoms in the hours leading up to the seizure. This prodrome is 
distinct from the stereotypic auras associated with focal seizures that 
generalize. The initial phase of the seizure is usually tonic contraction 
of muscles throughout the body, accounting for a number of the classic 
features of the event. Tonic contraction of the muscles of expiration 
and the larynx at the onset will produce a loud moan or “ictal cry.” 
Respirations are impaired, secretions pool in the oropharynx, and cya-
nosis develops. Contraction of the jaw muscles may cause biting of the 
tongue. A marked enhancement of sympathetic tone leads to increases 
in heart rate, blood pressure, and pupillary size. After 10–20 s, the tonic 
phase of the seizure typically evolves into the clonic phase, produced by 
the superimposition of periods of muscle relaxation on the tonic muscle 
contraction. The periods of relaxation progressively increase until the 
end of the ictal phase, which usually lasts no more than 1 min. The pos-
tictal phase is characterized by unresponsiveness, muscular flaccidity, 
and excessive salivation that can cause stridorous breathing and partial 
airway obstruction. Bladder or bowel incontinence may occur at this 
point. Patients gradually regain consciousness over minutes to hours, 
and during this transition, there is typically a period of postictal confu-
sion. Patients subsequently complain of headache, fatigue, and muscle 
ache that can last for many hours. The duration of impaired conscious-
ness in the postictal phase can be extremely long (i.e., many hours) in 
patients with prolonged seizures or underlying central nervous system 
(CNS) diseases such as alcoholic cerebral atrophy.
The EEG during the tonic phase of the seizure shows a progressive 
increase in generalized low-voltage fast activity, followed by gener-
alized high-amplitude, polyspike discharges. In the clonic phase, the 
high-amplitude activity is typically interrupted by slow waves to create 
a spike-and-slow-wave pattern. The postictal EEG shows diffuse sup-
pression of all cerebral activity, then slowing that gradually recovers as 
the patient awakens.
There are a number of variants of generalized motor seizures, 
including pure tonic and pure clonic seizures. Brief tonic seizures last-
ing only a few seconds are especially noteworthy since they are usually 
associated with specific epilepsy syndromes having mixed seizure 
phenotypes, such as the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (discussed below).
Atonic Seizures  Atonic seizures are characterized by sudden loss 
of postural muscle tone lasting 1–2 s. Consciousness is briefly impaired, 
but there is usually no postictal confusion. A very brief seizure may 
cause only a quick head drop or nodding movement, whereas a longer 
seizure will cause the patient to collapse. This can be extremely dan-
gerous, because there is a substantial risk of direct head injury with 
the fall. The EEG shows brief, generalized spike-and-wave discharges 
followed immediately by diffuse slow waves that correlate with the 
loss of muscle tone. Similar to pure tonic seizures, atonic seizures are 
usually seen in association with known epilepsy syndromes.
Myoclonic Seizures  Myoclonus is a sudden and brief muscle 
contraction that may involve one part of the body or the entire body. A 
normal, common physiologic form of myoclonus is the sudden jerking 
movement observed while falling asleep. Pathologic myoclonus is most 
commonly seen in association with metabolic disorders, degenerative 
CNS diseases, or anoxic brain injury (Chap. 301). Although the distinc-
tion from other forms of myoclonus is imprecise, myoclonic seizures 
are considered to be true epileptic events because they are caused by 
cortical (versus subcortical or spinal) dysfunction. The EEG shows 
bilaterally synchronous spike-and-slow-wave discharges immediately 
prior to the movement and muscle artifact associated with the myo-
clonus. Myoclonic seizures usually coexist with other forms of gener-
alized seizures but are the predominant feature of juvenile myoclonic 
epilepsy (JME) (discussed below).
Epileptic Spasms  Epileptic spasms are characterized by a briefly 
sustained flexion or extension of predominantly proximal muscles, 
including truncal muscles. The EEG usually shows hypsarrhythmia, 
which consist of diffuse, giant slow waves with a chaotic background 
of irregular, multifocal spikes and sharp waves. During the clinical 
spasm, there is a marked suppression of the EEG background (the 
“electrodecremental response”). The electromyogram (EMG) also 
reveals a characteristic rhomboid pattern that may help distinguish 
spasms from brief tonic and myoclonic seizures. Epileptic spasms occur 
predominantly in infants and likely result from differences in neuronal 
function and connectivity in the immature versus mature CNS.
EPILEPSY SYNDROMES
Epilepsy syndromes are disorders in which epilepsy is a predominant 
feature, and there is sufficient evidence (e.g., through clinical, EEG, 
radiologic, or genetic observations) to suggest a common underlying 
mechanism. Three important epilepsy syndromes are listed below; addi-
tional examples with a known genetic basis are shown in Table 418-2.
■
■JUVENILE MYOCLONIC EPILEPSY
JME is a generalized seizure disorder of unknown cause that appears 
in early adolescence and is usually characterized by bilateral myoclonic 
jerks that may be single or repetitive. The myoclonic seizures are most 
frequent in the morning after awakening and can be provoked by sleep 
deprivation. Consciousness is preserved unless the myoclonus is espe-
cially severe. Many patients also experience generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, and up to one-third have absence seizures. Although com-
plete remission is relatively uncommon, the seizures usually respond 
well to appropriate anticonvulsant medication. There is often a family 
history of epilepsy, and genetic linkage studies suggest a polygenic 
cause.
■
■LENNOX-GASTAUT SYNDROME
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome occurs in children and is defined by the fol-
lowing triad: (1) multiple seizure types (usually including generalized 
tonic-clonic, atonic, and atypical absence seizures); (2) an EEG showing 
slow (<3 Hz) spike-and-wave discharges and a variety of other abnor-
malities; and (3) impaired cognitive function in most but not all cases. 


--- PDF PAGE 3099 ---

CHAPTER 418 Seizures and Epilepsy
3053
TABLE 418-2  Examples of Genes Associated with Epilepsy Syndromesa
GENE (LOCUS)
FUNCTION OF GENE
CLINICAL SYNDROME
COMMENTS
CHRNA4 (20q13.2)
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
subunit; mutations cause alterations in 
Ca2+ flux through the receptor; this may 
reduce the amount of GABA release in 
presynaptic terminals
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy 
(ADNFLE); childhood onset; brief, nighttime 
seizures with prominent motor movements; often 
misdiagnosed as primary sleep disorder
Rare; first identified in a large Australian 
family; other families found to have 
mutations in CHRNA2 or CHRNB2, and some 
families appear to have mutations at other 
loci
KCNQ2 (20q13.3)
Voltage-gated potassium channel 
subunits; mutation in pore regions 
may cause a 20–40% reduction of 
potassium currents, which will lead to 
impaired repolarization
Benign familial neonatal seizures (BFNSs); 
autosomal dominant inheritance; onset in first 
week of life in infants who are otherwise normal; 
remission usually within weeks to months; long-
term epilepsy in 10–15%
Rare; other families found to have mutations 
in KCNQ3 or an inversion in chromosomal 5; 
sequence and functional homology to KCNQ1, 
mutations of which cause long QT syndrome 
and a cardiac-auditory syndrome
SCN1A (2q24.3)
α-Subunit of a voltage-gated sodium 
channel; numerous mutations affecting 
sodium currents that cause either 
gain or loss of function; network 
effects appear related to expression in 
excitatory or inhibitory cells
Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus 
(GEFS+); autosomal dominant inheritance; presents 
with febrile seizures at median 1 year, which may 
persist >6 years, then variable seizure types not 
associated with fever; numerous other syndromes, 
including almost 80% of patients with Dravet’s 
syndrome (severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy) 
and some cases of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome
Incidence uncertain; GEFS+ identified in 
other families with mutations in other sodium 
channel subunits (SCN2B and SCN2A) 
and GABAA receptor subunit (GABRG2 
and GABRA1); significant phenotypic 
heterogeneity within same family, including 
members with febrile seizures only
LGI1 (10q24)
Leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1 
gene; previous evidence for role in 
glial tumor progression; recent studies 
suggest an influence in the postnatal 
development of glutamatergic circuits 
in the hippocampus
Autosomal dominant partial epilepsy with auditory 
features (ADPEAF); a form of idiopathic lateral 
temporal lobe epilepsy with auditory symptoms or 
aphasia as a major focal seizure manifestation; age 
of onset usually between 10 and 25 years
Mutations found in up to 50% of families 
containing two or more subjects with 
idiopathic localization-related epilepsy with 
ictal auditory symptoms, suggesting that 
at least one other gene may underlie this 
syndrome
DEPDC5 (22q12.2)
Disheveled, Egl-10 and pleckstrin 
domain containing protein 5; exerts 
an inhibitory effect on mammalian 
target of rapamycin (mTOR)-mediated 
processes, such as cell growth and 
proliferation
Autosomal dominant familial focal epilepsy 
with variable foci (FFEVF); family members 
have seizures originating from different cortical 
regions; neuroimaging usually normal but may 
harbor subtle malformations; recent studies also 
suggest association with benign epilepsy with 
centrotemporal spikes
Study of families with the limited number 
of affected members revealed mutations in 
~12% of families; thus may be a relatively 
common cause of lesion-negative focal 
epilepsies with suspected genetic basis
CSTB (21q22.3)
Cystatin B, a noncaspase cysteine 
protease inhibitor; normal protein may 
block neuronal apoptosis by inhibiting 
caspases directly or indirectly (via 
cathepsins), or controlling proteolysis
Progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME) (Unverricht-
Lundborg disease); autosomal recessive 
inheritance; age of onset between 6 and  
15 years, myoclonic seizures, ataxia, and 
progressive cognitive decline; brain shows neuronal 
degeneration
Overall rare, but relatively common in Finland 
and Western Mediterranean (>1 in 20,000); 
precise role of cystatin B in human disease 
unknown, although mice with null mutations 
of cystatin B have similar syndrome
EPM2A (6q24)
Laforin, a protein tyrosine phosphatase 
(PTP); involved in glycogen metabolism 
and may have antiapoptotic activity
Progressive myoclonus epilepsy (Lafora’s disease); 
autosomal recessive inheritance; age of onset  
6–19 years, death within 10 years; brain 
degeneration associated with polyglucosan 
intracellular inclusion bodies in numerous organs
Most common PME in Southern Europe, 
Middle East, Northern Africa, and Indian 
subcontinent; genetic heterogeneity; 
unknown whether seizure phenotype due to 
degeneration or direct effects of abnormal 
laforin expression
Doublecortin 
(Xq21-24)
Doublecortin, expressed primarily 
in frontal lobes; directly regulates 
microtubule polymerization and 
bundling
Classic lissencephaly associated with severe 
mental retardation and seizures in males; 
subcortical band heterotopia with more subtle 
findings in females (presumably due to random 
X-inactivation); X-linked dominant
Relatively rare but of uncertain incidence; 
recent increased ascertainment due to 
improved imaging techniques; relationship 
between migration defect and seizure 
phenotype unknown
aThe first five syndromes listed in the table (ADNFLE, BFNC, GEFS+, ADPEAF, and FFEVF) are examples of idiopathic epilepsies associated with identified gene 
mutations. The last three syndromes are examples of the numerous Mendelian disorders in which seizures are one part of the phenotype.
Abbreviations: GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; PME, progressive myoclonus epilepsy.
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is associated with CNS disease or dysfunc-
tion from a variety of causes, including de novo mutations, develop-
mental abnormalities, perinatal hypoxia/ischemia, trauma, infection, 
and other acquired lesions. The multifactorial nature of this syndrome 
suggests that it is a nonspecific response of the brain to diffuse neu-
ronal dysfunction. Unfortunately, many patients have a poor prognosis 
due to the underlying CNS disease and the physical and psychosocial 
consequences of severe, poorly controlled epilepsy.
■
■MESIAL TEMPORAL LOBE EPILEPSY SYNDROME
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is the most common syndrome 
associated with focal seizures with impairment of consciousness and is 
an example of an epilepsy syndrome with distinctive clinical, electroen-
cephalographic, and pathologic features (Table 418-3). High-resolution 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can detect the characteristic hippo-
campal sclerosis that appears to be essential in the pathophysiology of 
MTLE for many patients (Fig. 418-1). Recognition of this syndrome is 
especially important because it tends to be refractory to treatment with 
anticonvulsants but responds well to surgical intervention. Advances 
in the understanding of basic mechanisms of epilepsy have come 
through studies of experimental models of MTLE, discussed below.
THE CAUSES OF SEIZURES AND EPILEPSY
Seizures are a result of a shift in the normal balance of excitation 
and inhibition within the CNS. Given the numerous properties that 
control neuronal excitability, it is not surprising that there are many 
different ways to perturb this normal balance, and therefore many dif-
ferent causes of both seizures and epilepsy. Three clinical observations 
emphasize how a variety of factors determine why certain conditions 
may cause seizures or epilepsy in a given patient.
1.	 The normal brain is capable of having a seizure under the appropriate 
circumstances, and there are differences between individuals in the sus-
ceptibility or threshold for seizures. For example, seizures may be 
induced by high fevers in children who are otherwise normal and 
who never develop other neurologic problems, including epilepsy. 
However, febrile seizures occur only in a relatively small proportion 
of children. This implies there are various underlying endogenous 


--- PDF PAGE 3100 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3054
factors that influence the threshold for having a seizure. Some of 
these factors are genetic, as a family history of epilepsy has a clear 
influence on the likelihood of seizures occurring in otherwise nor-
mal individuals. Normal development also plays an important role, 
because the brain appears to have different seizure thresholds at 
different maturational stages.
2.	 There are a variety of conditions that have an extremely high likelihood 
of resulting in a chronic seizure disorder. One of the best examples of 
this is severe, penetrating head trauma, which is associated with 
up to a 45% risk of subsequent epilepsy. The high propensity for 
severe traumatic brain injury to lead to epilepsy suggests that the 
injury results in a long-lasting pathologic change in the CNS that 
transforms a presumably normal neural network into one that is 
abnormally hyperexcitable. This process is known as epileptogenesis, 
and the specific changes that result in a lowered seizure threshold 
can be considered epileptogenic factors. Other processes associated 
with epileptogenesis include stroke, infections, and abnormalities of 
CNS development. Likewise, the genetic abnormalities associated 
with epilepsy likely involve processes that trigger the appearance of 
specific sets of epileptogenic factors.
3.	 Seizures are episodic. Patients with epilepsy have seizures intermit-
tently and, depending on the underlying cause, many patients are 
completely normal for months or even years between seizures. This 
implies there are important provocative or precipitating factors that 
induce seizures in patients with epilepsy. Similarly, precipitating 
factors are responsible for causing the single seizure in someone 
without epilepsy. Precipitants include those due to intrinsic phys-
iologic processes such as psychological or physical stress, sleep 
deprivation, or hormonal changes. They also include exogenous 
factors such as exposure to toxic substances and certain medications.
These observations emphasize the concept that the many causes 
of seizures and epilepsy result from a dynamic interplay between 
endogenous factors, epileptogenic factors, and precipitating factors. 
The potential role of each needs to be carefully considered when deter-
mining the appropriate management of a patient with seizures. For 
example, the identification of predisposing factors (e.g., family history 
of epilepsy) in a patient with febrile seizures may increase the neces-
sity for closer follow-up and a more aggressive diagnostic evaluation. 
Finding an epileptogenic lesion may help in the estimation of seizure 
recurrence and duration of therapy. Finally, removal or modification of 
a precipitating factor may be an effective and safer method for prevent-
ing further seizures than the prophylactic use of anticonvulsant drugs.
■
■CAUSES ACCORDING TO AGE
In practice, it is useful to consider the etiologies of seizures based on 
the age of the patient, because age is one of the most important fac-
tors determining both the incidence and the likely causes of seizures 
or epilepsy (Table 418-4). During the neonatal period and early infancy, 
potential causes include hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, trauma, 
CNS infection, congenital CNS abnormalities, and metabolic disorders. 
Babies born to mothers using neurotoxic drugs such as cocaine, heroin, 
or ethanol are susceptible to drug-withdrawal seizures in the first few 
days after delivery. Hypoglycemia and hypocalcemia, which can occur 
as secondary complications of perinatal injury, are also causes of sei-
zures early after delivery. Seizures due to inborn errors of metabolism 
usually present once regular feeding begins, typically 2–3 days after 
birth. Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) deficiency, an important cause of neo-
natal seizures, can be effectively treated with pyridoxine replacement. 
The idiopathic or inherited forms of benign neonatal seizures are also 
seen during this time period.
The most common seizures arising in late infancy and early childhood 
are febrile seizures, which are seizures associated with fevers but 
without evidence of CNS infection or other defined causes. The overall 
prevalence is 3–5% and even higher in some parts of the world such as 
Asia. Patients often have a family history of febrile seizures or epilepsy. 
Febrile seizures usually occur between 3 months and 5 years of age and 
have a peak incidence between 18 and 24 months. The typical scenario 
is a child who has a generalized, tonic-clonic seizure during a febrile 
illness in the setting of a common childhood infection such as otitis 
media, respiratory infection, or gastroenteritis. The seizure is likely to 
occur during the rising phase of the temperature curve (i.e., during the 
first day) rather than well into the course of the illness. A simple febrile 
seizure is a single, isolated event, brief, and symmetric in appearance. 
Complex febrile seizures are characterized by repeated seizure activity, 
duration >15 minutes, or by focal features. Approximately one-third 
of patients with febrile seizures will have a recurrence, but <10% have 
three or more episodes. Recurrences are much more likely when the 
TABLE 418-3  Characteristics of the Mesial Temporal Lobe  
Epilepsy Syndrome
History
History of febrile seizures
Rare generalized seizures
Family history of epilepsy
Seizures may remit and reappear
Early onset
Seizures often intractable
Clinical Observations
Aura common
Postictal disorientation
Behavioral arrest/stare
Memory loss
Complex automatisms
Dysphasia (with focus in dominant hemisphere)
Unilateral posturing
Laboratory Studies
Unilateral or bilateral anterior temporal spikes on EEG
Hypometabolism on interictal PET
Hypoperfusion on interictal SPECT
Material-specific memory deficits on intracranial amobarbital (Wada) test
MRI Findings
Small hippocampus with increased signal on T2-weighted sequences
Small temporal lobe
Enlarged temporal horn
Pathologic Findings
Highly selective loss of specific cell populations within hippocampus in most 
cases
Abbreviations: EEG, electroencephalogram; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; 
PET, positron emission tomography; SPECT, single-photon emission computed 
tomography.
FIGURE 418-1  Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. The electroencephalogram and 
seizure semiology were consistent with a left temporal lobe focus. This coronal 
high-resolution T2-weighted fast spin echo magnetic resonance image obtained 
at 3 tesla is at the level of the hippocampal bodies, and shows abnormal high 
signal intensity, blurring of internal laminar architecture, and reduced size of the 
left hippocampus (arrow) relative to the right. This triad of imaging findings is 
consistent with hippocampal sclerosis.


--- PDF PAGE 3101 ---

CHAPTER 418 Seizures and Epilepsy
3055
febrile seizure occurs in the first year of life. Simple febrile seizures 
are not associated with an increase in the risk of developing epilepsy, 
while complex febrile seizures have a risk of 2–5%; other risk factors 
include the presence of preexisting neurologic deficits and a family 
history of nonfebrile seizures.
Childhood marks the age at which many of the well-defined epilepsy 
syndromes present. Some children who are otherwise normal develop 
idiopathic, generalized tonic-clonic seizures without other features that 
fit into specific syndromes. Temporal lobe epilepsy usually presents in 
childhood and may be related to mesial temporal lobe sclerosis (as part 
of the MTLE syndrome) or other focal abnormalities such as cortical 
dysgenesis. Other types of focal seizures, including those that evolve 
into generalized seizures, may be the relatively late manifestation of a 
developmental disorder, an acquired lesion such as head trauma, CNS 
infection (especially viral encephalitis), or very rarely a CNS tumor.
The period of adolescence and early adulthood is one of transition 
during which the idiopathic or genetically based epilepsy syndromes, 
including JME and juvenile absence epilepsy, become less common, 
while epilepsies secondary to acquired CNS lesions begin to predomi-
nate. Seizures that arise in patients in this age range may be associated 
with head trauma, CNS infections (including parasitic infections such 
as cysticercosis), brain tumors, congenital CNS abnormalities, illicit 
drug use, or alcohol withdrawal. Autoantibodies directed against 
CNS antigens such as potassium channels or glutamate receptors are 
a newly recognized cause of epilepsy that also begins to appear in this 
age group (although cases of autoimmunity are being increasingly 
described in the pediatric population), including patients without 
an identifiable cancer. This etiology should be suspected when a 
previously normal individual presents with a particularly aggressive 
seizure pattern developing over weeks to months and characterized by 
increasingly frequent and prolonged seizures, especially when com-
bined with psychiatric symptoms and changes in cognitive function 
(Chap. 90).
Head trauma is a common cause of epilepsy in adolescents and 
adults. The head injury can be caused by a variety of mechanisms, 
and the likelihood of developing epilepsy is strongly correlated with 
the severity of the injury. A patient with a penetrating head wound, 
depressed skull fracture, intracranial hemorrhage, or prolonged post-
traumatic coma or amnesia has a 30–50% risk of developing epilepsy, 
whereas a patient with a closed head injury and cerebral contusion has 
a 5–25% risk. Recurrent seizures usually develop within 1 year after 
head trauma, although intervals of >10 years are well known. In con-
trolled studies, mild head injury, defined as a concussion with amnesia 
or loss of consciousness of <30 min, was found to be associated with 
only a slightly increased likelihood of epilepsy. Nonetheless, most epi-
leptologists know of patients who have focal seizures within hours or 
days of a mild head injury and subsequently develop chronic seizures 
of the same type; such cases may represent rare examples of chronic 
epilepsy resulting from mild head injury.
The causes of seizures in older adults include cerebrovascular disease, 
trauma (including subdural hematoma), CNS tumors, and degenera-
tive diseases. Cerebrovascular disease may account for ~50% of new 
cases of epilepsy in patients >65 years. Acute seizures (i.e., occurring 
at the time of the stroke) are seen more often with embolic rather than 
hemorrhagic or thrombotic stroke. Chronic seizures typically appear 
months to years after the initial event and are associated with all forms 
of stroke.
Metabolic disturbances such as electrolyte imbalance, hypo- or 
hyperglycemia, renal failure, and hepatic failure may cause seizures 
at any age. Similarly, endocrine disorders, hematologic disorders, vas-
culitides, and many other systemic diseases may cause seizures over a 
broad age range. A wide variety of medications and abused substances 
are known to precipitate seizures as well (Table 418-5).
BASIC MECHANISMS
■
■MECHANISMS OF SEIZURE INITIATION  
AND PROPAGATION
Focal seizure activity can begin in a very discrete region of cortex 
and then slowly invade the surrounding regions. The hallmark of an 
established seizure is typically an electrographic “spike” due to intense 
near-simultaneous firing of a large number of local excitatory neurons, 
resulting in an apparent hypersynchronization of the excitatory bursts 
across a relatively large cortical region. The bursting activity in indi-
vidual neurons (the “paroxysmal depolarization shift”) is caused by a 
relatively long-lasting depolarization of the neuronal membrane due 
to influx of extracellular calcium (Ca2+), which leads to the opening of 
voltage-dependent sodium (Na+) channels, influx of Na+, and genera-
tion of repetitive action potentials. This is followed by a hyperpolariz-
ing afterpotential mediated by γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors 
or potassium (K+) channels, depending on the cell type. The synchro-
nized bursts from a sufficient number of neurons result in a so-called 
spike discharge on the EEG.
The spreading seizure wavefront is thought to slow and ultimately 
halt by intact hyperpolarization and a “surround” inhibition created by 
feedforward activation of inhibitory neurons. With sufficient activation, 
there is a recruitment of surrounding neurons via a number of synaptic 
and nonsynaptic mechanisms, including: (1) an increase in extracellu-
lar K+, which blunts hyperpolarization and depolarizes neighboring 
neurons; (2) accumulation of Ca2+ in presynaptic terminals, leading to 
enhanced neurotransmitter release; (3) depolarization-induced activa-
tion of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of the excitatory 
amino acid receptor, which causes additional Ca2+ influx and neuronal 
activation; and (4) ephaptic interactions related to changes in tissue 
osmolarity and cell swelling. The recruitment of a sufficient number of 
neurons leads to the propagation of excitatory currents into contiguous 
areas via local cortical connections and to more distant areas via long 
commissural pathways such as the corpus callosum.
TABLE 418-4  Causes of Seizures
Neonates (<1 month)
Perinatal hypoxia and ischemia
Intracranial hemorrhage and trauma
CNS infection
Metabolic disturbances (hypoglycemia, 
hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, pyridoxine 
deficiency)
Drug withdrawal
Developmental disorders
Genetic disorders
Infants and children  
(>1 month and <12 years)
Febrile seizures
Genetic disorders (metabolic, degenerative, 
primary epilepsy syndromes)
CNS infection
Developmental disorders
Trauma
Adolescents  
(12–18 years)
Trauma
Genetic disorders
Infection
Illicit drug use
Brain tumor
Young adults  
(18–35 years)
Trauma
Alcohol withdrawal
Illicit drug use
Brain tumor
Autoantibodies
Older adults (>35 years)
Cerebrovascular disease
Brain tumor
Alcohol withdrawal
Metabolic disorders (uremia, hepatic failure, 
electrolyte abnormalities, hypoglycemia, 
hyperglycemia)
Alzheimer’s disease and other degenerative CNS 
diseases
Autoantibodies
Abbreviation: CNS, central nervous system.


--- PDF PAGE 3102 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3056
Many factors control neuronal excitability, and thus there are many 
potential mechanisms for altering a neuron’s propensity to have burst-
ing activity. Mechanisms intrinsic to the neuron include changes in the 
conductance of ion channels, response characteristics of membrane 
receptors, cytoplasmic buffering, second-messenger systems, and 
protein expression as determined by gene transcription, translation, 
and posttranslational modification. Mechanisms extrinsic to the neuron 
include changes in the amount or type of neurotransmitters present 
at the synapse, modulation of receptors by extracellular ions and 
other molecules, and temporal and spatial properties of synaptic and 
nonsynaptic input. Nonneural cells, such as astrocytes and oligoden-
drocytes, have an important role in many of these mechanisms as well.
Certain recognized causes of seizures are explained by these mech-
anisms. For example, accidental ingestion of domoic acid, which is 
an analogue of glutamate (the principal excitatory neurotransmitter 
in the brain), causes profound seizures via direct activation of excita-
tory amino acid receptors throughout the CNS. Penicillin, which can 
lower the seizure threshold in humans and is a potent convulsant in 
experimental models, reduces inhibition by antagonizing the effects of 
GABA at its receptor. The basic mechanisms of other precipitating fac-
tors of seizures, such as sleep deprivation, fever, alcohol withdrawal, 
hypoxia, and infection, are not as well understood but presumably 
involve analogous perturbations in neuronal excitability. Similarly, the 
endogenous factors that determine an individual’s seizure threshold 
may relate to these properties as well.
Knowledge of the mechanisms responsible for initiation and propa-
gation of most generalized seizures (including tonic-clonic, myoclonic, 
and atonic types) remains rudimentary and reflects the limited under-
standing of the connectivity of the brain at a systems level. Much more 
is understood about the origin of generalized spike-and-wave dis-
charges in absence seizures. These appear to be related to oscillatory 
rhythms normally generated during sleep by circuits connecting the 
thalamus and cortex. This oscillatory behavior involves an interaction 
between GABAB receptors, T-type Ca2+ channels, and K+ channels 
located within the thalamus. Pharmacologic studies indicate that mod-
ulation of these receptors and channels can induce absence seizures, 
and there is good evidence that the genetic forms of absence epilepsy 
may be associated with mutations of components of this system.
■
■MECHANISMS OF EPILEPTOGENESIS
Epileptogenesis refers to the transformation of a normal neuronal 
network into one that is chronically hyperexcitable. There is often a 
delay of months to years between an initial CNS injury such as trauma, 
stroke, or infection and the first clinically evident seizure. The injury 
appears to initiate a process that gradually lowers the seizure thresh-
old in the affected region until a spontaneous seizure occurs. In many 
genetic and idiopathic forms of epilepsy, epileptogenesis is presumably 
determined by developmentally regulated events.
Pathologic studies of the hippocampus from patients with temporal 
lobe epilepsy have led to the suggestion that some forms of epilepto-
genesis are related to structural changes in neuronal networks. For exam-
ple, many patients with MTLE have a highly selective loss of neurons 
that normally contribute to inhibition of the main excitatory neurons 
within the dentate gyrus. There is also evidence that, in response to the 
loss of neurons, there is reorganization of surviving neurons in a way 
that affects the excitability of the network. Some of these changes can 
be seen in experimental models of prolonged electrical seizures or trau-
matic brain injury. Thus, an initial injury such as head injury may lead 
to a very focal, confined region of structural change that causes local 
hyperexcitability. The local hyperexcitability leads to further structural 
changes that evolve over time until the focal lesion produces clinically 
evident seizures. Similar models have provided strong evidence for 
long-term alterations in intrinsic, biochemical properties of cells within 
the network such as chronic changes in glutamate or GABA receptor 
function. Induction of inflammatory cascades may be a critical factor 
in these processes as well.
■
■GENETIC CAUSES OF EPILEPSY
The most important recent progress in epilepsy research has been 
the identification of genetic mutations associated with a variety of 
epilepsy syndromes (Table 418-2). Although most of the muta-
tions identified to date cause rare forms of epilepsy, their discovery has 
led to extremely important conceptual advances. For example, it 
appears that many of the inherited epilepsies are due to mutations 
affecting ion channel function. These syndromes are therefore part of 
the larger group of channelopathies causing paroxysmal disorders such 
as cardiac arrhythmias, episodic ataxia, periodic weakness, and familial 
hemiplegic migraine. Other gene mutations are proving to be associ-
ated with pathways influencing CNS development or neuronal homeo-
stasis. De novo mutations may explain a significant proportion of these 
syndromes, especially those with onset in early childhood. A current 
challenge is to identify the multiple susceptibility genes that underlie 
the more common forms of idiopathic epilepsies. Recent studies sug-
gest that ion channel mutations and copy number variants may con-
tribute to causation in a subset of these patients.
■
■MECHANISMS OF ACTION OF  
ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS
Antiepileptic drugs appear to act primarily by blocking the initiation 
or spread of seizures. This occurs through a variety of mechanisms 
TABLE 418-5  Drugs and Other Substances That Can Cause Seizures
Alkylating agents (e.g., busulfan, chlorambucil)
Antimalarials (chloroquine, mefloquine)
Antimicrobials/antivirals
β-lactam and related compounds
Quinolones
Acyclovir
Isoniazid
Ganciclovir
Anesthetics and analgesics
Meperidine
Fentanyl
Tramadol
Local anesthetics
Dietary supplements
Ephedra (ma huang)
Gingko
Immunomodulatory drugs
Cyclosporine
OKT3 (monoclonal antibodies to T cells)
Tacrolimus
Interferons
Psychotropics
Antidepressants (e.g., bupropion)
Antipsychotics (e.g., clozapine)
Lithium
Radiographic contrast agents
Drug withdrawal
Alcohol
Baclofen
Barbiturates (short-acting)
Benzodiazepines (short-acting)
Zolpidem
Drugs of abuse
Amphetamine
Cocaine
Phencyclidine
Methylphenidate
Flumazenila
aIn benzodiazepine-dependent patients.


--- PDF PAGE 3103 ---

CHAPTER 418 Seizures and Epilepsy
3057
that modify the activity of ion channels or neurotransmitters, and in 
most cases, the drugs have pleiotropic effects. The mechanisms include 
inhibition of Na+-dependent action potentials in a frequency-dependent 
manner (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, topiramate, 
zonisamide, lacosamide, rufinamide), inhibition of voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels (phenytoin, gabapentin, pregabalin), facilitating the opening 
of potassium channels (ezogabine), attenuation of glutamate activity 
(lamotrigine, topiramate, felbamate), potentiation of GABA receptor 
function (benzodiazepines and barbiturates), increase in the availabil-
ity of GABA (valproic acid, gabapentin, tiagabine), and modulation of 
release of synaptic vesicles (levetiracetam, brivaracetam). Two of the 
effective drugs for absence seizures, ethosuximide and valproic acid, 
probably act by inhibiting T-type Ca2+ channels in thalamic neurons.
In contrast to the relatively large number of antiepileptic drugs that 
can attenuate seizure activity, there are currently no drugs known to 
prevent the formation of a seizure focus following CNS injury. The 
eventual development of such “antiepileptogenic” drugs will provide 
an important means of preventing the emergence of epilepsy following 
injuries such as head trauma, stroke, and CNS infection.
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Seizure
When a patient presents shortly after a seizure, the first priorities 
are attention to vital signs, respiratory and cardiovascular support, 
and treatment of seizures if they resume (see “Treatment: Seizures 
and Epilepsy”). Life-threatening conditions such as CNS infection, 
metabolic derangement, or drug toxicity must be recognized and 
managed appropriately.
When the patient is not acutely ill, the evaluation will initially 
focus on whether there is a history of earlier seizures (Fig. 418-2). 
If this is the first seizure, then the emphasis will be to: (1) establish 
whether the reported episode was a seizure rather than another 
paroxysmal event, (2) determine the cause of the seizure by identi-
fying risk factors and precipitating events, and (3) decide whether 
anticonvulsant therapy is required in addition to treatment for any 
underlying illness.
In the patient with prior seizures or a known history of epilepsy, 
the evaluation is directed toward: (1) identification of the underlying 
cause and precipitating factors, and (2) determination of the ade-
quacy of the patient’s current therapy.
■
■HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
The first goal is to determine whether the event was truly a seizure. 
An in-depth history is essential, because in many cases the diagnosis of 
a seizure is based solely on clinical grounds—the examination and labora-
tory studies are often normal. Questions should focus on the symptoms 
before, during, and after the episode in order to differentiate a seizure 
from other paroxysmal events (see “Differential Diagnosis of Seizures” 
below). Seizures frequently occur out-of-hospital, and the patient may 
be unaware of the ictal and immediate postictal phases; thus, witnesses 
to the event should be interviewed carefully.
The history should also focus on risk factors and predisposing 
events. Clues for a predisposition to seizures include a history of febrile 
seizures, a family history of seizures, and, of particular importance, 
earlier auras or brief seizures not recognized as such. Epileptogenic 
factors such as prior head trauma, stroke, tumor, or CNS infection 
should be identified. In children, a careful assessment of develop-
mental milestones may provide evidence for underlying CNS disease. 
Precipitating factors such as sleep deprivation, systemic diseases, elec-
trolyte or metabolic derangements, acute infection, drugs that lower 
the seizure threshold (Table 418-5), or alcohol or illicit drug use should 
also be identified.
The general physical examination includes a search for signs of 
infection or systemic illness. Careful examination of the skin may 
reveal signs of neurocutaneous disorders such as tuberous sclerosis 
or neurofibromatosis, or chronic liver or renal disease. A finding of 
organomegaly may indicate a metabolic storage disease, and limb 
asymmetry may provide a clue to brain injury early in development. 
Signs of head trauma and use of alcohol or illicit drugs should be 
sought. Auscultation of the heart and carotid arteries may identify an 
abnormality that predisposes to cerebrovascular disease.
All patients require a complete neurologic examination, with 
particular emphasis on eliciting signs of cerebral hemispheric disease 
(Chap. 415). Careful assessment of mental status (including memory, 
language function, and abstract thinking) may suggest lesions in the 
anterior frontal, parietal, or temporal lobes. Testing of visual fields 
will help screen for lesions in the optic pathways and occipital lobes. 
Screening tests of motor function such as pronator drift, deep tendon 
reflexes, gait, and coordination may suggest lesions in motor (frontal) 
cortex, and cortical sensory testing (e.g., double simultaneous stimula-
tion) may detect lesions in the parietal cortex.
■
■LABORATORY STUDIES
Routine blood studies are indicated to identify the more common met-
abolic causes of seizures such as abnormalities in electrolytes, glucose, 
calcium, or magnesium, and hepatic or renal disease. A screen for toxins 
in blood and urine should also be obtained from all patients in appro-
priate risk groups, especially when no clear precipitating factor has been 
identified. A lumbar puncture is indicated if there is any suspicion of 
meningitis or encephalitis, and it is mandatory in all patients infected 
with HIV, even in the absence of symptoms or signs suggesting infec-
tion. Testing for autoantibodies in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) should be considered in patients presenting with a seemingly 
aggressive form of epilepsy associated with other abnormalities such 
as psychiatric symptoms or cognitive disturbances.
■
■ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC STUDIES
The electrical activity of the brain (the EEG) is easily recorded from 
electrodes placed on the scalp. The potential difference between pairs 
of electrodes on the scalp (bipolar derivation) or between individual 
scalp electrodes and a relatively inactive common reference point (ref-
erential derivation) is amplified and displayed on a computer monitor, 
oscilloscope, or paper. Digital systems allow the EEG to be recon-
structed and displayed with any desired format and to be manipulated 
for more detailed analysis and also permit computerized techniques 
to be used to detect certain abnormalities. The characteristics of the 
normal EEG depend on the patient’s age and level of arousal. The 
rhythmic activity normally recorded represents the postsynaptic poten-
tials of vertically oriented pyramidal cells of the cerebral cortex and is 
characterized by its frequency. In normal awake adults lying quietly 
with the eyes closed, an 8- to 13-Hz alpha rhythm is seen posteriorly 
in the EEG, intermixed with a variable amount of generalized faster 
(beta) activity (>13 Hz); the alpha rhythm is attenuated when the eyes 
are opened (Fig. 418-3). During drowsiness, the alpha rhythm is also 
attenuated; with light sleep, slower activity in the theta (4–7 Hz) and 
delta (<4 Hz) ranges becomes more conspicuous.
All patients who have a possible seizure disorder should be evalu-
ated with an EEG as soon as possible. In the evaluation of a patient with 
suspected epilepsy, the presence of electrographic seizure activity during 
the clinically evident event (i.e., abnormal, repetitive, rhythmic activity 
having a discrete onset and termination) clearly establishes the diag-
nosis. The absence of electrographic seizure activity does not exclude 
a seizure disorder, however, because focal seizures may originate from 
a region of the cortex that cannot be detected by standard scalp elec-
trodes. The EEG is always abnormal during generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures. Because seizures are typically infrequent and unpredictable, 
it is often not possible to obtain the EEG during a clinical event. In such 
situations, activating procedures are generally undertaken while the 
EEG is recorded in an attempt to provoke abnormalities. These proce-
dures commonly include hyperventilation (for 3 or 4 min), photic stim-
ulation, sleep, and sleep deprivation on the night prior to the recording. 
Continuous monitoring for prolonged periods in video-EEG telemetry 
units for hospitalized patients or the use of portable equipment to 


--- PDF PAGE 3104 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3058
record the EEG continuously for ≥24 h in ambulatory patients has made 
it easier to capture the electrophysiologic accompaniments of clinical 
events. In particular, video-EEG telemetry is now a routine approach 
for the accurate diagnosis of epilepsy in patients with poorly character-
ized events or seizures that are difficult to control.
The EEG may also be helpful in the interictal period by showing 
certain abnormalities that are highly supportive of the diagnosis of 
epilepsy. Such epileptiform activity consists of bursts of abnormal dis-
charges containing spikes or sharp waves. The presence of epileptiform 
activity is not entirely specific for epilepsy, but it has a much greater 
Normal
Adult Patient with a Seizure
History of epilepsy; currently treated
  with antiepileptics
Assess: adequacy of antiepileptic therapy
  Side effects
  Serum levels
No history of epilepsy
Laboratory studies
  CBC
  Electrolytes, calcium, magnesium
  Serum glucose
  Liver and renal function tests
  Urinalysis
  Toxicology screen
Negative
metabolic screen
Positive metabolic screen
or symptoms/signs
suggesting a metabolic
or infectious disorder
Abnormal or change in
neurologic examination
  Treat identifiable
  metabolic abnormalities
Assess cause of
  neurologic change
  Lumbar puncture
  Cultures
  Endocrine studies
  CT
  MRI if focal
   features present
MRI scan
  and EEG
Subtherapeutic
antiepileptic
levels
Appropriate
increase or
resumption
of dose
Increase antiepileptic
therapy to maximum
tolerated dose;
consider alternative
antiepileptic drugs
Therapeutic
antiepileptic
levels
Focal features of 
seizures
Focal abnormalities
on clinical or lab
examination
Other evidence of
neurologic
dysfunction
Treat underlying
metabolic abnormality
Idiopathic seizures
Treat underlying disorder
Yes
No
Consider: Mass lesion; stroke; CNS infection;
  trauma; degenerative disease
Consider: Antiepileptic therapy
Further workup
Other causes of episodic cerebral dysfunction
Syncope
Transient ischemic attack
Migraine
Acute psychosis
History
Physical examination
Exclude
Consider: Antiepileptic therapy
Consider: Antiepileptic therapy
ALGORITHM FOR THE ADULT PATIENT WITH A SEIZURE
Consider
 CBC
 Electrolytes, calcium, magnesium
 Serum glucose
 Liver and renal function tests
 Urinalysis
 Toxicology screen
FIGURE 418-2  Evaluation of the adult patient with a seizure. CBC, complete blood count; CNS, central nervous system; CT, computed tomography; 
EEG, electroencephalogram; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.


--- PDF PAGE 3105 ---

CHAPTER 418 Seizures and Epilepsy
3059
Eyes open
Fp1-F3
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
Fp2-F4
F4-C4
C4-P4
P4-O2
F3-A1
C3-A1
P3-A1
O1-A1
F4-A2
C4-A2
P4-A2
O2-A2
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
F4-C4
C4-P4
P4-O2
T3-CZ
CZ-T4
Fp1-F3
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
Fp2-F4
F4-C4
C4-P4
P4-O2
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 418-3  A. Normal electroencephalogram (EEG) showing a posteriorly situated 9-Hz alpha rhythm that 
attenuates with eye opening. B. Abnormal EEG showing irregular diffuse slow activity in an obtunded patient with 
encephalitis. C. Irregular slow activity in the right central region, on a diffusely slowed background, in a patient with a 
right parietal glioma. D. Periodic complexes occurring once every second in a patient with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. 
Horizontal calibration: 1 s; vertical calibration: 200 μV in A, 300 μV in other panels. In this and the following figure, 
electrode placements are indicated at the left of each panel and accord with the international 10:20 system. A, 
earlobe; C, central; F, frontal; Fp, frontal polar; P, parietal; T, temporal; O, occipital. Right-sided placements are 
indicated by even numbers, left-sided placements by odd numbers, and midline placements by Z. (From MJ Aminoff 
[ed]: Aminoff’s Electrodiagnosis in Clinical Neurology, 6th ed. Oxford, Elsevier Saunders, 2012.)
prevalence in patients with epilepsy than in normal individuals. How-
ever, even in an individual who is known to have epilepsy, the initial 
routine interictal EEG may be normal up to 60% of the time. Thus, the 
EEG cannot establish the diagnosis of epilepsy in many cases.
The EEG is also used for classifying seizure disorders and aiding in 
the selection of anticonvulsant medications (Fig. 418-4). For example, 
episodic generalized spike-wave activity is usually seen in patients 
with typical absence epilepsy and may be seen with other generalized 
epilepsy syndromes. Focal interictal epileptiform discharges would 
support the diagnosis of a focal seizure disorder such as temporal 
lobe epilepsy or frontal lobe seizures, depending on the location of the 
discharges.
The routine scalp-recorded EEG may also be used to assess the prog-
nosis of seizure disorders; in general, a normal EEG implies a better 
prognosis, whereas an abnormal background or profuse epileptiform 
activity suggests a worse outcome. Unfortunately, the EEG has not 
proved to be useful in predicting which patients with predisposing 
conditions such as head injury or brain tumor will go on to develop 
epilepsy, because in such circumstances epileptiform activity is com-
monly encountered regardless of whether seizures occur.
Magnetoencephalography (MEG) provides another way of looking 
noninvasively at cortical activity. Instead of measuring electrical activ-
ity of the brain, it measures the small magnetic fields that are generated 
by this activity. The source of epileptiform activity seen on MEG can be 
analyzed, and its source in the brain can be estimated using a variety 
of mathematical techniques. These source estimates can then be plotted 
on an anatomic image of the brain such as an MRI (discussed below) to 
generate a magnetic source image (MSI). MSI can be useful to localize 
potential seizure foci.
■
■BRAIN IMAGING
Almost all patients with new-onset seizures should have a brain 
imaging study to determine whether there is an underlying struc-
tural abnormality that is responsible. The only potential exception 
to this rule is children who have an 
unambiguous history and examination 
suggestive of a benign, generalized sei-
zure disorder such as absence epilepsy. 
MRI has been shown to be superior 
to computed tomography (CT) for the 
detection of cerebral lesions associated 
with epilepsy. In some cases, MRI will 
identify lesions such as tumors, vascular 
malformations, or other pathologies that 
need urgent therapy. The availability of 
newer MRI methods such as 3-tesla scan-
ners, parallel imaging with multichannel 
head coils, three-dimensional structural 
imaging at submillimeter resolution, and 
widespread use of pulse sequences such 
as fluid-attenuated inversion recovery 
(FLAIR), has increased the sensitivity 
for detection of abnormalities of corti-
cal architecture, including hippocampal 
atrophy associated with mesial tempo-
ral sclerosis, as well as abnormalities of 
cortical neuronal migration. In such cases, 
the findings may not lead to immediate 
therapy, but they do provide an explana-
tion for the patient’s seizures and point 
to the need for chronic antiepileptic drug 
therapy or possible surgical resection.
In the patient with a suspected CNS 
infection or mass lesion, CT scanning 
should be performed emergently when 
MRI is not immediately available. Oth-
erwise, it is usually appropriate to obtain 
an MRI study within a few days of the 
initial evaluation. Functional imaging 
procedures such as positron emission tomography (PET) and single-
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) are also used to 
evaluate certain patients with medically refractory seizures (discussed 
below).
■
■GENETIC TESTING
With the increasing recognition of specific gene mutations causing epi-
lepsy, genetic testing is beginning to emerge as part of the diagnostic 
evaluation of patients with epilepsy.  In addition to providing a defini-
tive diagnosis (which may be of great benefit to the patient and family 
members, and curtail the pursuit of additional, unrevealing laboratory 
testing), genetic testing may offer a guide for therapeutic options (see 
section “Selection of Antiepileptic Drugs” below).  Presently, genetic 
testing is being done mainly in infants and children with epilepsy 
syndromes thought to have a genetic cause.  However, genetic testing 
should also be considered in older patients with a history suggesting an 
undiagnosed genetic epilepsy syndrome that began early in life.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SEIZURES
Disorders that may mimic seizures are listed in Table 418-6. In most 
cases, seizures can be distinguished from other conditions by metic-
ulous attention to the history and relevant laboratory studies. On 
occasion, additional studies such as video-EEG monitoring, sleep stud-
ies, tilt-table analysis, or cardiac electrophysiology may be required 
to reach a correct diagnosis. Two of the more common nonepileptic 
syndromes in the differential diagnosis are detailed below.
■
■SYNCOPE
(See also Chap. 18) The diagnostic dilemma encountered most fre-
quently is the distinction between a generalized seizure and syncope. 
Observations by the patient and bystanders that can help differentiate 
between the two are listed in Table 418-7. Characteristics of a seizure 
include the presence of an aura, cyanosis, unconsciousness, motor 


--- PDF PAGE 3106 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3060
manifestations lasting >15 s, postictal disorientation, muscle soreness, 
and sleepiness. In contrast, a syncopal episode is more likely if the 
event was provoked by acute pain or emotional stress or occurred 
immediately after arising from the lying or sitting position. Patients 
with syncope often describe a stereotyped transition from conscious-
ness to unconsciousness that includes tiredness, sweating, nausea, and 
tunneling of vision, and they experience a relatively brief loss of con-
sciousness. Headache or incontinence usually suggests a seizure but 
may on occasion also occur with syncope. A brief period (i.e., 1–10 s) of 
convulsive motor activity is frequently seen immediately at the onset 
of a syncopal episode, especially if the patient remains in an upright 
posture after fainting (e.g., in a dentist’s chair) and therefore has a sus-
tained decrease in cerebral perfusion. Rarely, a syncopal episode can 
induce a full tonic-clonic seizure. In such cases, the evaluation must 
focus on both the cause of the syncopal event as well as the possibility 
that the patient has a propensity for recurrent seizures.
■
■PSYCHOGENIC SEIZURES
Psychogenic seizures are nonepileptic behaviors that resemble sei-
zures. They are often part of a conversion reaction precipitated by 
underlying psychological distress. Certain behaviors such as side-to-
side turning of the head, asymmetric and large-amplitude shaking 
movements of the limbs, twitching of all four extremities without loss 
of consciousness, and pelvic thrusting are more commonly associated 
with psychogenic rather than epileptic seizures. Psychogenic seizures 
often last longer than epileptic seizures and may wax and wane over 
minutes to hours. However, the distinction is sometimes difficult on 
clinical grounds alone, and there are many examples of diagnostic 
errors made by experienced epileptologists. This is especially true for 
psychogenic seizures that resemble focal seizures, because the behav-
ioral manifestations of focal seizures (especially of frontal lobe origin) 
can be extremely unusual, and in both cases, the routine surface EEG 
may be normal. Video-EEG monitoring is very useful when historic 
features are nondiagnostic. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures always 
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
F4-C4
C4-P4
P4-O2
T3-CZ
CZ-T4
Fp1-F7
F7-T3
T3-T5
T5-O1
Fp2-F8
F8-T4
T4-T6
T6-O2
Fp1-A1
F7-A1
T3-A1
T5-A1
Fp2-A2
F8-A2
T4-A2
T6-A2
A
B
C
FIGURE 418-4  Electrographic seizures. A. Onset of a tonic seizure showing 
generalized repetitive sharp activity with synchronous onset over both 
hemispheres. B. Burst of repetitive spikes occurring with sudden onset in the 
right temporal region during a clinical spell characterized by transient impairment 
of external awareness. C. Generalized 3-Hz spike-wave activity occurring 
synchronously over both hemispheres during an absence (petit mal) attack. 
Horizontal calibration: 1 s; vertical calibration: 400 μV in A, 200 μV in B, and 
750 μV in C. (From MJ Aminoff [ed]: Aminoff’s Electrodiagnosis in Clinical Neurology, 
6th ed. Oxford, Elsevier Saunders, 2012.)
TABLE 418-7  Features That Distinguish Generalized Tonic-Clonic 
Seizure from Syncope
FEATURES
SEIZURE
SYNCOPE
Immediate precipitating 
factors
Usually none
Emotional stress, 
Valsalva, orthostatic 
hypotension, cardiac 
etiologies
Premonitory symptoms
None or aura (e.g., odd 
odor)
Tiredness, nausea, 
diaphoresis, tunneling 
of vision
Posture at onset
Variable
Usually erect
Transition to 
unconsciousness
Often immediate
Gradual over secondsa
Duration of 
unconsciousness
Minutes
Seconds
Duration of tonic or 
clonic movements
30–60 s
Never >15 s
Facial appearance during 
event
Cyanosis, frothing at 
mouth
Pallor
Disorientation and 
sleepiness after event
Many minutes to hours
<5 min
Aching of muscles after 
event
Often
Sometimes
Biting of tongue
Sometimes
Rarely
Incontinence
Sometimes
Sometimes
Headache
Sometimes
Rarely
aMay be sudden with certain cardiac arrhythmias.
TABLE 418-6  Differential Diagnosis of Seizures
Syncope
Vasovagal syncope
Cardiac arrhythmia
Valvular heart disease
Cardiac failure
Orthostatic hypotension
Psychological disorders
Psychogenic seizure
Hyperventilation
Panic attack
Metabolic disturbances
Alcoholic blackouts
Delirium tremens
Hypoglycemia
Hypoxia
Psychoactive drugs  
(e.g., hallucinogens)
Migraine
Confusional migraine
Basilar migraine
Transient ischemic attack (TIA)
Basilar artery TIA
Sleep disorders
Narcolepsy/cataplexy
Benign sleep myoclonus
Movement disorders
Tics
Nonepileptic myoclonus
Paroxysmal choreoathetosis
Special considerations in children
Breath-holding spells
Migraine with recurrent abdominal 
pain and cyclic vomiting
Benign paroxysmal vertigo
Apnea
Night terrors
Sleepwalking


--- PDF PAGE 3107 ---

CHAPTER 418 Seizures and Epilepsy
3061
produce marked EEG abnormalities during and after the seizure. For 
suspected focal seizures of temporal lobe origin, the use of additional 
electrodes may help to localize a seizure focus. Measurement of serum 
prolactin levels may also help to distinguish between epileptic and 
psychogenic seizures, because most generalized seizures and some 
focal seizures are accompanied by rises in serum prolactin (during the 
immediate 30-min postictal period), whereas psychogenic seizures are 
not. The diagnosis of psychogenic seizures does not exclude a concur-
rent diagnosis of epilepsy, because the two may coexist.
TREATMENT
Seizures and Epilepsy
Therapy for a patient with a seizure disorder is almost always 
multimodal and includes treatment of underlying conditions that 
cause or contribute to the seizures, avoidance of precipitating fac-
tors, suppression of recurrent seizures by prophylactic therapy with 
antiepileptic medications or surgery, and addressing a variety of 
psychological and social issues. Treatment plans must be individu-
alized, given the many different types and causes of seizures as well 
as the differences in efficacy and toxicity of antiepileptic medications 
for each patient. In almost all cases, a neurologist with experience in 
the treatment of epilepsy should design and oversee implementa-
tion of the treatment strategy. Furthermore, patients with refractory 
epilepsy or those who require polypharmacy with antiepileptic 
drugs should remain under the regular care of a neurologist.
TREATMENT OF UNDERLYING CONDITIONS
If the sole cause of a seizure is a metabolic disturbance such as 
an abnormality of serum electrolytes or glucose, then treatment 
is aimed at reversing the metabolic problem and preventing its 
recurrence. Therapy with antiepileptic drugs is usually unnecessary 
unless the metabolic disorder cannot be corrected promptly and the 
patient is at risk of having further seizures. If the apparent cause of a 
seizure was a medication (e.g., theophylline) or illicit drug use (e.g., 
cocaine), then appropriate therapy is avoidance of the drug; there 
is usually no need for antiepileptic medications unless subsequent 
seizures occur in the absence of these precipitants.
Seizures caused by a structural CNS lesion such as a brain tumor, 
vascular malformation, or brain abscess may not recur after appro-
priate treatment of the underlying lesion. However, despite removal 
of the structural lesion, there is a risk that the seizure focus will 
remain in the surrounding tissue or develop de novo as a result of 
gliosis and other processes induced by surgery, radiation, or other 
therapies. Most patients are therefore maintained on an antiepileptic 
medication for at least 1 year, and an attempt is made to withdraw 
medications only if the patient has been completely seizure free. If 
seizures are refractory to medication, the patient may benefit from 
surgical removal of the epileptic brain region (see below).
AVOIDANCE OF PRECIPITATING FACTORS
Unfortunately, little is known about the specific factors that deter-
mine precisely when a seizure will occur in a patient with epilepsy. 
An almost universal precipitating factor for seizures is sleep depri-
vation, so patients should do everything possible to optimize their 
sleep quality. Many patients can identify other particular situations 
that appear to lower their seizure threshold; these situations should 
be avoided. For example, patients may note an association between 
alcohol intake and seizures, and they should be encouraged to 
modify their drinking habits accordingly. There are also relatively 
rare cases of patients with seizures that are induced by highly 
specific stimuli such as a video game monitor, music, or an individ-
ual’s voice (“reflex epilepsy”). Because there is often an association 
between stress and seizures, stress reduction techniques such as 
physical exercise, meditation, or counseling may be helpful.
ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUG THERAPY
Antiepileptic drug therapy is the mainstay of treatment for most 
patients with epilepsy. The overall goal is to completely prevent 
seizures without causing any untoward side effects, preferably with 
a single medication and a dosing schedule that is easy for the patient 
to follow. Seizure classification is an important element in designing 
the treatment plan, because some antiepileptic drugs have different 
activities against various seizure types. However, there is consider-
able overlap between many antiepileptic drugs such that the choice 
of therapy is often determined more by the patient’s specific needs, 
especially his or her assessment of side effects.
When to Initiate Antiepileptic Drug Therapy  Antiepileptic drug 
therapy should be started in any patient with recurrent seizures 
of unknown etiology or a known cause that cannot be reversed. 
Whether to initiate therapy in a patient with a single seizure is con-
troversial. Patients with a single seizure due to an identified lesion 
such as a CNS tumor, infection, or trauma, in which there is strong 
evidence that the lesion is epileptogenic, should be treated. The risk 
of seizure recurrence in a patient with an apparently unprovoked 
or idiopathic seizure is uncertain, with estimates ranging from 31 to 
71% in the first 12 months after the initial seizure. This uncertainty 
arises from differences in the underlying seizure types and etiolo-
gies in various published epidemiologic studies. Generally accepted 
risk factors associated with recurrent seizures include the following: 
(1) an abnormal neurologic examination, (2) seizures presenting as 
status epilepticus, (3) postictal Todd’s paralysis, (4) a strong family 
history of seizures, or (5) an abnormal EEG. Most patients with 
one or more of these risk factors should be treated. Issues such as 
employment or driving may influence the decision whether to start 
medications as well. For example, a patient with a single, idiopathic 
seizure whose job depends on driving may prefer taking antiepilep-
tic drugs rather than risk a seizure recurrence and the potential loss 
of driving privileges.
Selection of Antiepileptic Drugs  Antiepileptic drugs available in 
the United States are shown in Table 418-8, and the main phar-
macologic characteristics of commonly used drugs are listed in 
Table 418-9. Worldwide, older medications such as phenytoin, 
valproic acid, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and ethosuximide 
are generally used as first-line therapy for most seizure disorders 
because, overall, they are as effective as recently marketed drugs 
and significantly less expensive overall. Most of the new drugs that 
have become available in the past decade are used as add-on or 
alternative therapy, although many are now being used as first-line 
monotherapy.
TABLE 418-8  Selection of Antiepileptic Drugs
GENERALIZED-
ONSET 
TONIC-CLONIC
FOCAL
TYPICAL 
ABSENCE
ATYPICAL 
ABSENCE, 
MYOCLONIC, 
ATONIC
First-Line
Lamotrigine
Valproic acid
Lamotrigine
Carbamazepine
Oxcarbazepine
Phenytoin
Levetiracetam
Valproic acid
Ethosuximide
Lamotrigine
Valproic acid
Lamotrigine
Topiramate
Alternatives
Zonisamidea
Phenytoin
Levetiracetam
Carbamazepine
Oxcarbazepine
Topiramate
Phenobarbital
Primidone
Felbamate
Zonisamidea
Brivaracetam
Topiramate
Valproic acid
Tiagabinea
Gabapentina
Lacosamidea
Phenobarbital
Primidone
Felbamate
Lamotrigine
Clonazepam
Clonazepam
Felbamate
Clobazam
Rufinamide
aAs adjunctive therapy.


--- PDF PAGE 3108 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3062
TABLE 418-9  Dosage and Adverse Effects of Commonly Used Antiepileptic Drugs
TRADE 
NAME
PRINCIPAL 
USES
TYPICAL DOSE; 
DOSE INTERVAL
HALF-LIFE
THERAPEUTIC 
RANGE
ADVERSE EFFECTS
DRUG 
INTERACTIONSa
GENERIC NAME
NEUROLOGIC
SYSTEMIC
Brivaracetam
Briviact
Focal-onset
100–200 mg/d; bid
7–10 h
Not established
Fatigue
Dizziness
Weakness
Ataxia
Mood changes
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
May increase 
carbamazepine-
epoxide causing 
decreased 
tolerability
May increase 
phenytoin
Carbamazepine
Tegretolc
Tonic-clonic
Focal-onset
600–1800 mg/d 
(15–35 mg/kg, 
child); bid (capsules 
or tablets), tid-qid 
(oral suspension)
10–17 h 
(variable 
due to 
autoinduction: 
complete 
3–5 wk after 
initiation)
4–12 μg/mL
Ataxia
Dizziness
Diplopia
Vertigo
Aplastic anemia
Leukopenia
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Hepatotoxicity
Hyponatremia
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Level increased 
by erythromycin, 
propoxyphene, 
isoniazid, 
cimetidine, 
fluoxetine
Clobazam
Onfi
Lennox-
Gastaut 
syndrome
10–40 mg/d (5–20 
mg/d for patients 
<30 kg body 
weight); bid
36–42 h 
(71–82 h for 
less active 
metabolite)
Not established
Fatigue
Sedation
Ataxia
Aggression
Insomnia
Constipation
Anorexia
Skin rash
Level increased 
by CYP2C19 
inhibitors
Clonazepam
Klonopin
Absence
Atypical 
absence
Myoclonic
1–12 mg/d; qd-tid
24–48 h
10–70 ng/mL
Ataxia
Sedation
Lethargy
Anorexia
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Ethosuximide
Zarontin
Absence
750–1250 mg/d 
(20–40 mg/kg); 
qd-bid
60 h, adult
30 h, child
40–100 μg/mL
Ataxia
Lethargy
Headache
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Skin rash
Bone marrow 
suppression
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Level increased 
by valproic acid
Felbamate
Felbatol
Focal-onset
Lennox-
Gastaut 
syndrome
Tonic-clonic
2400–3600 mg/d, 
tid-qid
16–22 h
30–60 μg/mL
Insomnia
Dizziness
Sedation
Headache
Aplastic anemia
Hepatic failure
Weight loss
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Increases 
phenytoin, 
valproic 
acid, active 
carbamazepine 
metabolite
Gabapentin
Neurontin
Focal-onset
900–2400 mg/d; 
tid-qid
5–9 h
2–20 μg/mL
Sedation
Dizziness
Ataxia
Fatigue
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Weight gain
Edema
No known 
significant 
interactions
Lacosamide
Vimpat
Focal-onset
200–400 mg/d; bid
13 h
Not established
Dizziness
Ataxia
Diplopia
Vertigo
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Cardiac 
conduction 
(PR interval 
prolongation)
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Lamotrigine
Lamictalc
Focal-onset
Tonic-clonic
Atypical 
absence
Myoclonic
Lennox-
Gastaut 
syndrome
150–500 mg/d; bid 
(immediate release), 
daily (extended 
release) (lower daily 
dose for regimens 
with valproic acid; 
higher daily dose for 
regimens with an 
enzyme inducer)
25 h
14 h (with 
enzyme-
inducers),  
59 h (with 
valproic acid)
2.5–20 μg/mL
Dizziness
Diplopia
Sedation
Ataxia
Headache
Skin rash
Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing 
drugsb and oral 
contraceptives
Level increased 
by valproic acid
Levetiracetam
Kepprac
Focal-onset
1000–3000 mg/d; 
bid (immediate 
release), daily 
(extended release)
6–8 h
5–45 μg/mL
Sedation
Fatigue
Incoordination
Mood changes
Anemia
Leukopenia
No known 
significant 
interactions
Oxcarbazepinec
Trileptal
Focal-onset
Tonic-clonic
900–2400 mg/d 
(30–45 mg/kg, 
child); bid
10–17 h 
(for active 
metabolite)
10–35 μg/mL
Fatigue
Ataxia
Dizziness
Diplopia
Vertigo
Headache
See 
carbamazepine
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
May increase 
phenytoin
(Continued)


--- PDF PAGE 3109 ---

CHAPTER 418 Seizures and Epilepsy
3063
TABLE 418-9  Dosage and Adverse Effects of Commonly Used Antiepileptic Drugs
TRADE 
NAME
PRINCIPAL 
USES
TYPICAL DOSE; 
DOSE INTERVAL
HALF-LIFE
THERAPEUTIC 
RANGE
ADVERSE EFFECTS
DRUG 
INTERACTIONSa
GENERIC NAME
NEUROLOGIC
SYSTEMIC
Phenobarbital
Luminal
Tonic-clonic
Focal-onset
60–180 mg/d; 
qd-tid
90 h
10–40 μg/mL
Sedation
Ataxia
Confusion
Dizziness
Decreased 
libido
Depression
Skin rash
Level increased 
by valproic acid, 
phenytoin
Phenytoin 
(diphenylhydantoin)
Dilantin
Tonic-clonic
Focal-onset
300–400 mg/d 
(3–6 mg/kg, adult; 
4–8 mg/kg, child); 
qd-tid
24 h (wide 
variation, dose-
dependent)
10–20 μg/mL
Dizziness
Diplopia
Ataxia
Incoordination
Confusion
Gingival 
hyperplasia
Lymphadenopathy
Hirsutism
Osteomalacia
Facial coarsening
Skin rash
Level increased 
by isoniazid, 
sulfonamides, 
fluoxetine
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Altered folate 
metabolism
Primidone
Mysoline
Tonic-clonic
Focal-onset
750–1000 mg/d; 
bid-tid
Primidone, 
8–15 h
Phenobarbital, 
90 h
Primidone,  
4–12 μg/mL
Phenobarbital, 
10–40 μg/mL
Same as 
phenobarbital
Level increased 
by valproic acid
Level decreased 
by phenytoin 
(increased 
conversion to 
phenobarbital)
Rufinamide
Banzel
Lennox-
Gastaut 
syndrome
3200 mg/d  
(45 mg/kg, child); 
bid
6–10 h
Not established
Sedation
Fatigue
Dizziness
Ataxia
Headache
Diplopia
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Leukopenia
Cardiac 
conduction 
(QT interval 
shortening)
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Level increased 
by valproic acid
May increase 
phenytoin
Tiagabine
Gabitril
Focal-onset
32–56 mg/d; bid-
qid (as adjunct to 
enzyme-inducing 
antiepileptic drug 
regimen)
2–5 h (with 
enzyme 
inducer),  
7–9 h (without 
enzyme 
inducer)
Not established
Confusion
Sedation
Depression
Dizziness
Speech or 
language 
problems
Paresthesias
Psychosis
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Topiramate
Topamax
Focal-onset
Tonic-clonic
Lennox-
Gastaut 
syndrome
200–400 mg/d; bid 
(immediate release), 
daily (extended 
release)
20 h 
(immediate 
release),  
30 h (extended 
release)
2–20 μg/mL
Psychomotor 
slowing
Sedation
Speech or 
language 
problems
Fatigue
Paresthesias
Renal stones 
(avoid use with 
other carbonic 
anhydrase 
inhibitors)
Glaucoma
Weight loss
Hypohidrosis
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Valproic acid 
(valproate sodium, 
divalproex sodium)
Depakene
Depakotec
Tonic-clonic
Absence
Atypical 
absence
Myoclonic
Focal-onset
Atonic
750–2000 mg/d 
(20–60 mg/kg); bid-
qid (immediate and 
delayed release), 
daily (extended 
release)
15 h
50–125 μg/mL
Ataxia
Sedation
Tremor
Hepatotoxicity
Thrombocytopenia
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Weight gain
Transient alopecia
Hyperammonemia
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Zonisamide
Zonegran
Focal-onset
Tonic-clonic
200–400 mg/d; 
qd-bid
50–68 h
10–40 μg/mL
Sedation
Dizziness
Confusion
Headache
Psychosis
Anorexia
Renal stones
Hypohidrosis
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
aExamples only; please refer to other sources for comprehensive listings of all potential drug–drug interactions. bPhenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital. cExtended-
release product available.
(Continued)


--- PDF PAGE 3110 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3064
In addition to efficacy, factors influencing the choice of an ini-
tial medication include the convenience of dosing (e.g., once daily 
versus three or four times daily) and potential side effects. In this 
regard, a number of the newer drugs have the advantage of reduced 
drug–drug interactions and easier dosing. Almost all of the com-
monly used antiepileptic drugs can cause similar, dose-related side 
effects such as sedation, ataxia, and diplopia. Long-term use of some 
agents in adults, especially the elderly, can lead to osteoporosis. 
Close follow-up is required to ensure these side effects are promptly 
recognized and reversed. Most of the older drugs and some of the 
newer ones can also cause idiosyncratic toxicity such as rash, bone 
marrow suppression, or hepatotoxicity. Although rare, these side 
effects should be considered during drug selection, and patients 
must be instructed about symptoms or signs that should signal the 
need to alert their health care provider. For some drugs, laboratory 
tests (e.g., complete blood count and liver function tests) are rec-
ommended prior to the institution of therapy (to establish baseline 
values) and during initial dosing and titration of the agent.
An important recent advance in the care of patients with epilepsy 
has been the application of genetic testing to help guide the choice 
of therapy (as well as establishing the underlying cause of a patient’s 
syndrome). For example, the identification of a mutation in the 
SLC2A1 gene, which encodes the glucose type 1 transporter (GLUT-1) 
and is a cause of GLUT-1 deficiency, should immediately prompt 
treatment with the ketogenic diet. Mutations of the ALDH7A1 
gene, which encodes antiquitin, can cause alterations in pyridoxine 
metabolism that are reversed by treatment with pyridoxine. There 
is also mounting evidence that certain gene mutations may indicate 
better or worse response to specific antiepileptic drugs. For exam-
ple, patients with mutations in the sodium channel subunit SCN1A 
should generally avoid taking phenytoin or lamotrigine, whereas 
patients with mutations in the SCN2A or SCN8A sodium chan-
nel subunits appear to respond favorably to high-dose phenytoin. 
Genetic testing may also help predict antiepileptic drug toxicity. 
Studies have shown that Asian individuals carrying the human 
leukocyte antigen allele, HLA-B*1502, are at particularly high risk of 
developing serious skin reactions from carbamazepine, phenytoin, 
oxcarbazepine, and lamotrigine. HLA-A*31:01 has also been found 
to be associated with carbamazepine-induced hypersensitivity reac-
tions in patients of European or Japanese ancestry. As a result, racial 
background and genotype are additional factors to consider in drug 
selection.
Antiepileptic Drug Selection for Focal Seizures  Carbamazepine (or 
a related drug, oxcarbazepine), lamotrigine, phenytoin, and leve-
tiracetam are currently the drugs of choice approved for the initial 
treatment of focal seizures, including those that evolve into general-
ized seizures. Overall they have very similar efficacy, but differences 
in pharmacokinetics and toxicity are the main determinants for use 
in a given patient. For example, an advantage of carbamazepine 
(which is also available in an extended-release form) is that its 
metabolism follows first-order pharmacokinetics, which allows for 
a linear relationship between drug dose, serum levels, and toxicity. 
Carbamazepine can cause leukopenia, aplastic anemia, or hepato-
toxicity and would therefore be contraindicated in patients with pre-
dispositions to these problems. Oxcarbazepine has the advantage of 
being metabolized in a way that avoids an intermediate metabolite 
associated with some of the side effects of carbamazepine. Oxcar-
bazepine also has fewer drug interactions than carbamazepine. 
Lamotrigine tends to be well tolerated in terms of side effects. How-
ever, patients need to be particularly vigilant about the possibility 
of a skin rash during the initiation of therapy. This can be extremely 
severe and lead to Stevens-Johnson syndrome if unrecognized and 
if the medication is not discontinued immediately. This risk can be 
reduced by the use of low initial doses and slow titration. Lamotrig-
ine must be started at lower initial doses when used as add-on ther-
apy with valproic acid, because valproic acid inhibits lamotrigine 
metabolism and results in a substantially prolonged half-life. Pheny-
toin has a relatively long half-life and offers the advantage of once 
or twice daily dosing compared to two or three times daily dosing 
for many of the other drugs. However, phenytoin shows properties 
of nonlinear kinetics, such that small increases in phenytoin doses 
above a standard maintenance dose can precipitate marked side 
effects. This is one of the main causes of acute phenytoin toxicity. 
Long-term use of phenytoin is associated with untoward cosmetic 
effects (e.g., hirsutism, coarsening of facial features, gingival hyper-
trophy) and effects on bone metabolism. Due to these side effects, 
phenytoin is often avoided in young patients who are likely to 
require the drug for many years. Levetiracetam has the advantage 
of having no known drug–drug interactions, making it especially 
useful in the elderly and patients on other medications. However, 
a significant number of patients taking levetiracetam complain of 
irritability, anxiety, and other psychiatric symptoms. Topiramate 
can be used for both focal and generalized seizures. Similar to some 
of the other antiepileptic drugs, topiramate can cause significant 
psychomotor slowing and other cognitive problems. Additionally, it 
should not be used in patients at risk for the development of glau-
coma or renal stones.
Valproic acid is an effective alternative for some patients with 
focal seizures, especially when the seizures generalize. Gastro-
intestinal side effects are fewer when using the delayed-release 
formulation (Depakote). Laboratory testing is required to monitor 
toxicity because valproic acid can rarely cause reversible bone mar-
row suppression and hepatotoxicity. This drug should generally be 
avoided in patients with preexisting bone marrow or liver disease. 
Valproic acid also has relatively high risks of unacceptable adverse 
effects for women of childbearing age, including hyperandrogenism 
that may affect fertility and teratogenesis (e.g., neural tube defects) 
in offspring. Irreversible, fatal hepatic failure appearing as an idio-
syncratic rather than dose-related side effect is a relatively rare com-
plication; its risk is highest in children <2 years old, especially those 
taking other antiepileptic drugs or with inborn errors of metabolism.
Zonisamide, brivaracetam, tiagabine, gabapentin, and lacos-
amide are additional drugs currently used for the treatment of focal 
seizures with or without evolution into generalized seizures. Pheno-
barbital and other barbiturate compounds were commonly used in 
the past as first-line therapy for many forms of epilepsy. However, 
the barbiturates frequently cause sedation in adults, hyperactivity 
in children, and other more subtle cognitive changes; thus, their use 
should be limited to situations in which no other suitable treatment 
alternatives exist.
Antiepileptic Drug Selection for Generalized Seizures  Lamotrigine, 
valproic acid and levetiracetam are currently considered the best 
initial choice for the treatment of primary generalized, tonic-clonic 
seizures. Topiramate, zonisamide, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and 
oxcarbazepine are suitable alternatives, although carbamazepine, 
oxcarbazepine, and phenytoin can worsen certain types of gener-
alized seizures. Valproic acid is particularly effective in absence, 
myoclonic, and atonic seizures. It is therefore commonly used in 
patients with generalized epilepsy syndromes having mixed seizure 
types. However, levetiracetam, rather than valproic acid, is increas-
ingly considered the initial drug of choice for women with epilepsies 
having mixed seizure types given the adverse effects of valproic acid 
for women of childbearing age. Lamotrigine is also an alternative to 
valproate, especially for absence epilepsies. Ethosuximide is a par-
ticularly effective drug for the treatment of uncomplicated absence 
seizures, but it is not useful for tonic-clonic or focal seizures. Peri-
odic monitoring of blood cell counts is required since ethosuximide 
rarely causes bone marrow suppression.
INITIATION AND MONITORING OF THERAPY
Because the response to any antiepileptic drug is unpredictable, 
patients should be carefully educated about the approach to therapy. 
The goal is to prevent seizures and minimize the side effects of treat-
ment; determination of the optimal dose is often a matter of trial and 
error. This process may take months or longer if the baseline seizure 
frequency is low. Most antiepileptic drugs need to be introduced 


--- PDF PAGE 3111 ---

CHAPTER 418 Seizures and Epilepsy
3065
relatively slow to minimize side effects. Patients should expect that 
minor side effects such as mild sedation, slight changes in cognition, 
or imbalance will typically resolve within a few days. Starting doses 
are usually the lowest value listed under the dosage column in  
Table 418-9. Subsequent increases should be made only after achiev-
ing a steady state with the previous dose (i.e., after an interval of five 
or more half-lives).
Monitoring of serum antiepileptic drug levels can be very useful 
for establishing the initial dosing schedule. However, the published 
therapeutic ranges of serum drug concentrations are only an approx-
imate guide for determining the proper dose for a given patient. 
The key determinants are the clinical measures of seizure frequency 
and presence of side effects, not the laboratory values. Conventional 
assays of serum drug levels measure the total drug (i.e., both free 
and protein bound). However, it is the concentration of free drug 
that reflects extracellular levels in the brain and correlates best with 
efficacy. Thus, patients with decreased levels of serum proteins (e.g., 
decreased serum albumin due to impaired liver or renal function) 
may have an increased ratio of free to bound drug, yet the concentra-
tion of free drug may be adequate for seizure control. These patients 
may have a “subtherapeutic” drug level, but the dose should be 
changed only if seizures remain uncontrolled, not just to achieve a 
“therapeutic” level. It is also useful to monitor free drug levels in 
such patients. In practice, other than during the initiation or mod-
ification of therapy, monitoring of antiepileptic drug levels is most 
useful for documenting adherence or assessing clinical suspicion of 
toxicity.
If seizures continue despite gradual increases to the maximum 
tolerated dose and documented compliance, then it becomes nec-
essary to switch to another antiepileptic drug. This is usually done 
by maintaining the patient on the first drug while a second drug is 
added. The dose of the second drug should be adjusted to decrease 
seizure frequency without causing toxicity. Once this is achieved, 
the first drug can be gradually withdrawn (usually over weeks 
unless there is significant toxicity). The dose of the second drug is 
then further optimized based on seizure response and side effects. 
Monotherapy should be the goal whenever possible.
WHEN TO DISCONTINUE THERAPY
Overall, about 50–60% of patients who have their seizures completely 
controlled with antiepileptic drugs can eventually discontinue ther-
apy. The following patient profile yields the greatest chance of 
remaining seizure free after drug withdrawal: (1) complete med-
ical control of seizures for 1–5 years; (2) single seizure type, with 
generalized seizures having a better prognosis than focal seizures;  
(3) normal neurologic examination, including intelligence; (4) no fam-
ily history of epilepsy; and (5) normal EEG. The appropriate seizure-
free interval is unknown and undoubtedly varies for different forms 
of epilepsy. However, it seems reasonable to attempt withdrawal of 
therapy after 2 years in a patient who meets all of the above criteria, 
is motivated to discontinue the medication, and clearly understands 
the potential risks and benefits. In most cases, it is preferable to 
reduce the dose of the drug gradually over 2–3 months. Most recur-
rences occur in the first 3 months after discontinuing therapy, and 
patients should be advised to avoid potentially dangerous situations 
such as driving or swimming during this period.
TREATMENT OF REFRACTORY EPILEPSY
Approximately one-third of patients with epilepsy do not respond 
to treatment with a single antiepileptic drug, and it becomes nec-
essary to try a combination of drugs to control seizures. Patients 
who have focal epilepsy related to an underlying structural lesion 
or those with multiple seizure types and developmental delay are 
particularly likely to require multiple drugs. There are currently 
no clear guidelines for rational polypharmacy, although in theory a 
combination of drugs with different mechanisms of action may be 
most useful. In most cases, the initial combination therapy combines 
first-line drugs (i.e., carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, 
valproic acid, levetiracetam, and phenytoin). If these drugs are 
unsuccessful, then the addition of other drugs such as zonisamide, 
brivaracetam, topiramate, lacosamide, or tiagabine is indicated. 
Patients with myoclonic seizures resistant to valproic acid may ben-
efit from the addition of clonazepam or clobazam, and those with 
absence seizures may respond to a combination of valproic acid 
and ethosuximide. The same principles concerning the monitoring 
of therapeutic response, toxicity, and serum levels for monotherapy 
apply to polypharmacy, and potential drug interactions need to be 
recognized. If there is no improvement, a third drug can be added 
while the first two are maintained. If there is a response, the less 
effective or less well tolerated of the first two drugs should be grad-
ually withdrawn.
SURGICAL TREATMENT OF REFRACTORY EPILEPSY
Approximately 20–30% of patients with epilepsy continue to have 
seizures despite efforts to find an effective combination of antiep-
ileptic drugs. For some, surgery can be extremely effective in sub-
stantially reducing seizure frequency and even providing complete 
seizure control. Understanding the potential value of surgery is 
especially important when a patient’s seizures are not controlled 
with initial treatment, as such patients often do not respond to 
subsequent medication trials. Rather than submitting the patient 
to years of unsuccessful medical therapy and the psychosocial 
trauma and increased mortality associated with ongoing seizures, 
the patient should have an efficient but relatively brief attempt at 
medical therapy and then be referred for surgical evaluation.
The most common surgical procedure for patients with temporal 
lobe epilepsy involves resection of the anteromedial temporal lobe 
(temporal lobectomy) or a more limited removal of the underlying 
hippocampus and amygdala (amygdalohippocampectomy). Focal 
seizures arising from extratemporal regions may be abolished by 
a focal neocortical resection with precise removal of an identified 
lesion (lesionectomy). Localized neocortical resection without a 
clear lesion identified on MRI is also possible when other tests (e.g., 
MEG, PET, SPECT) implicate a focal cortical region as a seizure onset 
zone. When the cortical region cannot be removed, multiple subpial 
transection, which disrupts intracortical connections, is sometimes 
used to prevent seizure spread. Hemispherectomy or multilobar 
resection is useful for some patients with severe seizures due to 
hemispheric abnormalities such as hemimegalencephaly or other 
dysplastic abnormalities, and corpus callosotomy has been shown 
to be effective for disabling tonic or atonic seizures, usually when 
they are part of a mixed-seizure syndrome (e.g., Lennox-Gastaut 
syndrome).
Presurgical evaluation is designed to identify the functional 
and structural basis of the patient’s seizure disorder. Inpatient 
video-EEG monitoring is used to define the anatomic location of 
the seizure focus and to correlate the abnormal electrophysiologic 
activity with behavioral manifestations of the seizure. Routine scalp 
or scalp-sphenoidal recordings and a high-resolution MRI scan 
are usually sufficient for localization of the epileptogenic focus, 
especially when the findings are concordant. Functional imaging 
studies such as SPECT, PET, and MEG are adjunctive tests that 
may help to reveal or verify the localization of an apparent epilep-
togenic region. Once the presumed location of the seizure onset is 
identified, additional studies, including neuropsychological testing, 
the intracarotid amobarbital test (Wada test), and functional MRI 
may be used to assess language and memory localization and to 
determine the possible functional consequences of surgical removal 
of the epileptogenic region. In some cases, standard noninvasive 
evaluation is not sufficient to localize the seizure onset zone, and 
invasive electrophysiologic monitoring, such as implanted depth 
or subdural electrodes, is required for more definitive localization. 
The exact extent of the resection to be undertaken can also be deter-
mined by performing cortical mapping at the time of the surgical 
procedure, allowing for a tailored resection. This involves electro-
corticographic recordings made with electrodes on the surface of 
the brain to identify the extent of epileptiform disturbances. If the 
region to be resected is within or near brain regions suspected of 


--- PDF PAGE 3112 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3066
having sensorimotor or language function, electrical cortical stimu-
lation mapping is performed on the awake patient to determine the 
function of cortical regions in question in order to avoid resection of 
so-called eloquent cortex and thereby minimize postsurgical deficits.
Advances in presurgical evaluation and microsurgical techniques 
have led to a steady increase in the success of epilepsy surgery. 
Clinically significant complications of surgery are <5%, and the 
use of functional mapping procedures has markedly reduced the 
neurologic sequelae due to removal or sectioning of brain tissue. For 
example, about 70% of patients treated with temporal lobectomy 
will become seizure free, and another 15–25% will have at least a 
90% reduction in seizure frequency. Marked improvement is also 
usually seen in patients treated with hemispherectomy for cata-
strophic seizure disorders due to large hemispheric abnormalities. 
Postoperatively, patients generally need to remain on antiepileptic 
drug therapy, but the marked reduction of seizures following resec-
tive surgery can have a very beneficial effect on quality of life.
Not all medically refractory patients are suitable candidates for 
resective surgery. For example, some patients have seizures arising 
from more than one location, making the risk of ongoing seizures 
or potential harm from the surgery unacceptably high. Vagus nerve 
stimulation (VNS) has been used in some of these cases, although 
the results are limited and it is difficult to predict who will benefit. 
An implantable device that can detect the onset of a seizure (in some 
instances before the seizure becomes clinically apparent) and deliver 
an electrical stimulation to abort the seizure (Responsive Neuro-
Stimulation) has proved to be of benefit in selected patients. Studies 
are currently evaluating the efficacy of stereotactic radiosurgery, 
laser thermoablation, and deep brain stimulation (DBS) as other 
options for surgical treatment of refractory epilepsy.
■
■STATUS EPILEPTICUS
Status epilepticus refers to continuous seizures or repetitive, discrete 
seizures with impaired consciousness in the interictal period. Status 
epilepticus has numerous subtypes, including generalized convulsive 
status epilepticus (GCSE) (e.g., persistent, generalized electrographic 
seizures, coma, and tonic-clonic movements) and nonconvulsive sta-
tus epilepticus (e.g., persistent absence seizures or focal seizures with 
confusion or partially impaired consciousness, and minimal motor 
abnormalities). The duration of seizure activity sufficient to meet 
the definition of status epilepticus has traditionally been specified as 
15–30 min. However, a more practical definition is to consider status 
epilepticus as a situation in which the duration of seizures prompts the 
acute use of anticonvulsant therapy. For GCSE, this is typically when 
seizures last beyond 5 min.
GCSE is an emergency and must be treated immediately, because cardi-
orespiratory dysfunction, hyperthermia, and metabolic derangements 
can develop as a consequence of prolonged seizures, and these can 
lead to irreversible neuronal injury. Furthermore, CNS injury can occur 
even when the patient is paralyzed with neuromuscular blockade but 
continues to have electrographic seizures. The most common causes 
of GCSE are anticonvulsant withdrawal or noncompliance, metabolic 
disturbances, drug toxicity, CNS infection, CNS tumors, refractory 
epilepsy, and head trauma.
GCSE is obvious when the patient is having overt seizures. How-
ever, after 30–45 min of uninterrupted seizures, the signs may become 
increasingly subtle. Patients may have mild clonic movements of only 
the fingers or fine, rapid movements of the eyes. There may be parox-
ysmal episodes of tachycardia, hypertension, and pupillary dilation. 
In such cases, the EEG may be the only method of establishing the 
diagnosis. Thus, if the patient stops having overt seizures, yet remains 
comatose, an EEG should be performed to rule out ongoing status 
epilepticus. This is obviously also essential when a patient with GCSE 
has been paralyzed with neuromuscular blockade in the process of 
protecting the airway.
The first steps in the management of a patient in GCSE are to attend 
to any acute cardiorespiratory problems or hyperthermia, perform a 
brief medical and neurologic examination, establish venous access, and 
send samples for laboratory studies to identify metabolic abnormalities. 
Anticonvulsant therapy should then begin without delay; a treatment 
approach is shown in Fig. 418-5.
The treatment of nonconvulsive status epilepticus is thought to be 
less urgent than GCSE, because the ongoing seizures are not accompa-
nied by the severe metabolic disturbances seen with GCSE. However, 
evidence suggests that nonconvulsive status epilepticus, especially 
that caused by ongoing, focal seizure activity, is associated with cel-
lular injury in the region of the seizure focus; therefore, this condition 
should be treated as promptly as possible using the general approach 
described for GCSE.
BEYOND SEIZURES: OTHER  
MANAGEMENT ISSUES
■
■EPILEPSY COMORBIDITIES
The adverse effects of epilepsy often go beyond clinical seizures. Many 
epilepsy patients are completely normal between seizures and live 
highly successful and productive lives. However, a significant propor-
tion of patients suffer from varying degrees of cognitive dysfunction, 
including psychiatric disease, and it has become increasingly clear that 
the network dysfunction underlying epilepsy can have effects well 
beyond the occurrence of seizures. For example, patients with seizures 
secondary to developmental abnormalities or acquired brain injury 
may have impaired cognitive function and other neurologic deficits 
due to abnormal brain structure. Frequent interictal EEG abnormali-
ties are associated with subtle dysfunction of memory and attention. 
Patients with many seizures, especially those emanating from the tem-
poral lobe, often note an impairment of short-term memory that may 
progress over time.
The psychiatric problems associated with epilepsy include depres-
sion, anxiety, and psychosis. This risk varies considerably depending 
on many factors, including the etiology, frequency, and severity of 
seizures and the patient’s age and previous personal or family his-
tory of psychiatric disorder. Depression occurs in ~20% of patients, 
and the incidence of suicide is higher in patients with epilepsy than 
in the general population. Depression should be treated through 
counseling or medication. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs) typically have minimal effect on seizures, whereas tricyclic 
antidepressants may lower the seizure threshold. Anxiety can be a 
seizure symptom, and anxious or psychotic behavior can occur during 
a postictal delirium. Postictal psychosis is a rare phenomenon that 
typically occurs after a period of increased seizure frequency. There is 
usually a brief lucid interval lasting up to a week, followed by days to 
weeks of agitated, psychotic behavior. The psychosis usually resolves 
spontaneously but frequently will require short-term treatment with 
antipsychotic or anxiolytic medications.
■
■MORTALITY OF EPILEPSY
Patients with epilepsy have a risk of death that is roughly two to three 
times greater than expected in a matched population without epilepsy. 
Most of the increased mortality is due to the underlying etiology of 
epilepsy (e.g., tumors or strokes in older adults). However, a signifi-
cant number of patients die from accidents, status epilepticus, and a 
syndrome known as sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP), which 
usually affects young people with convulsive seizures and tends to 
occur at night. The cause of SUDEP is unknown; it may result from 
brainstem-mediated effects of seizures on pulmonary, cardiac, and 
arousal functions. Recent studies suggest that, in some cases, a genetic 
mutation may be the cause of both epilepsy and a cardiac conduction 
defect that gives rise to sudden death.
■
■PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES
There continues to be a cultural stigma about epilepsy, although it is 
slowly declining in societies with effective health education programs. 
Many patients with epilepsy harbor fears such as the fear of becoming 
mentally retarded or dying during a seizure. These issues need to be 
carefully addressed by educating the patient about epilepsy and by 
ensuring that family members, teachers, fellow employees, and other 
associates are equally well informed. A useful source of educational 
material is the website www.epilepsy.com.


--- PDF PAGE 3113 ---

CHAPTER 418 Seizures and Epilepsy
3067
■
■EMPLOYMENT, DRIVING, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES
Many patients with epilepsy face difficulty in obtaining or maintaining 
employment, even when their seizures are well controlled. Federal and 
state legislation is designed to prevent employers from discriminating 
against patients with epilepsy, and patients should be encouraged to 
understand and claim their legal rights. Patients in these circumstances 
also benefit greatly from the assistance of health providers who act as 
strong patient advocates.
Loss of driving privileges is one of the most disruptive social 
consequences of epilepsy. Physicians should be very clear about 
local regulations concerning driving and epilepsy, because the laws 
vary considerably among states and countries. In all cases, it is the 
physician’s responsibility to warn patients of the danger imposed on 
themselves and others while driving if their seizures are uncontrolled 
(unless the seizures are not associated with impairment of conscious-
ness or motor control). In general, most states allow patients to drive 
after a seizure-free interval (on or off medications) of between 3 months 
and 2 years.
Patients with incompletely controlled seizures must also contend 
with the risk of being in other situations where an impairment of con-
sciousness or loss of motor control could lead to major injury or death. 
Thus, depending on the type and frequency of seizures, many patients 
need to be instructed to avoid working at heights or with machinery or 
to have someone close by for activities such as bathing and swimming.
SPECIAL ISSUES RELATED TO WOMEN  
AND EPILEPSY
■
■CATAMENIAL EPILEPSY
Some women experience a marked increase in seizure frequency 
around the time of menses. This is believed to be mediated by either 
the effects of estrogen and progesterone on neuronal excitability or 
changes in antiepileptic drug levels due to altered protein binding or 
metabolism. Some patients may benefit from increases in antiepileptic 
drug dosages during menses. Natural progestins or intramuscular 
medroxyprogesterone may be of benefit to a subset of women.
■
■PREGNANCY
Most women with epilepsy who become pregnant will have an uncom-
plicated gestation and deliver a normal baby. However, epilepsy poses 
some important risks to a pregnancy. Seizure frequency during preg-
nancy will remain unchanged in ~50% of women, increase in ~30%, 
and decrease in ~20%. Changes in seizure frequency are attributed to 
endocrine effects on the CNS, variations in antiepileptic drug pharma-
cokinetics (such as acceleration of hepatic drug metabolism or effects 
on plasma protein binding), and changes in medication compliance. 
It is useful to see patients at frequent intervals during pregnancy and 
monitor serum antiepileptic drug levels. Measurement of the unbound 
drug concentrations may be useful if there is an increase in seizure fre-
quency or worsening of side effects of antiepileptic drugs.
The overall incidence of fetal abnormalities in children born to 
mothers with epilepsy is 5–6%, compared to 2–3% in healthy women. 
Part of the higher incidence is due to teratogenic effects of antiepileptic 
drugs, and the risk increases with the number of medications used 
(e.g., 10–20% risk of malformations with three drugs) and possibly 
with higher doses. A meta-analysis of published pregnancy registries 
and cohorts found that the most common malformations were defects 
in the cardiovascular and musculoskeletal system (1.4–1.8%). Valproic 
acid is strongly associated with an increased risk of adverse fetal out-
comes (7–20%). Findings from a large pregnancy registry suggest that, 
other than topiramate, the newer antiepileptic drugs are far safer than 
valproic acid.
Because the potential harm of uncontrolled convulsive seizures 
on the mother and fetus is considered greater than the teratogenic 
Other approaches
Surgery, VNS, rTMS, ECT,
hypothermia
Other anesthetics
Isoflurane, desflurane,
ketamine
IV MDZ 0.2 mg/kg → 0.2–0.6 mg/kg/h
and/or
IV PRO 2 mg/kg → 2–10 mg/kg/h 
Focal-complex,
myoclonic or
absence SE
Generalized
convulsive or
“subtle” SE
Impending and early SE
(5–30 min)
Established and
early refractory SE
(30 min to 48 h)
Late refractory SE
(>48 h)
Further IV/PO antiepileptic drug
VPA, LEV, LCM, TPM, PGB, or other
Other medications
Lidocaine, verapamil,
magnesium, ketogenic diet,
immunomodulation
IV antiepileptic drug
PHT 20 mg/kg, or VPA 20–30 mg/kg,
or
LEV 20–30 mg/kg
IV benzodiazepine
LZP 0.1 mg/kg, or MDZ 0.2 mg/kg,
or
CLZ 0.015 mg/kg
PTB (THP)
5 mg/kg (1 mg/kg) → 1–5 mg/kg/h
FIGURE 418-5  Pharmacologic treatment of generalized tonic-clonic status epilepticus (SE) in adults. CLZ, clonazepam; ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; LCM, 
lacosamide; LEV, levetiracetam; LZP, lorazepam; MDZ, midazolam; PGB, pregabalin; PHT, phenytoin or fos-phenytoin; PRO, propofol; PTB, pentobarbital; rTMS, repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation; THP, thiopental; TPM, topiramate; VNS, vagus nerve stimulation; VPA, valproic acid. (From AO Rossetti, DH Lowenstein: Lancet Neurol 
10:922, 2011.)


================================================================================
Ch419 Cerebrovascular Diseases
Pages 3114-3124
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3114 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3068 effects of antiepileptic drugs, it is currently recommended that preg-
nant women be maintained on effective drug therapy. When possible, 
it seems prudent to have the patient on monotherapy at the lowest 
effective dose, especially during the first trimester. For some women, 
however, the type and frequency of their seizures may allow for them 
to safely wean off antiepileptic drugs prior to conception. Patients 
should also take folate (1–4 mg/d), because the antifolate effects of 
anticonvulsants are thought to play a role in the development of neural 
tube defects, although the benefits of this treatment remain unproved 
in this setting.
Enzyme-inducing drugs such as phenytoin, carbamazepine, oxcar-
bazepine, topiramate, phenobarbital, and primidone cause a transient 
and reversible deficiency of vitamin K–dependent clotting factors in 
~50% of newborn infants. Although neonatal hemorrhage is uncom-
mon, the mother should be treated with oral vitamin K (20 mg/d, 
phylloquinone) in the last 2 weeks of pregnancy, and the infant should 
receive intramuscular vitamin K (1 mg) at birth.
■
■CONTRACEPTION
Special care should be taken when prescribing antiepileptic medi-
cations for women who are taking oral contraceptive agents. Drugs 
such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and topiramate can 
significantly decrease the efficacy of oral contraceptives via enzyme 
induction and other mechanisms. Patients should be advised to con-
sider alternative forms of contraception, or their contraceptive med-
ications should be modified to offset the effects of the antiepileptic 
medications.
■
■BREAST-FEEDING
Antiepileptic medications are excreted into breast milk to a variable 
degree. The ratio of drug concentration in breast milk relative to serum 
ranges from ~5% (valproic acid) to 300% (levetiracetam). Given the 
overall benefits of breast-feeding and the lack of evidence for long-term 
harm to the infant by being exposed to antiepileptic drugs, mothers 
with epilepsy can be encouraged to breast-feed. This should be recon-
sidered, however, if there is any evidence of drug effects on the infant 
such as lethargy or poor feeding.
Acknowledgment
Dr. Michael J. Aminoff contributed to the section on EEG interpretation in 
earlier editions.
■
■FURTHER READING
Chen DK et al: Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures. Curr Neurol 
Neurosci Rep 17:71, 2017.
Crepeau AZ, Sirven JI: Management of adult onset seizures. Mayo 
Clin Proc 92:306, 2017.
Dalkilic EB: Neurostimulation devices used in treatment of epilepsy. 
Curr Treat Options Neurol 19:7, 2017.
Epi PM Consortium: A roadmap for precision medicine in the 
epilepsies. Lancet Neurol 14:1219, 2015.
Gavvala JR, Schuele SU: New-onset seizure in adults and adolescents: 
A review. JAMA 316:2657, 2016.
Golyala A, Kwan P: Drug development for refractory epilepsy: The 
past 25 years and beyond. Seizure 44:147, 2017.
Jetté N et al: Surgical treatment for epilepsy: The potential gap 
between evidence and practice. Lancet Neurol 15:982, 2016.
Keezer MR et al: Comorbidities of epilepsy: Current concepts and 
future perspectives. Lancet Neurol 15:106, 2016.
Lamberink HJ et al: Individualised prediction model of seizure recur-
rence and long-term outcomes after withdrawal of antiepileptic 
drugs in seizure-free patients: A systematic review and individual 
participant data meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol 16:523, 2017.
McGovern RA et al: New techniques and progress in epilepsy surgery. 
Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 16:65, 2016.
Pitkänen A et al: Advances in the development of biomarkers for 
epilepsy. Lancet Neurol 15:843, 2016.
Cerebrovascular diseases include some of the most common 
and devastating disorders: ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic 
stroke. Stroke is the second leading cause of death worldwide, 
with 6.2 million dying from stroke in 2015, an increase of 830,000 since 
the year 2000. While stroke has grown in incidence worldwide, it is 
declining among the affluent and rising among those with less access 
to medical care. In the United States, the incidence of stroke has 
declined steadily since at least 1958, and stroke is currently the fifth 
leading cause of death with 133,000 dying in 2014. Despite this prog-
ress, however, stroke remains the most common disabling disease in 
the United States and in many forms is preventable.
A stroke, or cerebrovascular accident, is defined as an abrupt 
onset of a neurologic deficit that is attributable to a focal vascular 
cause. Thus, the definition of stroke is clinical, and laboratory studies 
including brain imaging are used to support the diagnosis. The clinical 
manifestations of stroke are highly variable because of the complex 
anatomy of the brain and its vasculature. Cerebral ischemia is caused 
by a reduction in blood flow that lasts longer than several seconds. 
Neurologic symptoms are manifest within seconds because neurons 
lack glycogen, so energy failure is rapid. If the cessation of flow lasts 
for more than a few minutes, infarction or death of brain tissue results. 
When blood flow is quickly restored, brain tissue can recover fully 
and the patient’s symptoms are only transient: this is called a transient 
ischemic attack (TIA). The definition of TIA requires that all neurologic 
signs and symptoms resolve within 24 h without evidence of brain 
infarction on brain imaging. Stroke has occurred if the neurologic signs 
and symptoms last for >24 h or brain infarction is demonstrated. A gen-
eralized reduction in cerebral blood flow due to systemic hypotension 
(e.g., cardiac arrhythmia, myocardial infarction, or hemorrhagic shock) 
usually produces syncope (Chap. 18). If low cerebral blood flow per-
sists for a longer duration, then infarction in the border zones between 
the major cerebral artery distributions may develop. In more severe 
instances, global hypoxia-ischemia causes widespread brain injury; 
the constellation of cognitive sequelae that ensues is called hypoxic- 
ischemic encephalopathy (Chap. 301). Focal ischemia or infarction, con-
versely, is usually caused by thrombosis of the cerebral vessels 
themselves or by emboli from a proximal arterial source or the heart 
(Chap. 420). Intracranial hemorrhage is caused by bleeding directly into 
or around the brain; it produces neurologic symptoms by producing a 
mass effect on neural structures, from the toxic effects of blood itself, or 
by increasing intracranial pressure (Chap. 421).
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Cerebrovascular Disease
Rapid evaluation is essential for use of acute treatments such as 
thrombolysis or thrombectomy. However, patients with acute stroke 
often do not seek medical assistance on their own because they may 
lose the appreciation that something is wrong (anosognosia) or lack 
the knowledge that acute treatment is beneficial; it is often a family 
member or a bystander who calls for help. Therefore, patients and 
their family members should be counseled to call emergency med-
ical services immediately if they experience or witness the sudden 
onset of any of the following: loss of sensory and/or motor function 
on one side of the body (nearly 85% of ischemic stroke patients have 
hemiparesis); change in vision, gait, or ability to speak or under-
stand; or a sudden, severe headache. The acronym FAST (Facial 
weakness, Arm weakness, Speech abnormality and Time) is simple 
and helpful to teach to the lay public about the common physical 
419 Cerebrovascular Diseases
Wade S. Smith, S. Claiborne Johnston,  
J. Claude Hemphill, III 


--- PDF PAGE 3115 ---

CHAPTER 419 Cerebrovascular Diseases
3069
symptoms of stroke and to underscore that treatments are highly 
time-sensitive.
Other causes of sudden-onset neurologic symptoms that may 
mimic stroke include seizure, intracranial tumor, migraine, and 
metabolic encephalopathy. An adequate history from an observer 
that no convulsive activity occurred at the onset usually excludes 
seizure, although ongoing complex partial seizures without tonic-
clonic activity can on occasion mimic stroke. Tumors may pres-
ent with acute neurologic symptoms due to hemorrhage, seizure, 
or hydrocephalus. Surprisingly, migraine (Chap. 422) can mimic 
stroke, even in patients without a significant migraine history. When 
migraine develops without head pain (acephalgic migraine), the diag-
nosis can be especially difficult. Patients without any prior history 
of migraine may develop acephalgic migraine even after age 65. A 
sensory disturbance is often prominent, and the sensory deficit, as 
well as any motor deficits, tends to migrate slowly across a limb, 
over minutes rather than seconds as with stroke. The diagnosis of 
migraine becomes more secure as the cortical disturbance begins 
to cross vascular boundaries or if classic visual symptoms are pres-
ent such as scintillating scotomata. At times, it may be impossible 
to make the diagnosis of migraine until there have been multiple 
episodes with no residual symptoms or signs and no changes on 
brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Metabolic encephalopa-
thies typically produce fluctuating mental status changes without 
focal neurologic findings. However, in the setting of prior stroke or 
brain injury, a patient with fever or sepsis may manifest a recurrent 
hemiparesis, which clears rapidly when the infection is treated. The 
metabolic process serves to “unmask” a prior deficit.
Once the diagnosis of stroke is made, a brain imaging study is 
necessary to determine if the cause of stroke is ischemia or hem-
orrhage (Fig. 419-1). Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the 
brain is the standard imaging modality to detect the presence or 
absence of intracranial hemorrhage (see “Imaging Studies,” below). 
If the stroke is ischemic, administration of recombinant tissue plas-
minogen activator (rtPA) or endovascular mechanical thrombec-
tomy may be beneficial in restoring cerebral perfusion (Chap. 420). 
Medical management to reduce the risk of complications becomes 
the next priority, followed by plans for secondary prevention. For 
ischemic stroke, several strategies can reduce the risk of subsequent 
stroke in all patients, while other strategies are effective for patients 
with specific causes of stroke such as cardiac embolus and carotid 
atherosclerosis. For hemorrhagic stroke, aneurysmal subarachnoid 
hemorrhage (SAH) and hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage are 
two important causes. The treatment and prevention of hyperten-
sive intracerebral hemorrhage are discussed in Chap. 421. SAH is 
discussed in Chap. 302.
■
■STROKE SYNDROMES
A careful history and neurologic examination can often localize the 
region of brain dysfunction; if this region corresponds to an arterial 
distribution, the possible causes responsible for the syndrome can be 
narrowed. This is of particular importance when the patient presents 
with a TIA and a normal examination. For example, if a patient devel-
ops language loss and a right homonymous hemianopia, a search for 
causes of left middle cerebral emboli should be performed. A finding 
of an isolated stenosis of the right internal carotid artery in that patient, 
for example, suggests an asymptomatic carotid stenosis, and the search 
for other causes of stroke should continue. The following sections 
describe the clinical findings of cerebral ischemia associated with cere-
bral vascular territories depicted in Figs. 419-2 through 419-11. Stroke 
syndromes are divided into: (1) large-vessel stroke within the anterior 
circulation, (2) large-vessel stroke within the posterior circulation, and 
(3) small-vessel disease of either vascular bed.
Stroke within the Anterior Circulation  The internal carotid 
artery and its branches comprise the anterior circulation of the brain. 
These vessels can be occluded by intrinsic disease of the vessel (e.g., 
atherosclerosis or dissection) or by embolic occlusion from a proximal 
source as discussed above. Occlusion of each major intracranial vessel 
has distinct clinical manifestations.
MIDDLE CEREBRAL ARTERY  Occlusion of the proximal middle cere-
bral artery (MCA) or one of its major branches is most often due to 
an embolus (artery-to-artery, cardiac, or of unknown source) rather 
than intracranial atherothrombosis. Atherosclerosis of the proximal 
MCA may cause distal emboli to the middle cerebral territory or, less 
commonly, may produce low-flow TIAs. Collateral formation via 
leptomeningeal vessels often prevents MCA stenosis from becoming 
symptomatic.
The cortical branches of the MCA supply the lateral surface of 
the hemisphere except for (1) the frontal pole and a strip along the 
superomedial border of the frontal and parietal lobes supplied by the 
anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and (2) the lower temporal and occipi-
tal pole convolutions supplied by the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) 
(Figs. 419-2–419-5).
The proximal MCA (M1 segment) gives rise to penetrating branches 
(termed lenticulostriate arteries) that supply the putamen, outer globus 
pallidus, posterior limb of the internal capsule, adjacent corona radiata, 
and most of the caudate nucleus (Fig. 419-2). In the sylvian fissure, the 
MCA in most patients divides into superior and inferior divisions (M2 
branches). Branches of the inferior division supply the inferior parietal 
and temporal cortex, and those from the superior division supply the 
frontal and superior parietal cortex (Fig. 419-3).
If the entire MCA is occluded at its origin (blocking both its pen-
etrating and cortical branches) and the distal collaterals are limited, 
the clinical findings are contralateral hemiplegia, hemianesthesia, 
homonymous hemianopia, and a day or two of gaze preference to 
the ipsilateral side. Dysarthria is common because of facial weakness. 
When the dominant hemisphere is involved, global aphasia is present 
ALGORITHM FOR STROKE AND TIA MANAGEMENT
Stroke or TIA
ABCs, glucose
Ischemic stroke/ 
TIA, 85%
Hemorrhage 
15%
Consider thrombolysis/ 
thrombectomy
Consider BP 
lowering
Obtain brain 
imaging
Establish cause
Establish cause
Atrial 
fibrillation, 
17%
Carotid 
disease, 
4%
Aneurysmal 
SAH, 4%
Hyperten-
sive ICH, 7%
Other, 
64%
Other, 
4%
Consider 
warfarin
Consider 
CEA or 
stent
Clip or coil 
(Chap. 302)
Consider 
surgery
Treat 
specific 
cause
Treat 
specific 
cause
Deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis
Physical, occupational, speech therapy
Evaluate for rehab, discharge planning
Secondary prevention based on disease
FIGURE 419-1  Medical management of stroke and TIA. Rounded boxes are 
diagnoses; rectangles are interventions. Numbers are percentages of stroke 
overall. ABCs, airway, breathing, circulation; BP, blood pressure; CEA, carotid 
endarterectomy; ICH, intracerebral hemorrhage; SAH, subarachnoid hemorrhage; 
TIA, transient ischemic attack.


--- PDF PAGE 3116 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3070
KEY
Rolandic a.
Prerolandic a.
Sup. division
middle cerebral a.
Lateral 
orbitofrontal a.
Temporopolar a.
Inf. division
middle cerebral a.
Ant. temporal a.
Post. temporal a.
Angular a.
Post. parietal a.
Ant. parietal a.
Visual radiation
Broca's area
Sensory cortex
Auditory area
Contraversive
eye center
Wernicke's
aphasia area
Visual cortex
Motor cortex
FIGURE 419-3  Diagram of a cerebral hemisphere, lateral aspect, showing the branches and distribution of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and the principal regions 
of cerebral localization. Note the bifurcation of the MCA into a superior and inferior division.
  Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
  Paralysis of the contralateral face, arm, and leg; sensory impairment over the same area (pinprick, cotton touch, vibration, position, two-point discrimination, 
stereognosis, tactile localization, barognosis, cutaneographia): Somatic motor area for face and arm and the fibers descending from the leg area to enter the corona 
radiata and corresponding somatic sensory system
  Motor aphasia: Motor speech area of the dominant hemisphere
  Central aphasia, word deafness, anomia, jargon speech, sensory agraphia, acalculia, alexia, finger agnosia, right-left confusion (the last four comprise the Gerstmann 
syndrome): Central, suprasylvian speech area and parietooccipital cortex of the dominant hemisphere
  Conduction aphasia: Central speech area (parietal operculum)
  Apractagnosia of the nondominant hemisphere, anosognosia, hemiasomatognosia, unilateral neglect, agnosia for the left half of external space, dressing “apraxia,” 
constructional “apraxia,” distortion of visual coordinates, inaccurate localization in the half field, impaired ability to judge distance, upside-down reading, visual illusions 
(e.g., it may appear that another person walks through a table): Nondominant parietal lobe (area corresponding to speech area in dominant hemisphere); loss of 
topographic memory is usually due to a nondominant lesion, occasionally to a dominant one
  Homonymous hemianopia (often homonymous inferior quadrantanopia): Optic radiation deep to second temporal convolution
  Paralysis of conjugate gaze to the opposite side: Frontal contraversive eye field or projecting fibers
Putamen
Internal 
capsule
Uncus
Claustrum
Caudate
Middle cerebral
a. (M2)
Lenticulostriate as.
Post cerebral a.
Deep branches of ant. cerebral a.
Deep branches of middle cerebral a.
Middle cerebral a.
Ant. cerebral a.
KEY
Anterior
cerebral a. (A2)
Anterior
cerebral a. (A1)
Internal carotid a.
Middle cerebral a. (M1)
FIGURE 419-2  Diagram of a cerebral hemisphere in coronal section showing the territories of the major cerebral vessels that branch from the internal carotid arteries.


--- PDF PAGE 3117 ---

CHAPTER 419 Cerebrovascular Diseases
3071
also, and when the nondominant hemisphere is affected, anosognosia, 
constructional apraxia, and neglect are found (Chap. 26).
Complete MCA syndromes occur most often when an embolus 
occludes the stem of the artery. Cortical collateral blood flow and dif-
fering arterial configurations are probably responsible for the develop-
ment of many partial syndromes. Partial syndromes may also be due 
to emboli that enter the proximal MCA without complete occlusion, 
occlude distal MCA branches, or fragment and move distally.
Partial syndromes due to embolic occlusion of a single branch 
include hand, or arm and hand, weakness alone (brachial syndrome) 
or facial weakness with nonfluent (Broca) aphasia (Chap. 26), with or 
without arm weakness (frontal opercular syndrome). A combination of 
sensory disturbance, motor weakness, and nonfluent aphasia suggests 
that an embolus has occluded the proximal superior division and 
infarcted large portions of the frontal and parietal cortices (Fig. 419-3). 
If a fluent (Wernicke’s) aphasia occurs without weakness, the inferior 
division of the MCA supplying the posterior part (temporal cortex) of 
the dominant hemisphere is probably involved. Jargon speech and an 
inability to comprehend written and spoken language are prominent 
features, often accompanied by a contralateral, homonymous superior 
quadrantanopia. Hemineglect or spatial agnosia without weakness 
indicates that the inferior division of the MCA in the nondominant 
hemisphere is involved.
Occlusion of a lenticulostriate vessel produces small-vessel (lacu-
nar) stroke within the internal capsule (Fig. 419-2). This produces 
pure motor stroke or sensory-motor stroke contralateral to the lesion. 
Ischemia within the genu of the internal capsule causes primarily facial 
weakness followed by arm and then leg weakness as the ischemia 
moves posterior within the capsule. Alternatively, the contralateral 
hand may become ataxic, and dysarthria will be prominent (clumsy 
hand, dysarthria lacunar syndrome). Lacunar infarction affecting the 
globus pallidus and putamen often has few clinical signs, but parkin-
sonism and hemiballismus have been reported.
ANTERIOR CEREBRAL ARTERY  The ACA is divided into two segments: 
the precommunal (A1) circle of Willis, or stem, which connects the 
internal carotid artery to the anterior communicating artery, and the 
postcommunal (A2) segment distal to the anterior communicating 
artery (Figs. 419-2 and 419-4). The A1 segment gives rise to several 
deep penetrating branches that supply the anterior limb of the internal 
capsule, the anterior perforate substance, amygdala, anterior hypothal-
amus, and the inferior part of the head of the caudate nucleus.
Occlusion of the proximal ACA is usually well tolerated because 
of collateral flow through the anterior communicating artery and col-
laterals through the MCA and PCA. Occlusion of a single A2 segment 
results in the contralateral symptoms noted in Fig. 419-4. If both A2 
segments arise from a single anterior cerebral stem (contralateral A1 
segment atresia), the occlusion may affect both hemispheres. Profound 
abulia (a delay in verbal and motor response) and bilateral pyramidal 
signs with paraparesis or quadriparesis and urinary incontinence 
result.
ANTERIOR CHOROIDAL ARTERY  This artery arises from the internal 
carotid artery and supplies the posterior limb of the internal capsule 
and the white matter posterolateral to it, through which pass some 
of the geniculocalcarine fibers (Fig. 419-5). The complete syndrome 
of anterior choroidal artery occlusion consists of contralateral hemi-
plegia, hemianesthesia (hypesthesia), and homonymous hemianopia. 
However, because this territory is also supplied by penetrating vessels 
of the proximal MCA and the posterior communicating and posterior 
choroidal arteries, minimal deficits may occur, and patients frequently 
recover substantially. Anterior choroidal strokes are usually the result 
of in situ thrombosis of the vessel, and the vessel is particularly 
Secondary
motor area
Medial
prerolandic a.
Callosomarginal a.
Frontopolar a.
Medial orbitofrontal a.
Ant. cerebral a.
Post. communicating a.
Penetrating
thalamosubthalamic
paramedian As.
Calcarine a.
Parietooccipital a. 
Medial posterior choroidal a.
Pericallosal a.
Post. 
parietal a.
Splenial a.
Post. thalamic a.
Lateral posterior
choroidal a.
Post. temporal a.
Ant.
temporal a.
Post. 
cerebral 
stem
Visual
cortex
Sensory
cortex
Motor
cortex
Hippocampal As.
Medial 
rolandic a.
Striate area 
along calcarine
sulcus
FIGURE 419-4  Diagram of a cerebral hemisphere, medial aspect, showing the branches and distribution of the anterior cerebral artery and the principal regions of 
cerebral localization.
  Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
  Paralysis of opposite foot and leg: Motor leg area
  A lesser degree of paresis of opposite arm: Arm area of cortex or fibers descending to corona radiata
  Cortical sensory loss over toes, foot, and leg: Sensory area for foot and leg
  Urinary incontinence: Sensorimotor area in paracentral lobule
  Contralateral grasp reflex, sucking reflex, gegenhalten (paratonic rigidity): Medial surface of the posterior frontal lobe; likely supplemental motor area
  Abulia (akinetic mutism), slowness, delay, intermittent interruption, lack of spontaneity, whispering, reflex distraction to sights and sounds: Uncertain localization— 
    probably cingulate gyrus and medial inferior portion of frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes
  Impairment of gait and stance (gait apraxia): Frontal cortex near leg motor area
  Dyspraxia of left limbs, tactile aphasia in left limbs: Corpus callosum


--- PDF PAGE 3118 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3072
Ant. cerebral a.
Post. 
communicating a.
Post. cerebral a.
Medial posterior
choroidal a.
Ant. temporal a.
Hippocampal a.
Post. temporal a.
Post. thalamic a.
Lateral posterior 
choroidal a. 
Visual
cortex
Internal 
carotid a.
Ant. 
choroidal a.
Mesencephalic
paramedian As.
Splenial a.
Parietooccipital a.
Calcarine a.
FIGURE 419-5  Inferior aspect of the brain with the branches and distribution of 
the posterior cerebral artery and the principal anatomic structures shown.
  Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
  Peripheral territory (see also Fig. 419-9). Homonymous hemianopia (often upper 
quadrantic): Calcarine cortex or optic radiation nearby. Bilateral homonymous 
hemianopia, cortical blindness, awareness or denial of blindness; tactile naming, 
achromatopia (color blindness), failure to see to-and-fro movements, inability to 
perceive objects not centrally located, apraxia of ocular movements, inability to 
count or enumerate objects, tendency to run into things that the patient sees and 
tries to avoid: Bilateral occipital lobe with possibly the parietal lobe involved. Verbal 
dyslexia without agraphia, color anomia: Dominant calcarine lesion and posterior 
part of corpus callosum. Memory defect: Hippocampal lesion bilaterally or on the 
dominant side only. Topographic disorientation and prosopagnosia: Usually with 
lesions of nondominant, calcarine, and lingual gyrus. Simultanagnosia, hemivisual 
neglect: Dominant visual cortex, contralateral hemisphere. Unformed visual 
hallucinations, peduncular hallucinosis, metamorphopsia, teleopsia, illusory 
visual spread, palinopsia, distortion of outlines, central photophobia: Calcarine 
cortex. Complex hallucinations: Usually nondominant hemisphere.
  Central territory. Thalamic syndrome: sensory loss (all modalities), spontaneous pain 
and dysesthesias, choreoathetosis, intention tremor, spasms of hand, mild hemiparesis: 
Posteroventral nucleus of thalamus; involvement of the adjacent subthalamus body 
or its afferent tracts. Thalamoperforate syndrome: crossed cerebellar ataxia with 
ipsilateral third nerve palsy (Claude’s syndrome): Dentatothalamic tract and issuing 
third nerve. Weber’s syndrome: third nerve palsy and contralateral hemiplegia: Third 
nerve and cerebral peduncle. Contralateral hemiplegia: Cerebral peduncle. Paralysis 
or paresis of vertical eye movement, skew deviation, sluggish pupillary responses to 
light, slight miosis and ptosis (retraction nystagmus and “tucking” of the eyelids may 
be associated): Supranuclear fibers to third nerve, interstitial nucleus of Cajal, nucleus 
of Darkschewitsch, and posterior commissure. Contralateral rhythmic, ataxic action 
tremor; rhythmic postural or “holding” tremor (rubral tremor): Dentatothalamic tract.
occluded and give rise to symptoms referable to its peripheral territory 
(Figs. 419-4 and 419-5).
In addition to supplying the ipsilateral brain, the internal carotid 
artery perfuses the optic nerve and retina via the ophthalmic artery. 
In ~25% of symptomatic internal carotid disease, recurrent transient 
monocular blindness (amaurosis fugax) warns of the lesion. Patients 
typically describe a horizontal shade that sweeps down or up across 
the field of vision. They may also complain that their vision was 
blurred in that eye or that the upper or lower half of vision disap-
peared. In most cases, these symptoms last only a few minutes. Rarely, 
ischemia or infarction of the ophthalmic artery or central retinal arteries 
occurs at the time of cerebral TIA or infarction.
A high-pitched prolonged carotid bruit fading into diastole is often 
associated with tightly stenotic lesions. As the stenosis grows tighter 
and flow distal to the stenosis becomes reduced, the bruit becomes 
fainter and may disappear when occlusion is imminent.
COMMON CAROTID ARTERY  All symptoms and signs of internal carotid 
occlusion may also be present with occlusion of the common carotid 
artery. Jaw claudication may result from low flow in the external 
carotid branches. Bilateral common carotid artery occlusions at their 
origin may occur in Takayasu’s arteritis (Chap. 356).
Stroke within the Posterior Circulation  The posterior circula-
tion is composed of the paired vertebral arteries, the basilar artery, and 
the paired PCAs. The vertebral arteries join to form the basilar artery at 
the pontomedullary junction. The basilar artery divides into two PCAs 
in the interpeduncular fossa (Figs. 419-4–419-6). These major arteries 
give rise to long and short circumferential branches and to smaller 
deep penetrating branches that supply the cerebellum, medulla, pons, 
midbrain, subthalamus, thalamus, hippocampus, and medial temporal 
and occipital lobes. Occlusion of each vessel produces its own distinc-
tive syndrome.
POSTERIOR CEREBRAL ARTERY  In 75% of cases, both PCAs arise from 
the bifurcation of the basilar artery; in 20%, one has its origin from 
the ipsilateral internal carotid artery via the posterior communicating 
artery; in 5%, both originate from the respective ipsilateral internal 
carotid arteries (Figs. 419-4–419-6). The precommunal, or P1, segment 
of the true PCA is atretic in such cases.
PCA syndromes usually result from atheroma formation or emboli 
that lodge at the top of the basilar artery; posterior circulation disease 
may also be caused by dissection of either vertebral artery or fibromus-
cular dysplasia.
Two clinical syndromes are commonly observed with occlusion of 
the PCA: (1) P1 syndrome: midbrain, subthalamic, and thalamic signs, 
which are due to disease of the proximal P1 segment of the PCA or 
its penetrating branches (thalamogeniculate, Percheron, and posterior 
Basilar a.
Vertebral a.
Posterior Inferior
cerebellar a.
Deep branches
of the basilar a.
Anterior Inferior
cerebellar a.
Middle cerebral a.
Posterior cerebral a.
Superior cerebellar a.
FIGURE 419-6  Diagram of the posterior circulation, showing the intracranial 
vertebral arteries forming the basilar artery that gives off the anterior inferior 
cerebellar, superior cerebellar, and posterior cerebral arteries. The posterior 
inferior cerebellar artery arises from each of the vertebral segments. The majority 
of brainstem blood flow arises from numerous deep branches of the basilar artery 
that penetrate directly into the brainstem.
vulnerable to iatrogenic occlusion during surgical clipping of aneu-
rysms arising from the internal carotid artery.
INTERNAL CAROTID ARTERY  The clinical picture of internal carotid 
occlusion varies depending on whether the cause of ischemia is prop-
agated thrombus, embolism, or low flow. The cortex supplied by the 
MCA territory is affected most often. With a competent circle of Willis, 
occlusion may go unnoticed. If the thrombus propagates up the inter-
nal carotid artery into the MCA or embolizes it, symptoms are identical 
to proximal MCA occlusion (see above). Sometimes there is massive 
infarction of the entire deep white matter and cortical surface. When 
the origins of both the ACA and MCA are occluded at the top of the 
carotid artery, abulia or stupor occurs with hemiplegia, hemianesthe-
sia, and aphasia or anosognosia. When the PCA arises from the internal 
carotid artery (a configuration called a fetal PCA), it may also become 


--- PDF PAGE 3119 ---

CHAPTER 419 Cerebrovascular Diseases
3073
choroidal arteries); and (2) P2 syndrome: cortical temporal and occipital 
lobe signs, due to occlusion of the P2 segment distal to the junction of 
the PCA with the posterior communicating artery.
P1 SYNDROMES  Infarction usually occurs in the ipsilateral subthalamus 
and medial thalamus and in the ipsilateral cerebral peduncle and mid-
brain (Figs. 419-5 and 419-11). A third nerve palsy with contralateral 
ataxia (Claude’s syndrome) or with contralateral hemiplegia (Weber’s 
syndrome) may result. The ataxia indicates involvement of the red 
nucleus or dentatorubrothalamic tract; the hemiplegia is localized 
to the cerebral peduncle (Fig. 419-11). If the subthalamic nucleus is 
involved, contralateral hemiballismus may occur. Occlusion of the 
artery of Percheron produces paresis of upward gaze and drowsiness 
and often abulia. Extensive infarction in the midbrain and subthalamus 
occurring with bilateral proximal PCA occlusion presents as coma, 
unreactive pupils, bilateral pyramidal signs, and decerebrate rigidity.
Occlusion of the penetrating branches of thalamic and thalamo-
geniculate arteries produces less extensive thalamic and thalamocapsu-
lar lacunar syndromes. The thalamic Déjérine-Roussy syndrome consists 
of contralateral hemisensory loss followed later by an agonizing, sear-
ing, or burning pain in the affected areas. It is persistent and responds 
poorly to analgesics. Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine or gabapentin) 
or tricyclic antidepressants may be beneficial.
P2 SYNDROMES  (Figs. 419-4 and 419-5) Occlusion of the distal PCA 
causes infarction of the medial temporal and occipital lobes. Contralat-
eral homonymous hemianopia without macula sparing is the usual 
manifestation. (MCA strokes often produce hemianopia but typically 
spare the macula as calcarine cortex is perfused by the P2 segment). 
Occasionally, only the upper quadrant of visual field is involved or 
the macula vision is spared. If the visual association areas are spared 
and only the calcarine cortex is involved, the patient may be aware of 
visual defects. Medial temporal lobe and hippocampal involvement 
may cause an acute disturbance in memory, particularly if it occurs in 
the dominant hemisphere. The defect usually clears because memory 
has bilateral representation. If the dominant hemisphere is affected and 
the infarct extends to involve the splenium of the corpus callosum, the 
patient may demonstrate alexia without agraphia. Visual agnosia for 
12th n. 
nucleus
Vestibular
nucleus
Restiform
body
Olivocerebellar
fibers
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Descending nucleus
and tract - 5th n.
Descending 
sympathetic
tract
Dorsal 
spinocerebellar tract
10th n.
Ventral
spinocerebellar tract
Spinothalamic tract
Medial lemniscus
Inferior olive
Nucleus ambiguus
– motor 9 +10
Pyramid
12th n.
Medullary syndrome:
Lateral
Medial
Tractus solitarius
with nucleus
Medulla
Cerebellum
FIGURE 419-7  Axial section at the level of the medulla, depicted schematically on the left, with a corresponding magnetic resonance image on the right. Note that 
in Figs. 419-7 through 419-11, all drawings are oriented with the dorsal surface at the bottom, matching the orientation of the brainstem that is commonly seen in all 
modern neuroimaging studies. Approximate regions involved in medial and lateral medullary stroke syndromes are shown.
  Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
  1.  Medial medullary syndrome (occlusion of vertebral artery or of branch of vertebral or lower basilar artery)
  On side of lesion
  Paralysis with atrophy of one-half half the tongue: Ipsilateral twelfth nerve
  On side opposite lesion
  Paralysis of arm and leg, sparing face; impaired tactile and proprioceptive sense over one-half the body: Contralateral pyramidal tract and medial lemniscus
  2.  Lateral medullary syndrome (occlusion of any of five vessels may be responsible—vertebral, posterior inferior cerebellar, superior, middle, or inferior lateral 
medullary arteries)
  On side of lesion
  Pain, numbness, impaired sensation over one-half the face: Descending tract and nucleus fifth nerve
  Ataxia of limbs, falling to side of lesion: Uncertain—restiform body, cerebellar hemisphere, cerebellar fibers, spinocerebellar tract (?)
  Nystagmus, diplopia, oscillopsia, vertigo, nausea, vomiting: Vestibular nucleus
  Horner’s syndrome (miosis, ptosis, decreased sweating): Descending sympathetic tract
  Dysphagia, hoarseness, paralysis of palate, paralysis of vocal cord, diminished gag reflex: Issuing fibers ninth and tenth nerves
  Loss of taste: Nucleus and tractus solitarius
  Numbness of ipsilateral arm, trunk, or leg: Cuneate and gracile nuclei
  Weakness of lower face: Genuflected upper motor neuron fibers to ipsilateral facial nucleus
  On side opposite lesion
  Impaired pain and thermal sense over half the body, sometimes face: Spinothalamic tract
  3.  Total unilateral medullary syndrome (occlusion of vertebral artery): Combination of medial and lateral syndromes
  4.  Lateral pontomedullary syndrome (occlusion of vertebral artery): Combination of lateral medullary and lateral inferior pontine syndrome
  5.  Basilar artery syndrome (the syndrome of the lone vertebral artery is equivalent): A combination of the various brainstem syndromes plus those arising in the 
posterior cerebral artery distribution.
  Bilateral long tract signs (sensory and motor; cerebellar and peripheral cranial nerve abnormalities): Bilateral long tract; cerebellar and peripheral cranial nerves
  Paralysis or weakness of all extremities, plus all bulbar musculature: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tracts bilaterally


--- PDF PAGE 3120 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3074
faces, objects, mathematical symbols, and colors and anomia with para-
phasic errors (amnestic aphasia) may also occur, even without callosal 
involvement. Occlusion of the PCA can produce peduncular hallucinosis 
(visual hallucinations of brightly colored scenes and objects).
Bilateral infarction in the distal PCAs produces cortical blindness 
(blindness with preserved pupillary light reaction). The patient is 
often unaware of the blindness or may even deny it (Anton’s syndrome). 
Tiny islands of vision may persist, and the patient may report that 
vision fluctuates as images are captured in the preserved portions. 
Rarely, only peripheral vision is lost and central vision is spared, result-
ing in “gun-barrel” vision. Bilateral visual association area lesions may 
result in Balint’s syndrome, a disorder of the orderly visual scanning of 
the environment (Chap. 26), usually resulting from infarctions second-
ary to low flow in the “watershed” between the distal PCA and MCA 
territories, as occurs after cardiac arrest. Patients may experience per-
sistence of a visual image for several minutes despite gazing at another 
scene (palinopsia) or an inability to synthesize the whole of an image 
(asimultanagnosia). Embolic occlusion of the top of the basilar artery 
can produce any or all the central or peripheral territory symptoms. 
The hallmark is the sudden onset of bilateral signs, including ptosis, 
pupillary asymmetry or lack of reaction to light, and somnolence. 
Patients will often have posturing and myoclonic jerking that simulates 
seizure. Interrogation of the noncontrast CT scan for a hyperdense 
basilar artery sign (indicating thrombus in the basilar artery), or CT 
angiography (CTA) establishes this diagnosis. Physicians should be 
suspicious of this rare, but potentially treatable stroke syndrome in the 
setting of presumed new onset seizure and cranial nerve deficits.
VERTEBRAL AND POSTERIOR INFERIOR CEREBELLAR ARTERIES  The ver-
tebral artery, which arises from the innominate artery on the right 
and the subclavian artery on the left, consists of four segments. The 
first (V1) extends from its origin to its entrance into the sixth or fifth 
transverse vertebral foramen. The second segment (V2) traverses the 
vertebral foramina from C6 to C2. The third (V3) passes through the 
transverse foramen and circles around the arch of the atlas to pierce 
the dura at the foramen magnum. The fourth (V4) segment courses 
upward to join the other vertebral artery to form the basilar artery 
(Fig. 419-6); only the fourth segment gives rise to branches that supply 
the brainstem and cerebellum. The posterior inferior cerebellar artery 
(PICA) in its proximal segment supplies the lateral medulla and, in its 
distal branches, the inferior surface of the cerebellum.
Inferior pontine syndrome:
Lateral
Medial
Medial longitudinal
fasciculus
Vestibular nucleus
Spinothalamic
tract
7th n.
6th n.
8th n.
Middle cerebellar
peduncle
Restiform body
6th n. nucleus
complex
Corticospinal and
corticobulbar tract
7th n. nucleus
Dorsal
cochlear 
nucleus
Descending tract
and nucleus of
5th n.
Medial lemniscus
Inferior pons
Cerebellum
7th and 8th
cranial
nerves
FIGURE 419-8  Axial section at the level of the inferior pons, depicted schematically on the left, with a corresponding magnetic resonance image on the right. 
Approximate regions involved in medial and lateral inferior pontine stroke syndromes are shown.
  Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
  1.  Medial inferior pontine syndrome (occlusion of paramedian branch of basilar artery)
  On side of lesion
  Paralysis of conjugate gaze to side of lesion (preservation of convergence): Center for conjugate lateral gaze
  Nystagmus: Vestibular nucleus
  Ataxia of limbs and gait: Likely middle cerebellar peduncle
  Diplopia on lateral gaze: Abducens nerve
  On side opposite lesion
  Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tract in lower pons
  Impaired tactile and proprioceptive sense over one-half of the body: Medial lemniscus
  2.  Lateral inferior pontine syndrome (occlusion of anterior inferior cerebellar artery)
  On side of lesion
  Horizontal and vertical nystagmus, vertigo, nausea, vomiting, oscillopsia: Vestibular nerve or nucleus
  Facial paralysis: Seventh nerve
  Paralysis of conjugate gaze to side of lesion: Center for conjugate lateral gaze
  Deafness, tinnitus: Auditory nerve or cochlear nucleus
  Ataxia: Middle cerebellar peduncle and cerebellar hemisphere
  Impaired sensation over face: Descending tract and nucleus fifth nerve
  On side opposite lesion
  Impaired pain and thermal sense over one-half the body (may include face): Spinothalamic tract


--- PDF PAGE 3121 ---

CHAPTER 419 Cerebrovascular Diseases
3075
Atherothrombotic lesions have a predilection for V1 and V4 seg-
ments of the vertebral artery. The first segment may become diseased at 
the origin of the vessel and may produce posterior circulation emboli; 
collateral flow from the contralateral vertebral artery or the ascend-
ing cervical, thyrocervical, or occipital arteries is usually sufficient to 
prevent low-flow TIAs or stroke. When one vertebral artery is atretic 
and an atherothrombotic lesion threatens the origin of the other, the 
collateral circulation, which may also include retrograde flow down the 
basilar artery, is often insufficient (Figs. 419-5 and 419-6). In this setting, 
low-flow TIAs may occur, consisting of syncope, vertigo, and alternat-
ing hemiplegia; this state also sets the stage for thrombosis. Disease of 
the distal fourth segment of the vertebral artery can promote thrombus 
formation manifest as embolism or with propagation as basilar artery 
thrombosis. Stenosis proximal to the origin of the PICA can threaten the 
lateral medulla and posterior inferior surface of the cerebellum.
If the subclavian artery is occluded proximal to the origin of the 
vertebral artery, there is a reversal in the direction of blood flow in the 
ipsilateral vertebral artery. Exercise of the ipsilateral arm may increase 
demand on vertebral flow, producing posterior circulation TIAs, or 
“subclavian steal.”
Although atheromatous disease rarely narrows the second and third 
segments of the vertebral artery, this region is subject to dissection, 
fibromuscular dysplasia, and, rarely, encroachment by osteophytic 
spurs within the vertebral foramina.
Embolic occlusion or thrombosis of a V4 segment causes ischemia 
of the lateral medulla. The constellation of vertigo, numbness of the 
ipsilateral face and contralateral limbs, diplopia, hoarseness, dys-
arthria, dysphagia, and ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome is called the 
lateral medullary (or Wallenberg’s) syndrome (Fig. 419-7). Ipsilateral upper 
motor neuron facial weakness can also occur. Most cases result from 
ipsilateral vertebral artery occlusion; in the remainder, PICA occlusion 
is responsible. Occlusion of the medullary penetrating branches of the 
vertebral artery or PICA results in partial syndromes. Hemiparesis is 
not a typical feature of vertebral artery occlusion; however, quadriparesis may 
result from occlusion of the anterior spinal artery.
Rarely, a medial medullary syndrome occurs with infarction of the 
pyramid and contralateral hemiparesis of the arm and leg, sparing the 
face. If the medial lemniscus and emerging hypoglossal nerve fibers 
are involved, contralateral loss of joint position sense and ipsilateral 
tongue weakness occur.
Cerebellar infarction can lead to respiratory arrest due to raised 
intracranial pressure from cerebellar swelling, closure of the aqueduct 
of Silvius or fourth ventricle, followed by hydrocephalus and central 
herniation. Displacement of the brainstem from cerebellar edema 
will also cause respiratory and hemodynamic instability. Drowsiness, 
Babinski signs, dysarthria, and bifacial weakness may be absent, or 
present only briefly, before respiratory arrest ensues. Gait unsteadi-
ness, headache, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting may be the only early 
Temporal lobe
Mid-pons
5th cranial
nerve
Cerebellum
Midpontine syndrome:
Lateral
Medial
Medial longitudinal 
fasciculus
Superior cerebellar
peduncle
5th n. sensory nucleus
5th n. motor nucleus
Middle
cerebellar
peduncle
Lateral
lemniscus
Corticospinal and
corticopontine tracts
Spinothalamic
tract
5th n. 
Medial
lemniscus
FIGURE 419-9  Axial section at the level of the midpons, depicted schematically on the left, with a corresponding magnetic resonance image on the right. Approximate 
regions involved in medial and lateral midpontine stroke syndromes are shown.
  Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
  1.  Medial midpontine syndrome (paramedian branch of midbasilar artery)
  On side of lesion
  Ataxia of limbs and gait (more prominent in bilateral involvement): Pontine nuclei
  On side opposite lesion
  Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tract
  Variable impaired touch and proprioception when lesion extends posteriorly: Medial lemniscus
  2.  Lateral midpontine syndrome (short circumferential artery)
  On side of lesion
  Ataxia of limbs: Middle cerebellar peduncle
  Paralysis of muscles of mastication: Motor fibers or nucleus of fifth nerve
  Impaired sensation over side of face: Sensory fibers or nucleus of fifth nerve
  On side opposite lesion
  Impaired pain and thermal sense on limbs and trunk: Spinothalamic tract


--- PDF PAGE 3122 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3076
symptoms and signs and should arouse suspicion of this impending 
complication, which may require neurosurgical decompression, often 
with an excellent outcome. Separating these symptoms from those of 
viral labyrinthitis can be a challenge, but headache, neck stiffness, and 
unilateral dysmetria favor stroke.
BASILAR ARTERY  Branches of the basilar artery (Fig. 419-6) supply the 
base of the pons and superior cerebellum and fall into three groups: 
(1) paramedian, 7–10 in number, which supply a wedge of pons on 
either side of the midline; (2) short circumferential, 5–7 in number, 
that supply the lateral two-thirds of the pons and middle and superior 
cerebellar peduncles; and (3) bilateral long circumferential (superior cer-
ebellar and anterior inferior cerebellar arteries), which course around 
the pons to supply the cerebellar hemispheres.
Atheromatous lesions can occur anywhere along the basilar trunk 
but are most frequent in the proximal basilar and distal vertebral seg-
ments. Typically, lesions occlude either the proximal basilar and one 
or both vertebral arteries. The clinical picture varies depending on the 
availability of retrograde collateral flow from the posterior communi-
cating arteries. Rarely, dissection of a vertebral artery may involve the 
basilar artery and, depending on the location of true and false lumen, 
may produce multiple penetrating artery strokes.
Although atherothrombosis occasionally occludes the distal portion 
of the basilar artery, emboli from the heart or proximal vertebral or 
basilar segments are more commonly responsible for “top of the basilar” 
syndromes.
Because the brainstem contains many structures in close apposition, 
a diversity of clinical syndromes may emerge with ischemia, reflecting 
involvement of the corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts, ascending 
sensory tracts, and cranial nerve nuclei (Figs. 419-7–419-11).
The symptoms of transient ischemia or infarction in the territory 
of the basilar artery often do not indicate whether the basilar artery 
itself or one of its branches is diseased, yet this distinction has impor-
tant implications for therapy. The picture of complete basilar occlusion, 
however, is easy to recognize as a constellation of bilateral long tract signs 
(sensory and motor) with signs of cranial nerve and cerebellar dysfunc-
tion. Patients may have spontaneous posturing movements that are 
myoclonic in nature and simulate seizure activity. A “locked-in” 
state of preserved consciousness with quadriplegia and cranial nerve 
signs suggests complete pontine and lower midbrain infarction. The 
Superior pontine syndrome:
Lateral
Medial
Medial longitudinal
fasciculus
Lateral
lemniscus
Spinothalamic 
tract
Pontine nuclei and
pontocerebellar fibers
Corticospinal tract
Medial
lemniscus
Central
tegmental
bundle
Superior cerebellar 
peduncle
Basilar artery
Temporal lobe
Superior
pons
FIGURE 419-10  Axial section at the level of the superior pons, depicted schematically on the left, with a corresponding magnetic resonance image on the right. 
Approximate regions involved in medial and lateral superior pontine stroke syndromes are shown.
  Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
  1.  Medial superior pontine syndrome (paramedian branches of upper basilar artery)
  On side of lesion
  Cerebellar ataxia (probably): Superior and/or middle cerebellar peduncle
  Internuclear ophthalmoplegia: Medial longitudinal fasciculus
  Myoclonic syndrome, palate, pharynx, vocal cords, respiratory apparatus, face, oculomotor apparatus, etc.: Localization uncertain—central tegmental bundle, 
dentate projection, inferior olivary nucleus
  On side opposite lesion
  Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tract
  Rarely touch, vibration, and position are affected: Medial lemniscus
  2.  Lateral superior pontine syndrome (syndrome of superior cerebellar artery)
  On side of lesion
  Ataxia of limbs and gait, falling to side of lesion: Middle and superior cerebellar peduncles, superior surface of cerebellum, dentate nucleus
  Dizziness, nausea, vomiting; horizontal nystagmus: Vestibular nucleus
  Paresis of conjugate gaze (ipsilateral): Pontine contralateral gaze
  Skew deviation: Uncertain
  Miosis, ptosis, decreased sweating over face (Horner’s syndrome): Descending sympathetic fibers
  Tremor: Localization unclear—Dentate nucleus, superior cerebellar peduncle
  On side opposite lesion
  Impaired pain and thermal sense on face, limbs, and trunk: Spinothalamic tract
  Impaired touch, vibration, and position sense, more in leg than arm (there is a tendency to incongruity of pain and touch deficits): Medial lemniscus 
(lateral portion)


--- PDF PAGE 3123 ---

CHAPTER 419 Cerebrovascular Diseases
3077
therapeutic goal is to identify impending basilar occlusion before dev-
astating infarction occurs. A series of TIAs and a slowly progressive, 
fluctuating stroke are extremely significant, because they often herald 
an atherothrombotic occlusion of the distal vertebral or proximal 
basilar artery.
TIAs in the proximal basilar distribution may produce vertigo 
(often described by patients as “swimming,” “swaying,” “moving,” 
“unsteadiness,” or “light-headedness”). Other symptoms that warn 
of basilar thrombosis include diplopia, dysarthria, facial or circumoral 
numbness, and hemisensory symptoms. In general, symptoms of basi-
lar branch TIAs affect one side of the brainstem, whereas symptoms of 
basilar artery TIAs usually affect both sides, although a “herald” hemi-
paresis has been emphasized as an initial symptom of basilar occlusion. 
Most often, TIAs, whether due to impending occlusion of the basilar 
artery or a basilar branch, are short lived (5–30 min) and repetitive, 
occurring several times a day. The pattern suggests intermittent reduc-
tion of flow. Although treatment with intravenous heparin or various 
combinations of antiplatelet agents have been used to prevent clot 
propagation there is no specific evidence to support any one approach, 
and endovascular intervention is also an option.
Atherothrombotic occlusion of the basilar artery with infarction 
usually causes bilateral brainstem signs. A gaze paresis or internu-
clear ophthalmoplegia associated with ipsilateral hemiparesis may 
be the only manifestation of bilateral brainstem ischemia. More often, 
unequivocal signs of bilateral pontine disease are present. Complete 
basilar thrombosis carries a high mortality.
Occlusion of a branch of the basilar artery usually causes unilateral 
symptoms and signs involving motor, sensory, and cranial nerves. If 
symptoms remain unilateral, concern over pending basilar occlusion 
should be reduced.
Occlusion of the superior cerebellar artery results in severe ipsilateral 
cerebellar ataxia, nausea and vomiting, dysarthria, and contralateral 
loss of pain and temperature sensation over the extremities, body, 
and face (spino- and trigeminothalamic tract). Partial deafness, ataxic 
tremor of the ipsilateral upper extremity, Horner’s syndrome, and pal-
atal myoclonus may occur rarely. Partial syndromes occur frequently 
(Fig. 419-10). With large strokes, swelling and mass effects may com-
press the midbrain or produce hydrocephalus; these symptoms may 
evolve rapidly. Neurosurgical intervention may be lifesaving in such 
cases.
Occlusion of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery produces variable 
degrees of infarction because the size of this artery and the territory it 
supplies vary inversely with those of the PICA. The principal symp-
toms include: (1) ipsilateral deafness, facial weakness, vertigo, nausea 
and vomiting, nystagmus, tinnitus, cerebellar ataxia, Horner’s syn-
drome, and paresis of conjugate lateral gaze; and (2) contralateral loss 
of pain and temperature sensation. An occlusion close to the origin of 
the artery may cause corticospinal tract signs (Fig. 419-8).
Occlusion of one of the short circumferential branches of the basilar 
artery affects the lateral two-thirds of the pons and middle or supe-
rior cerebellar peduncle, whereas occlusion of one of the paramedian 
branches affects a wedge-shaped area on either side of the medial pons 
(Figs. 419-8–419-10).
■
■IMAGING STUDIES
See also Chap. 416.
CT Scans  CT radiographic images identify or exclude hemorrhage 
as the cause of stroke, and they identify extraparenchymal hemor-
rhages, neoplasms, abscesses, and other conditions masquerading 
Midbrain syndrome:
Lateral
Medial
3rd n.
Superior colliculus
Cerebral aqueduct
3rd nerve
nucleus
Medial
lemniscus
Spinothalamic
tract
Red nucleus
Substantia
nigra
Crus cerebri
Periaqueductal
gray matter
Basilar artery
Internal
carotid
artery
Midbrain
FIGURE 419-11  Axial section at the level of the midbrain, depicted schematically on the left, with a corresponding magnetic resonance image on the right. Approximate 
regions involved in medial and lateral midbrain stroke syndromes are shown.
  Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
  1.  Medial midbrain syndrome (paramedian branches of upper basilar and proximal posterior cerebral arteries)
  On side of lesion
  Eye “down and out” secondary to unopposed action of fourth and sixth cranial nerves, with dilated and unresponsive pupil: Third nerve fibers
  On side opposite lesion
  Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tract descending in crus cerebri
  2.  Lateral midbrain syndrome (syndrome of small penetrating arteries arising from posterior cerebral artery)
  On side of lesion
  Eye “down and out” secondary to unopposed action of fourth and sixth cranial nerves, with dilated and unresponsive pupil: Third nerve fibers and/or third 
nerve nucleus
  On side opposite lesion
  Hemiataxia, hyperkinesias, tremor: Red nucleus, dentatorubrothalamic pathway


--- PDF PAGE 3124 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3078
FIGURE 419-12  Acute left middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke with right hemiplegia but preserved language. A. Computed tomography (CT) perfusion mean-
transit time map showing delayed perfusion of the left MCA distribution (blue). B. Predicted region of infarct (red) and penumbra (green) based on CT perfusion 
data. C. Conventional angiogram showing occlusion of the left internal carotid–MCA bifurcation (left panel), and revascularization of the vessels following successful 
thrombectomy 8 h after stroke symptom onset (right panel). D. The clot removed with a thrombectomy device (L5, Concentric Medical, Inc.). E. CT scan of the brain 
2 days later; note infarction in the region predicted in B but preservation of the penumbral region by successful revascularization.
as stroke. Brain CT scans obtained in the first several hours after an 
infarction generally show no abnormality, and the infarct may not be 
seen reliably for 24–48 h. CT may fail to show small ischemic strokes in 
the posterior fossa because of bone artifact; small infarcts on the cortical 
surface may also be missed.
Contrast-enhanced CT scans add specificity by showing contrast 
enhancement of subacute infarcts and allow visualization of venous 
structures. Coupled with multidetector scanners, CT angiography can 
be performed with administration of IV iodinated contrast allowing 
visualization of the cervical and intracranial arteries, intracranial veins, 
aortic arch, and even the coronary arteries in one imaging session. 
Carotid disease and intracranial vascular occlusions are readily iden-
tified with this method (see Fig. 420-2). After an IV bolus of contrast, 
deficits in brain perfusion produced by vascular occlusion can also be 
demonstrated (Fig. 419-12) and used to predict the region of infarcted 
brain and the brain at risk of further infarction (i.e., the ischemic pen-
umbra, see “Pathophysiology of Ischemic Stroke” in Chap. 420). CT 
imaging is also sensitive for detecting SAH (although by itself does 
not rule it out), and CTA can readily identify intracranial aneurysms 
(Chap. 301). Because of its speed and wide availability, noncontrast 
head CT is the imaging modality of choice in patients with acute stroke 
(Fig. 419-1), and CTA and CT perfusion imaging may also be useful and 
convenient adjuncts.
■
■MRI
MRI reliably documents the extent and location of infarction in all areas 
of the brain, including the posterior fossa and cortical surface. It also 
identifies intracranial hemorrhage and other abnormalities and, using 
special sequences, can be as sensitive as CT for detecting acute intrace-
rebral hemorrhage. MRI scanners with magnets of higher field strength 
produce more reliable and precise images. Diffusion-weighted imaging 
is more sensitive for early brain infarction than standard MR sequences 
or CT (Fig. 419-13), as is fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) 
imaging (Chap. 416). Using IV administration of gadolinium contrast, 
MR perfusion studies can be performed. Brain regions showing poor 
perfusion but no abnormality on diffusion provide, compared to CT, 
an equivalent measure of the ischemic penumbra. MR angiography 
is highly sensitive for stenosis of extracranial internal carotid arteries 
and of large intracranial vessels. With higher degrees of stenosis, MR 
angiography tends to overestimate the degree of stenosis when com-
pared to conventional x-ray angiography. MRI with fat saturation is an 
imaging sequence used to visualize extra or intracranial arterial dissec-
tion. This sensitive technique images clotted blood within the dissected 
vessel wall. Iron-sensitive imaging (ISI) is helpful to detect cerebral 
microbleeds that may be present in cerebral amyloid angiopathy and 
other hemorrhagic disorders.
MRI is more expensive and time consuming than CT and less readily 
available. Claustrophobia and the logistics of imaging acutely critically 
ill patients also limit its application. Most acute stroke protocols use 
CT because of these limitations. However, MRI is useful outside the 
acute period by more clearly defining the extent of tissue injury and 
discriminating new from old regions of brain infarction. MRI may have 
utility in patients with TIA, because it is also more likely to identify 
new infarction, which is a strong predictor of subsequent stroke.
Cerebral Angiography  Conventional x-ray cerebral angiogra-
phy is the gold standard for identifying and quantifying atherosclerotic 


================================================================================
Ch420 Ischemic Stroke
Pages 3125-3136
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3125 ---

CHAPTER 420 Ischemic Stroke
3079
FIGURE 419-13  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of acute stroke. A. MRI 
diffusion-weighted image (DWI) of an 82-year-old woman 2.5 h after onset of 
right-sided weakness and aphasia reveals restricted diffusion within the left 
basal ganglia and internal capsule (colored regions). B. Perfusion defect within 
the left hemisphere (colored signal) imaged after administration of an IV bolus of 
gadolinium contrast. The discrepancy between the region of poor perfusion shown 
in B and the diffusion deficit shown in A is called diffusion-perfusion mismatch 
and provides an estimate of the ischemic penumbra. Without specific therapy, the 
region of infarction will expand into much or all the perfusion deficit. C. Cerebral 
angiogram of the left internal carotid artery in this patient before (left) and after 
(right) successful endovascular embolectomy. The occlusion is within the carotid 
terminus. D. Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image obtained 3 days later 
showing a region of infarction (coded as white) that corresponds to the initial DWI 
image in A, but not the entire area at risk shown in B, suggesting that successful 
embolectomy saved a large region of brain tissue from infarction. (Courtesy of 
Gregory Albers, MD, Stanford University; with permission.)
stenoses of the cerebral arteries and for identifying and characterizing 
other pathologies, including aneurysms, vasospasm, intraluminal 
thrombi, fibromuscular dysplasia, arteriovenous fistulae, vasculitis, 
and collateral channels of blood flow. Conventional angiography car-
ries risks of arterial damage, groin hemorrhage, embolic stroke, and 
renal failure from contrast nephropathy, so it should be reserved for 
situations where less invasive means are inadequate. Acute stroke 
treatment with endovascular thrombectomy has proven effective in 
ischemic strokes caused by internal carotid terminus or MCA occlu-
sions and has now part of routine clinical practice at centers that have 
this capability (see Chap. 420).
Ultrasound Techniques  Stenosis at the origin of the internal 
carotid artery can be identified and quantified reliably by ultrasonog-
raphy that combines a B-mode ultrasound image with a Doppler 
ultrasound assessment of flow velocity (“duplex” ultrasound). Tran-
scranial Doppler (TCD) assessment of MCA, ACA, and PCA flow and 
of vertebrobasilar flow is also useful. This latter technique can detect 
stenotic lesions in the large intracranial arteries because such lesions 
increase systolic flow velocity. TCD can also detect microemboli from 
otherwise asymptomatic carotid plaques. In many cases, MR angi-
ography combined with carotid and transcranial ultrasound studies 
eliminates the need for conventional x-ray angiography in evaluating 
vascular stenosis. Alternatively, CTA of the entire head and neck can 
be performed during the initial imaging of acute stroke. Because this 
images the entire arterial system relevant to stroke, with the exception 
of the heart, much of the clinician’s stroke workup can be completed 
with this single imaging study.
Perfusion Techniques  Both xenon techniques (principally xenon-CT) 
and positron emission tomography (PET) can quantify cerebral blood 
flow. These tools are generally used for research (Chap. 416) but can 
be useful for determining the significance of arterial stenosis and plan-
ning for revascularization surgery. Single-photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) and MR perfusion techniques report relative 
cerebral blood flow. As noted above, CT imaging is used as the initial 
imaging modality for acute stroke, and some centers combine both 
CTA and CT perfusion imaging together with the noncontrast CT scan. 
CT perfusion imaging increases the sensitivity for detecting ischemia 
and can measure the ischemic penumbra (Fig. 419-12). Alternatively, 
MR perfusion can be combined with MR diffusion imaging to identify 
the ischemic penumbra as the mismatch between these two imaging 
sequences (Fig. 419-13).
■
■FURTHER READING
Caplan LR: Caplan’s Stroke: A Clinical Approach, 5th ed. Cambridge, UK, 
Cambridge University Press, 2016.
Tamutzer AA et al: ED misdiagnosis of cerebrovascular events in the 
era of modern neuroimaging: A meta-analysis. Neurology 88:1468, 
2017.
The clinical diagnosis of stroke is discussed in Chap. 419. Once this 
diagnosis is made, and either a non-contrast CT scan or MRI has been 
performed, rapid reversal of ischemia is paramount. This chapter 
will focus on the stroke treatment timeline and subsequent secondary 
stroke prevention.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF ISCHEMIC STROKE
Acute occlusion of an intracranial vessel causes reduction in blood flow 
to the brain region it supplies. The magnitude of flow reduction is a 
function of collateral blood flow, and this depends on individual vascu-
lar anatomy (which may be altered by disease), the site of occlusion, and 
systemic blood pressure. A decrease in cerebral blood flow to zero causes 
death of brain tissue within 4–10 min; values <16–18 mL/100 g tissue 
per minute cause infarction within an hour; and values <20 mL/100 g 
tissue per minute cause ischemia without infarction unless prolonged 
for several hours or days. If blood flow is restored to ischemic tissue 
before significant infarction develops, the patient may experience 
only transient symptoms, and the clinical syndrome is called a tran-
sient ischemic attack (TIA). Another important concept is the ischemic 
penumbra, defined as the ischemic but reversibly dysfunctional tissue 
surrounding a core area of infarction. The penumbra can be imaged by 
perfusion imaging using MRI or CT (see below and Figs. 419-12 and 
419-13). The ischemic penumbra will eventually progress to infarction 
if no change in flow occurs, and hence saving the ischemic penumbra 
is the goal of revascularization therapies.
Focal cerebral infarction occurs via two distinct pathways (Fig. 420-1): 
(1) a necrotic pathway in which cellular cytoskeletal breakdown is 
rapid, due principally to energy failure of the cell; and (2) an apoptotic 
pathway in which cells become programmed to die. Ischemia produces 
necrosis by starving neurons of glucose and oxygen, which in turn 
results in failure of mitochondria to produce ATP. Without ATP, mem-
brane ion pumps stop functioning and neurons depolarize, allowing 
intracellular calcium to rise. Cellular depolarization also causes glu-
tamate release from synaptic terminals; excess extracellular glutamate 
produces neurotoxicity by activating postsynaptic glutamate receptors 
that increase neuronal calcium influx. Free radicals are produced by deg-
radation of membrane lipids and mitochondrial dysfunction. Free rad-
icals cause catalytic destruction of membranes and likely damage other 
Ischemic Stroke
Wade S. Smith, S. Claiborne Johnston,  
J. Claude Hemphill, III 
420


--- PDF PAGE 3126 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3080
vital functions of cells. Lesser degrees of ischemia, as are seen within 
the ischemic penumbra, favor apoptotic cellular death causing cells to 
die days to weeks later. Fever dramatically worsens brain injury during 
ischemia, as does hyperglycemia (glucose >11.1 mmol/L [200 mg/dL]), 
so it is reasonable to suppress fever and prevent hyperglycemia as much 
as possible. The value of induced mild hypothermia to improve stroke 
outcomes is the subject of continuing clinical research.
TREATMENT
Acute Ischemic Stroke
After the clinical diagnosis of stroke is made, an orderly process of 
evaluation and treatment should follow. The first goal is to prevent 
or reverse brain injury. Attend to the patient’s airway, breathing, 
and circulation (ABCs), and treat hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia 
if identified by finger stick testing. Perform an emergency non-
contrast head CT scan to differentiate between ischemic stroke 
and hemorrhagic stroke; there are no reliable clinical findings that 
conclusively separate ischemia from hemorrhage, although a more 
depressed level of consciousness, higher initial blood pressure, or 
worsening of symptoms after onset favor hemorrhage, and a deficit 
that is maximal at onset, or remits, suggests ischemia. Treatments 
designed to reverse or lessen the amount of tissue infarction and 
improve clinical outcome fall within six categories: (1) medical 
support, (2) IV thrombolysis, (3) endovascular revascularization, (4) 
antithrombotic treatment, (5) neuroprotection, and (6) stroke centers 
and rehabilitation.
MEDICAL SUPPORT
When ischemic stroke occurs, the immediate goal is to optimize 
cerebral perfusion in the surrounding ischemic penumbra. Attention 
is also directed toward preventing the common complications of 
bedridden patients—infections (pneumonia, urinary, and skin) and 
deep-venous thrombosis (DVT) with pulmonary embolism. Sub-
cutaneous heparin (unfractionated and low-molecular-weight) is 
safe and can be used concomitantly. Use of pneumatic compression 
stockings is of proven benefit in reducing risk of DVT and is a safe 
alternative to heparin.
Because collateral blood flow within the ischemic brain may 
be blood pressure dependent, there is controversy about whether 
Glutamate
receptors
Energy failure
Proteolysis
Cell Death
Ca2+/Na+ influx
Ischemia
Reperfusion
PARP
Arterial Occlusion
Glutamate
release
Thrombolysis
Thrombectomy
Mitochondrial
damage
Free radical
formation
Inflammatory
response
Arachidonic acid
production
Membrane and
cytoskeletal breakdown
Apoptosis
Phospholipase
iNOS
Leukocyte
adhesion
Lipolysis
CASCADE OF CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA
FIGURE 420-1  Major steps in the cascade of cerebral ischemia. See text for details. iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; PARP, poly-A ribose polymerase.
blood pressure should be lowered acutely. Blood pressure should be 
reduced if it exceeds 220/120 mmHg, if there is malignant hyper-
tension (Chap. 271), concomitant myocardial ischemia, or if blood 
pressure is >185/110 mmHg and thrombolytic therapy is antici-
pated. When faced with the competing demands of myocardium 
and brain, lowering the heart rate with a β1-adrenergic blocker (such 
as esmolol) can be a first step to decrease cardiac work and maintain 
blood pressure. Routine lowering of blood pressure below the limits 
listed above has the potential to worsen outcomes. Fever is detri-
mental and should be treated with antipyretics and surface cool-
ing. Serum glucose should be monitored and kept <10.0 mmol/L  
(180 mg/dL) using an insulin infusion if necessary, and above at 
least 3.3 mmol/L (60 mg/dL).
Between 5 and 10% of patients develop enough cerebral edema to 
cause obtundation or brain herniation. Edema peaks on the second 
or third day but can cause mass effect for ~10 days. The larger the 
infarct, the greater the likelihood that clinically significant edema 
will develop. Water restriction and IV mannitol may be used to 
raise the serum osmolarity, but hypovolemia should be avoided 
because this may contribute to hypotension and worsening infarc-
tion. Combined analysis of three randomized European trials of 
hemicraniectomy (craniotomy and temporary removal of part of 
the skull) shows that hemicraniectomy reduces mortality by 50%, 
and the clinical outcomes of survivors are significantly improved. 
Older patients (age >60 years) benefit less, but still significantly. The 
size of the diffusion-weighted imaging volume of brain infarction 
during the acute stroke is a predictor of deterioration requiring 
hemicraniectomy.
Special vigilance is warranted for patients with cerebellar infarc-
tion. These strokes may mimic labyrinthitis because of prominent 
vertigo and vomiting; the presence of head or neck pain should alert 
the physician to consider cerebellar stroke due to vertebral artery 
dissection. Even small amounts of cerebellar edema can acutely 
increase intracranial pressure (ICP) by obstructing cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) flow leading to hydrocephalus or by directly com-
pressing the brainstem. The resulting brainstem compression can 
manifest as coma and respiratory arrest and require emergency sur-
gical decompression. Suboccipital decompression is recommended 
in patients with cerebellar infarcts who demonstrate neurological 
deterioration and should be performed before significant brainstem 
compression occurs.


--- PDF PAGE 3127 ---

CHAPTER 420 Ischemic Stroke
3081
INTRAVENOUS THROMBOLYSIS
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
(NINDS) rtPA Stroke Study showed a clear benefit for IV rtPA in 
selected patients with acute stroke. The NINDS study used IV rtPA 
(0.9 mg/kg to a 90-mg maximum; 10% as a bolus, then the remain-
der over 60 min) versus placebo in ischemic stroke within 3 h of 
onset. One-half of the patients were treated within 90 min. Symp-
tomatic intracranial hemorrhage occurred in 6.4% of patients on 
rtPA and 0.6% on placebo. In the rTPA group, there was a significant 
12% absolute increase in the number of patients with only minimal 
disability (32% on placebo and 44% on rtPA) and a nonsignificant 
4% reduction in mortality (21% on placebo and 17% on rtPA). Thus, 
despite an increased incidence of symptomatic intracranial hemor-
rhage, treatment with IV rtPA within 3 h of the onset of ischemic 
stroke improved clinical outcome.
Three subsequent trials of IV rtPA did not confirm this benefit, 
perhaps because of the dose of rtPA used, the timing of its delivery, 
and small sample size. When data from all randomized IV rtPA trails 
were combined, however, efficacy was confirmed in the <3-h time 
window, and efficacy likely extended to 4.5 h and possibly to 6 h. 
Based on these combined results, the European Cooperative Acute 
Stroke Study (ECASS) III explored the safety and efficacy of rtPA in 
the 3- to 4.5-h time window. Unlike the NINDS study, patients aged 
>80 years and diabetic patients with a previous stroke were excluded. 
In this 821-patient randomized study, efficacy was again confirmed, 
although the treatment effect was less robust than in the 0- to 3-h time 
window. In the rtPA group, 52.4% of patients achieved a good out-
come at 90 days, compared to 45.2% of the placebo group (odds ratio 
[OR] 1.34, p = .04). The symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage rate 
was 2.4% in the rtPA group and 0.2% in the placebo group (p = .008).
Based on these data, rtPA is approved in the 3- to 4.5-h window in 
Europe and Canada, but is still only approved for 0–3 h in the United 
States. A dose of 0.6 mg/kg is typically used in Japan and other Asian 
countries based on observation of >600 patients given this lower 
dose, and observing similar outcomes to historical controls and a 
lower rate of intracranial hemorrhage. This dose also mitigates con-
cerns that patients of Asian descent have a higher propensity to bleed 
from most antithrombotic and thrombolytic medications.. Use of IV 
tPA is now considered a central component of primary stroke centers 
(see below). It represents the first treatment proven to improve clini-
cal outcomes in ischemic stroke and is cost-effective and cost-saving. 
Advanced neuroimaging techniques (see Chap. 419) may help to 
select patients beyond the 4.5-h window who will benefit from 
thrombolysis. The time of stroke onset is defined as the time the 
patient’s symptoms were witnessed to begin or the time the patient 
was last seen as normal. Patients who awaken with stroke have the 
onset defined as when they went to bed. Table 420-1 summarizes 
eligibility criteria and instructions for administration of IV rtPA.
ENDOVASCULAR REVASCULARIZATION
Ischemic stroke from large-vessel intracranial occlusion results in 
high rates of mortality and morbidity. Occlusions in such large 
vessels (middle cerebral artery [MCA], intracranial internal carotid 
artery, and the basilar artery) generally involve a large clot volume 
and often fail to open with IV rtPA alone. As proof of concept, 
thrombolytics were tested via an intraarterial route to increase the 
concentration of drug at the clot and minimize systemic bleeding 
complications. The Prolyse in Acute Cerebral Thromboembolism 
(PROACT) II trial found benefit for intraarterial prourokinase in 
acute MCA occlusions up to the sixth hour following onset of stroke. 
Intraarterial treatment of basilar artery occlusions may also be ben-
eficial for selected patients but has not been tested in a randomized 
trial. Intraarterial administration of a thrombolytic agent for acute 
ischemic stroke (AIS) is not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA); however, based on these data many stroke 
centers consider this treatment if more advanced techniques of 
mechanical thrombectomy fail.
Endovascular mechanical thrombectomy has been studied as 
an alternative or adjunctive treatment of acute stroke in patients 
who are ineligible for, or have contraindications to, thrombolyt-
ics or in those who failed to achieve vascular recanalization with 
IV thrombolytics (see Fig. 419-12). First generation thrombectomy 
devices produced promising results with recanalization in observa-
tional studies, leading to FDA approval. Three randomized stroke 
trials published in 2013 concluded that endovascular therapy did 
not improve outcomes, but results may have been influenced by 
methodologic issues: angiography was not required for study entry 
and less effective mechanical devices were employed. In 2015, the 
results of six randomized trials were published, all demonstrating 
that endovascular therapy improved clinical outcomes for inter-
nal carotid and MCA occlusions proven by CTA, under 6 h from 
stroke onset, with or without pretreatment with IV t-PA. One study 
concluded that patients were home nearly 2 months earlier if they 
received endovascular therapy. A combined meta-analysis of all 
1287 patients in these trials confirmed a large benefit with endovas-
cular therapy (OR 2.49, 95% CI 1.76–3.53; p<0.001). The percentage 
of patients who achieved modified Rankin scores of 0–2 (normal or 
symptomatic but independent) was 46% in the endovascular group 
and 26.5% in the medical arm. Mortality was unchanged. As with 
IV t-PA treatment, clinical outcome is dependent on time to effective 
therapy. The odds of a good outcome exceed 3 if groin puncture 
occurs within 2 h of symptom onset, but is only 2 if 8 h elapse. Over 
80% of patients who had vessel opening within 1 h of arrival to the 
Emergency Department had a good outcome, while only one-third 
had a good outcome if 6 h elapsed.
Extending the time window beyond 6 h appears to be effective 
if the patient has specific imaging findings demonstrating good 
vascular collaterals (CT perfusion or MR perfusion techniques,  
see Chap. 419) and can be treated within 24 h; the Clinical Mismatch 
in the Triage of Wake Up and Late Presenting Strokes Undergo-
ing Neurointervention With Trevo (DAWN) trial reported good 
outcomes more frequently with endovascular therapy than with 
medical care alone (47 vs 13%, p<0.0001). The Endovascular Therapy 
Following Imaging Evaluation for Ischemic Stroke 3 (DEFUSE-3) 
trial confirmed these results (45 vs 17%, p<0.001) if treated up to 16 
hours from stroke onset.
TABLE 420-1  Administration of Intravenous Recombinant Tissue 
Plasminogen Activator (rtPA) for Acute Ischemic Stroke (AIS)a
INDICATION
CONTRAINDICATION
Clinical diagnosis of stroke
Onset of symptoms to time of drug 
administration ≤4.5 hb
CT scan showing no hemorrhage or 
edema of >1/3 of the MCA territory
Age 18 ≥ years
Sustained BP >185/110 mmHg 
despite treatment
Bleeding diathesis
Recent head injury or intracerebral 
hemorrhage
Major surgery in preceding 14 days
Gastrointestinal bleeding in preceding 
21 days
Recent myocardial infarction
Administration of rtPA
IV access with two peripheral IV lines (avoid arterial or central line placement)
Review eligibility for rtPA
Administer 0.9 mg/kg IV (maximum 90 mg) IV as 10% of total dose by bolus, 
followed by remainder of total dose over 1 hc
Frequent cuff blood pressure monitoring
No other antithrombotic treatment for 24 h
For decline in neurologic status or uncontrolled blood pressure, stop infusion, 
give cryoprecipitate, and reimage brain emergently
Avoid urethral catheterization for ≥2 h
aSee Activase (tissue plasminogen activator) package insert for complete list of 
contraindications and dosing. bDepending on the country, IV rtPA may be approved 
for up to 4.5 h with additional restrictions. cA dose of 0.6 mg/kg is commonly 
used in Asia (Japan and China) based on randomized data indicating less 
hemorrhage and similar efficacy using this lower-dose.
Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; CT, computed tomography; HCT, hematocrit; 
INR, international normalized ratio; MCA, middle cerebral artery; PTT, partial 
thromboplastin time.


--- PDF PAGE 3128 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3082
Now that endovascular stroke therapy is proven to be effective, 
the creation of comprehensive stroke centers designed to rapidly 
identify and treat patients with large vessel cerebral ischemia are a 
major focus internationally. Creating geographical systems of care 
whereby stroke patients are first evaluated at primary stroke centers 
(which can administer IV t-PA) then transferred to comprehensive 
centers if needed, or directly triaged to comprehensive centers based 
on field assessment, appears to be an effective strategy to improve 
patient outcomes.
ANTITHROMBOTIC TREATMENT
Platelet Inhibition  Aspirin is the only antiplatelet agent that has 
been proven to be effective for the acute treatment of ischemic 
stroke; there are several antiplatelet agents proven for the secondary 
prevention of stroke (see below). Two large trials, the International 
Stroke Trial (IST) and the Chinese Acute Stroke Trial (CAST), found 
that the use of aspirin within 48 h of stroke onset reduced both 
stroke recurrence risk and mortality minimally. Among 19,435 
patients in IST, those allocated to aspirin, 300 mg/d, had slightly 
fewer deaths within 14 days (9.0 vs 9.4%), significantly fewer recur-
rent ischemic strokes (2.8 vs 3.9%), no excess of hemorrhagic strokes 
(0.9 vs 0.8%), and a trend toward a reduction in death or depen-
dence at 6 months (61.2 vs 63.5%). In CAST, 21,106 patients with 
ischemic stroke received 160 mg/d of aspirin or a placebo for up 
to 4 weeks. There were very small reductions in the aspirin group 
in early mortality (3.3 vs 3.9%), recurrent ischemic strokes (1.6 vs 
2.1%), and dependency at discharge or death (30.5 vs 31.6%). These 
trials demonstrate that the use of aspirin in the treatment of AIS is 
safe and produces a small net benefit. For every 1000 acute strokes 
treated with aspirin, about 9 deaths or nonfatal stroke recurrences 
will be prevented in the first few weeks and ~13 fewer patients will 
be dead or dependent at 6 months.
Anticoagulation  Numerous clinical trials have failed to demon-
strate any benefit of routine anticoagulation in the primary treat-
ment of atherothrombotic cerebral ischemia, and have also shown 
an increase in the risk of brain and systemic hemorrhage. Therefore 
the routine use of heparin or other anticoagulants for patients 
with atherothrombotic stroke is not warranted. Heparin and oral 
anticoagulation are likely no more effective than aspirin for stroke 
associated with arterial dissection. However, there may be benefit of 
anticoagulation for halting progression of dural sinus thrombosis.
NEUROPROTECTION
Neuroprotection is the concept of providing a treatment that pro-
longs the brain’s tolerance to ischemia. Drugs that block the exci-
tatory amino acid pathways have been shown to protect neurons 
and glia in animals, but despite multiple human trials, they have 
not yet been proven to be beneficial. Hypothermia is a pow-
erful neuroprotective treatment in patients with cardiac arrest  
(Chap. 301) and is neuroprotective in animal models of stroke, but 
it has not been adequately studied in patients with ischemic stroke 
and is associated with an increase in pneumonia rates that could 
adversely impact stroke outcomes.
STROKE CENTERS AND REHABILITATION
Patient care in stroke units followed by rehabilitation services 
improves neurologic outcomes and reduces mortality. Use of clinical 
pathways and staff dedicated to the stroke patient can improve care. 
This includes use of standardized stroke order sets. Stroke teams 
that provide emergency 24-h evaluation of acute stroke patients for 
acute medical management and consideration of thrombolysis or 
endovascular treatments are essential components of primary and 
comprehensive stroke centers, respectively.
Proper rehabilitation of the stroke patient includes early physical, 
occupational, and speech therapy. It is directed toward educating 
the patient and family about the patient’s neurologic deficit, pre-
venting the complications of immobility (e.g., pneumonia, DVT 
and pulmonary embolism, pressure sores of the skin, and muscle 
contractures), and providing encouragement and instruction in 
overcoming the deficit. Use of pneumatic compression stockings is 
of proven benefit in reducing risk of DVT and is a safe alternative 
to heparin. The goal of rehabilitation is to return the patient home 
and to maximize recovery by providing a safe, progressive regimen 
suited to the individual patient. Additionally, the use of constrained 
movement therapy (immobilizing the unaffected side) has been 
shown to improve hemiparesis following stroke, even years after the 
stroke, suggesting that physical therapy can recruit unused neural 
pathways. Newer robotic therapies appear promising as well. The 
human nervous system is more adaptable than previously thought, 
and developing physical and pharmacologic strategies to enhance 
long-term neural recovery is an active area of research.
■
■ETIOLOGY OF ISCHEMIC STROKE
(Fig. 420-2 and Table 420-2) Although the initial management of 
AIS often does not depend on the etiology, establishing a cause is 
essential to reduce the risk of recurrence. Focus should be on atrial 
fibrillation and carotid atherosclerosis, because these etiologies have 
proven secondary prevention strategies. The clinical presentation and 
examination findings often establish the cause of stroke or narrow the 
possibilities to a few. Judicious use of laboratory testing and imaging 
studies completes the initial evaluation. Nevertheless, nearly 30% of 
strokes remain unexplained despite extensive evaluation.
Clinical examination should focus on the peripheral and cervical 
vascular system (carotid auscultation for bruits and blood pressure), 
the heart (dysrhythmia, murmurs), extremities (peripheral emboli), 
and retina (effects of hypertension and cholesterol emboli [Hollenhorst 
plaques]). A complete neurologic examination is performed to localize 
the anatomic site of stroke. An imaging study of the brain is nearly 
always indicated and is required for patients being considered for 
thrombolysis; it may be combined with CT- or MRI-based angiogra-
phy to visualize the vasculature of the neck and intracranial vessels 
(see “Imaging Studies,” Chap. 419). A chest x-ray, electrocardiogram 
(ECG), urinalysis, complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR), serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, 
blood glucose, serum lipid profile, prothrombin time (PT), and partial 
thromboplastin time (PTT) are often useful and should be considered 
in all patients. An ECG, and subsequent cardiac telemetry, may demon-
strate arrhythmias or reveal evidence of recent myocardial infarction 
(MI). Of all these studies, only brain imaging and capillary blood glu-
cose are necessary prior to IV rtPA; the results of other studies should 
not delay the rapid administration of IV rtPA if the patient is eligible.
Cardioembolic Stroke  Cardioembolism is responsible for ~20% 
of all ischemic strokes. Stroke caused by heart disease is primarily due 
to embolism of thrombotic material forming on the atrial or ventricular 
wall or the left heart valves. These thrombi then detach and embol-
ize into the arterial circulation. The thrombus may fragment or lyse 
quickly, producing only a TIA. Alternatively, the arterial occlusion may 
last longer, producing stroke. Embolic strokes tend to occur suddenly 
with maximum neurologic deficit present at onset. With reperfusion 
following more prolonged ischemia, petechial hemorrhages can occur 
within the ischemic territory. These are usually of no clinical signifi-
cance and should be distinguished from frank intracranial hemorrhage 
into a region of ischemic stroke where the mass effect from the hemor-
rhage can cause a significant decline in neurologic function.
Emboli from the heart most often lodge in the intracranial internal 
carotid artery, the MCA, the posterior cerebral artery (PCA), or one 
of their branches; infrequently, the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) 
is involved. Emboli large enough to occlude the stem of the MCA 
(3–4 mm) or internal carotid terminus lead to large infarcts that involve 
both deep gray and white matter and some portions of the cortical sur-
face and its underlying white matter. A smaller embolus may occlude 
a small cortical or penetrating arterial branch. The location and size 
of an infarct within a vascular territory depend on the extent of the 
collateral circulation.
The most significant cause of cardioembolic stroke in most of 
the world is nonrheumatic (often called nonvalvular) atrial fibrilla-
tion. MI, prosthetic valves, rheumatic heart disease, and ischemic 


--- PDF PAGE 3129 ---

CHAPTER 420 Ischemic Stroke
3083
cardiomyopathy are other considerations (Table 420-2). Cardiac dis-
orders causing brain embolism are discussed in the chapters on heart 
diseases, but a few pertinent aspects are highlighted here.
Nonrheumatic atrial fibrillation is the most common cause of cere-
bral embolism overall. The presumed stroke mechanism is thrombus 
formation in the fibrillating atrium or atrial appendage, with subse-
quent embolization. Patients with atrial fibrillation have an average 
annual risk of stroke of ~5%. The risk of stroke can be estimated by cal-
culating the CHA2DS2-VASc score (Table 420-3). Left atrial enlargement 
is an additional risk factor for formation of atrial thrombi. Rheumatic 
heart disease usually causes ischemic stroke when there is prominent 
mitral stenosis or atrial fibrillation. Recent MI may be a source of 
emboli, especially when transmural and involving the anteroapical 
ventricular wall, and prophylactic anticoagulation following MI has 
been shown to reduce stroke risk. Mitral valve prolapse is not usually 
a source of emboli unless the prolapse is severe.
Paradoxical embolization occurs when venous thrombi migrate to 
the arterial circulation, usually via a patent foramen ovale (PFO) or 
atrial septal defect. Bubble-contrast echocardiography (IV injection 
of agitated saline coupled with either transthoracic or transesopha-
geal echocardiography) can demonstrate a right-to-left cardiac shunt, 
revealing the conduit for paradoxical embolization. Alternatively, a 
right-to-left shunt is implied if immediately following IV injection of 
agitated saline, the ultrasound signature of bubbles is observed during 
transcranial Doppler insonation of the MCA; pulmonary arteriovenous 
malformations should be considered if this test is positive yet an 
echocardiogram fails to reveal an intracardiac shunt. Both techniques 
are highly sensitive for detection of right-to-left shunts. Besides venous 
clot, fat and tumor emboli, bacterial endocarditis, IV air, and amniotic 
fluid emboli at childbirth may occasionally be responsible for para-
doxical embolization. The importance of a PFO as a cause of stroke is 
debated, particularly because they are present in ~15% of the general 
population. Some studies have suggested that the risk is only elevated 
in the presence of a coexisting atrial septal aneurysm. The presence of 
a venous source of embolus, most commonly a deep-venous throm-
bus, may provide confirmation of the importance of a PFO with an 
accompanying right-to-left shunt in a particular case. Two recent trials 
found about a 1% per year absolute reduction in stroke risk using per-
cutaneous occlusion devices in patients with no other explanation for 
their stroke.
Bacterial endocarditis can be a source of valvular vegetations that 
give rise to septic emboli. The appearance of multifocal symptoms 
and signs in a patient with stroke makes bacterial endocarditis more 
likely. Infarcts of microscopic size occur, and large septic infarcts may 
evolve into brain abscesses or cause hemorrhage into the infarct, which 
generally precludes use of anticoagulation or thrombolytics. Mycotic 
aneurysms caused by septic emboli may also present as subarachnoid 
hemorrhage (SAH) or intracerebral hemorrhage.
Artery-to-Artery Embolic Stroke 
Thrombus formation on 
atherosclerotic plaques may embolize to intracranial arteries producing 
an artery-to-artery embolic stroke. Less commonly, a diseased vessel 
may acutely thrombose. Unlike the myocardial vessels, artery-to-artery 
embolism, rather than local thrombosis, appears to be the dominant 
vascular mechanism causing large-vessel brain ischemia. Any diseased 
vessel may be an embolic source, including the aortic arch, common 
carotid, internal carotid, vertebral, and basilar arteries.
CAROTID ATHEROSCLEROSIS  Atherosclerosis within the carotid artery 
occurs most frequently within the common carotid bifurcation and 
proximal internal carotid artery; the carotid siphon (portion within 
the cavernous sinus) is also vulnerable to atherosclerosis. Male gender, 
older age, smoking, hypertension, diabetes, and hypercholesterolemia 
are risk factors for carotid disease, as they are for stroke in general 
(Table 420-4). Carotid atherosclerosis produces an estimated 10% of 
ischemic stroke. For further discussion of the pathogenesis of athero-
sclerosis, see Chap. 232.
Carotid disease can be classified by whether the stenosis is symp-
tomatic or asymptomatic and by the degree of stenosis (percent nar-
rowing of the narrowest segment compared to a nondiseased segment). 
Symptomatic carotid disease implies that the patient has experienced 
a stroke or TIA within the vascular distribution of the artery, and it is 
associated with a greater risk of subsequent stroke than asymptomatic 
Left ventricular
thrombi
Valve disease
Atrial fibrillation
Flow
reducing
carotid
stenosis
External
carotid
Common
carotid
Internal
carotid
Cardiogenic
emboli
Carotid
plaque with
arteriogenic
emboli
Intracranial
atherosclerosis
Penetrating
artery disease
A
B
C
FIGURE 420-2  Pathophysiology of ischemic stroke. A. Diagram illustrating the three major mechanisms that underlie ischemic stroke: (1) occlusion of an intracranial 
vessel by an embolus that arises at a distant site (e.g., cardiogenic sources such as atrial fibrillation or artery-to-artery emboli from carotid atherosclerotic plaque), 
often affecting the large intracranial vessels; (2) in situ thrombosis of an intracranial vessel, typically affecting the small penetrating arteries that arise from the major 
intracranial arteries; (3) hypoperfusion caused by flow-limiting stenosis of a major extracranial (e.g., internal carotid) or intracranial vessel, often producing “watershed” 
ischemia. B. and C. Diagram and reformatted computed tomography angiogram of the common, internal, and external carotid arteries. High-grade stenosis of the 
internal carotid artery, which may be associated with either cerebral emboli or flow-limiting ischemia, was identified in this patient.


--- PDF PAGE 3130 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3084
TABLE 420-3  Recommendations on Chronic Use of Antithrombotics 
for Various Cardiac Conditions
CONDITION
RECOMMENDATION
Nonvalvular atrial fibrillation
Calculate CHA2DS2-VASc scorea
•  CHA2DS2-VASc score of 0
Aspirin or no antithrombotic
•  CHA2DS2-VASc score of 1
Aspirin or OAC
•  CHA2DS2-VASc score of 2 or greater
OAC
Rheumatic mitral valve disease
•  With atrial fibrillation, previous 
embolization, or atrial appendage 
thrombus, or left atrial diameter  
>55 mm
OAC
•  Embolization or appendage clot 
despite OAC
OAC plus aspirin
Mitral valve prolapse
•  Asymptomatic
No therapy
•  With otherwise cryptogenic stroke or 
TIA
Aspirin
•  Atrial fibrillation
OAC
Mitral annular calcification
•  Without atrial fibrillation but systemic 
embolization, or otherwise cryptogenic 
stroke or TIA
Aspirin
•  Recurrent embolization despite aspirin
OAC
•  With atrial fibrillation
OAC
Aortic valve calcification
•  Asymptomatic
No therapy
•  Otherwise cryptogenic stroke or TIA
Aspirin
Aortic arch mobile atheroma
•  Otherwise cryptogenic stroke or TIA
Aspirin or OAC
Patent foramen ovale
•  Otherwise cryptogenic ischemic stroke 
or TIA
Aspirin or closure with device
•  Indication for OAC (deep-venous 
thrombosis or hypercoagulable state)
OAC
Mechanical heart value
•  Aortic position, bileaflet or Medtronic 
Hall tilting disk with normal left atrial 
size and sinus rhythm
VKA INR 2.5, range 2–3
•  Mitral position tilting disk or bileaflet 
valve
VKA INR 3.0, range 2.5–3.5
•  Mitral or aortic position, anterior-
apical myocardial infarct or left atrial 
enlargement
VKA INR 3.0, range 2.5–3.5
•  Mitral or aortic position, with atrial 
fibrillation, or hypercoagulable state, or 
low ejection fraction, or atherosclerotic 
vascular disease
Aspirin plus VKA INR 3.0, range 
2.5–3.5
•  Systemic embolization despite target 
INR
Add aspirin and/or increase INR: 
prior target was 2.5 increase to 
3.0, range 2.5–3.5; prior target 
was 3.0 increase to 3.5, range 3–4
Bioprosthetic valve
•  No other indication for VKA therapy
Aspirin
Infective endocarditis
Avoid antithrombotic agents
Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis
•  With systemic embolization
Full-dose unfractionated heparin or 
SC LMWH
aCHA2DS2-VASc score is calculated as follows: 1 point for Congestive heart failure, 
1 point for Hypertension, 2 points for Age ≥ 75 y, 1 point for Diabetes mellitus,  
2 points for Stroke or TIA, 1 point for Vascular disease (prior MI, peripheral 
vascular disease or aortic plaque), 1 point for Age 65–74 y, 1 point for female 
Sex category; sum of point is the total bCHA2DS2-VASc score.
Note: Dose of aspirin is 50–325 mg/d; target INR for OAC is between 2 and 3 
unless otherwise specified.
Abbreviations: INR, international normalized ratio; LMWH, low-molecular-weight 
heparin; OAC, oral anticoagulant (VKA, thrombin inhibitor, or oral factor Xa 
inhibitors); TIA, transient ischemic attack; VKA, vitamin K antagonist.
Sources: Modified from DE Singer et al: Chest 133:546S, 2008; DN Salem et al: 
Chest 133:593S, 2008; CT January et al: JACC 64:2246, 2014.
TABLE 420-2  Causes of Ischemic Stroke
COMMON CAUSES
UNCOMMON CAUSES
Thrombosis
  Lacunar stroke (small vessel)
  Large-vessel thrombosis
  Dehydration
Embolic occlusion
  Artery-to-artery
    Carotid bifurcation
    Aortic arch
    Arterial dissection
  Cardioembolic
    Atrial fibrillation
    Mural thrombus
    Myocardial infarction
    Dilated cardiomyopathy
    Valvular lesions
    Mitral stenosis
    Mechanical valve
    Bacterial endocarditis
  Paradoxical embolus
    Atrial septal defect
    Patent foramen ovale
  Atrial septal aneurysm
  Spontaneous echo contrast
  Stimulant drugs: cocaine, 
amphetamine
Hypercoagulable disorders
  Protein C deficiencya
  Protein S deficiencya
  Antithrombin III deficiencya
  Antiphospholipid syndrome
  Factor V Leiden mutationa
  Prothrombin G20210 mutationa
  Systemic malignancy
  Sickle cell anemia
  β Thalassemia
  Polycythemia vera
  Systemic lupus erythematosus
  Homocysteinemia
  Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura
  Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation
  Dysproteinemiasa
  Nephrotic syndromea
  Inflammatory bowel diseasea
  Oral contraceptives
Venous sinus thrombosisb
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Vasculitis
  Systemic vasculitis (PAN, 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
[Wegener’s], Takayasu’s, giant cell 
arteritis)
  Primary CNS vasculitis
  Meningitis (syphilis, tuberculosis, 
fungal, bacterial, zoster)
Noninflammatory vasculopathy
  Reversible vasoconstriction 
syndrome
  Fabry’s disease
  Angiocentric lymphoma
Cardiogenic
  Mitral valve calcification
  Atrial myxoma
  Intracardiac tumor
  Marantic endocarditis
  Libman-Sacks endocarditis
Subarachnoid hemorrhage vasospasm
Moyamoya disease
Eclampsia
aChiefly cause venous sinus thrombosis. bMay be associated with any 
hypercoagulable disorder.
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; PAN, polyarteritis nodosa.
stenosis, in which the patient is symptom free and the stenosis is 
detected through screening. Greater degrees of arterial narrowing are 
generally associated with a higher risk of stroke, except that those with 
near occlusions are at lower risk of stroke.
OTHER CAUSES OF ARTERY-TO-ARTERY EMBOLIC STROKE  Intracranial ath-
erosclerosis produces stroke either by an embolic mechanism or by in 
situ thrombosis of a diseased vessel. It is more common in patients of 
Asian and African-American descent. Recurrent stroke risk is ~15% per 
year, similar to untreated symptomatic carotid atherosclerosis.
Dissection of the internal carotid or vertebral arteries or even vessels 
beyond the circle of Willis is a common source of embolic stroke in 
young (age <60 years) patients. The dissection is usually painful and 
precedes the stroke by several hours or days. Extracranial dissections 
do not cause hemorrhage, presumably because of the tough adventitia 


--- PDF PAGE 3131 ---

CHAPTER 420 Ischemic Stroke
3085
of these vessels. Intracranial dissections, conversely, may produce SAH 
because the adventitia of intracranial vessels is thin and pseudoan-
eurysms may form, requiring urgent treatment to prevent rerupture. 
Treating asymptomatic pseudoaneurysms following dissection is likely 
not necessary. The cause of dissection is usually unknown, and recur-
rence is rare. Ehlers-Danlos type IV, Marfan’s disease, cystic medial 
necrosis, and fibromuscular dysplasia are associated with dissections. 
Trauma (usually a motor vehicle accident or a sports injury) can cause 
carotid and vertebral artery dissections. Spinal manipulative therapy is 
associated with vertebral artery dissection and stroke. Most dissections 
heal spontaneously, and stroke or TIA is uncommon beyond 2 weeks. 
A recent trial showed no difference in stroke prevention with aspirin 
compared to anticoagulation, with a low recurrent stroke rate of 2%.
■
■SMALL-VESSEL STROKE
The term lacunar infarction refers to infarction following atherothrom-
botic or lipohyalinotic occlusion of a small artery in the brain. The term 
small-vessel stroke denotes occlusion of such a small penetrating artery 
and is now the preferred term. Small-vessel strokes account for ~20% 
of all strokes.
Pathophysiology  The MCA stem, the arteries comprising the 
circle of Willis (A1 segment, anterior and posterior communicating 
arteries, and P1 segment), and the basilar and vertebral arteries all give 
rise to 30- to 300-μm branches that penetrate the deep gray and white 
matter of the cerebrum or brainstem (Fig. 420-3). Each of these small 
branches can occlude either by atherothrombotic disease at its origin 
or by the development of lipohyalinotic thickening. Thrombosis of 
these vessels causes small infarcts that are referred to as lacunes (Latin 
for “lake” of fluid noted at autopsy). These infarcts range in size from 
3 mm to 2 cm in diameter. Hypertension and age are the principal risk 
factors.
Clinical Manifestations  The most common small-vessel stroke 
syndromes are the following: (1) Pure motor hemiparesis from an infarct 
in the posterior limb of the internal capsule or the pons; the face, arm, 
and leg are almost always involved; (2) pure sensory stroke from an 
infarct in the ventral thalamus; (3) ataxic hemiparesis from an infarct 
in the ventral pons or internal capsule; (4) and dysarthria and a clumsy 
hand or arm due to infarction in the ventral pons or in the genu of the 
internal capsule.
Transient symptoms (small-vessel TIAs) may herald a small-vessel 
infarct; they may occur several times a day and last only a few minutes. 
Recovery from small-vessel strokes tends to be more rapid and com-
plete than recovery from large-vessel strokes; in some cases, however, 
there is severe permanent disability.
A large-vessel source (either thrombosis or embolism) may manifest 
initially as a small-vessel infarction. Therefore, the search for embolic 
sources (carotid and heart) should not be completely abandoned in 
the evaluation of these patients. Secondary prevention of small-vessel 
stroke involves risk factor modification, specifically reduction in blood 
TABLE 420-4  Risk Factors for Stroke
RISK FACTOR
RELATIVE RISK
RELATIVE RISK REDUCTION WITH 
TREATMENT
NUMBER NEEDED TO TREATa
PRIMARY PREVENTION
SECONDARY PREVENTION
Hypertension
2–5
38%
100–300
50–100
Atrial fibrillation
1.8–2.9
68% warfarin, 21% aspirin
20–83
13
Diabetes
1.8–6
No proven effect
Smoking
1.8
50% at 1 year, baseline risk at  
5 years postcessation
Hyperlipidemia
1.8–2.6
16–30%
560
230
Asymptomatic carotid stenosis
2.0
53%
85
N/A
Symptomatic carotid stenosis 
(70–99%)
65% at 2 years
N/A
12
Symptomatic carotid stenosis 
(50–69%)
29% at 5 years
N/A
77
aNumber needed to treat to prevent one stroke annually. Prevention of other cardiovascular outcomes is not considered here.
Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.
pressure (see “Treatment: Primary and Secondary Prevention of Stroke 
and TIA,” below).
■
■LESS COMMON CAUSES OF STROKE
(Table 420-2) Hypercoagulable disorders (Chap. 61) primarily increase 
the risk of cortical vein or cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. Systemic 
lupus erythematosus with Libman-Sacks endocarditis can be a cause 
of embolic stroke. These conditions overlap with the antiphospholipid 
syndrome, which probably requires long-term anticoagulation to 
prevent further stroke. Homocysteinemia may cause arterial throm-
boses as well; this disorder is caused by various mutations in the 
homocysteine pathways and responds to different forms of cobalamin 
depending on the mutation.
Venous sinus thrombosis of the lateral or sagittal sinus or of small 
cortical veins (cortical vein thrombosis) occurs as a complication of oral 
contraceptive use, pregnancy and the postpartum period, inflamma-
tory bowel disease, intracranial infections (meningitis), and dehydra-
tion. It is also seen in patients with laboratory-confirmed thrombophilia 
including antiphospholipid syndrome, polycythemia, sickle cell ane-
mia, deficiencies of proteins C and S, factor V Leiden mutation 
(resistance to activated protein C), antithrombin III deficiency, homo-
cysteinemia, and the prothrombin G20210 mutation. Women who take 
oral contraceptives and have the prothrombin G20210 mutation may 
be at particularly high risk for sinus thrombosis. Patients present with 
headache and may also have focal neurologic signs (especially parapa-
resis) and seizures. Often, CT imaging is normal unless an intracranial 
venous hemorrhage has occurred, but the venous sinus occlusion is 
readily visualized using magnetic resonance (MR) or CT venography 
or conventional x-ray angiography. With greater degrees of sinus 
thrombosis, the patient may develop signs of increased ICP and coma. 
Intravenous heparin, regardless of the presence of intracranial hemor-
rhage, reduces morbidity and mortality, and the long-term outcome 
is generally good. Heparin prevents further thrombosis and reduces 
venous hypertension and ischemia. If an underlying hypercoagulable 
state is not found, many physicians treat with vitamin K antagonists 
(VKAs) for 3–6 months and then convert to aspirin, depending on the 
degree of resolution of the venous sinus thrombus. Anticoagulation is 
often continued indefinitely if thrombophilia is diagnosed.
Sickle cell anemia (SS disease) is a common cause of stroke in children. 
A subset of homozygous carriers of this hemoglobin mutation develop 
stroke in childhood, and this may be predicted by documenting 
high-velocity blood flow within the MCAs using transcranial Doppler 
ultrasonography. In children who are identified to have high velocities, 
treatment with aggressive exchange transfusion dramatically reduces 
risk of stroke, and if exchange transfusion is ceased, their stroke rate 
increases again along with MCA velocities.
Fibromuscular dysplasia affects the cervical arteries and occurs mainly 
in women. The carotid or vertebral arteries show multiple rings of 
segmental narrowing alternating with dilatation. Vascular occlusion is 
usually incomplete. The process is often asymptomatic but occasionally 


--- PDF PAGE 3132 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3086
Anterior cerebral a.
Anterior cerebral a.
Internal carotid a.
Basilar a.
Basilar a.
Vertebral a.
Vertebral a.
Internal
carotid a.
Middle cerebral a.
Deep branches
of the basilar a.
Middle cerebral a.
Deep branches of the
middle cerebral a.
FIGURE 420-3  Diagrams and reformatted computed tomography (CT) angiograms in the coronal section 
illustrating the deep penetrating arteries involved in small-vessel strokes. In the anterior circulation, small 
penetrating arteries called lenticulostriates arise from the proximal portion of the anterior and middle cerebral 
arteries and supply deep subcortical structures (upper panels). In the posterior circulation, similar arteries arise 
directly from the vertebral and basilar arteries to supply the brainstem (lower panels). Occlusion of a single 
penetrating artery gives rise to a discrete area of infarct (pathologically termed a “lacune,” or lake). Note that 
these vessels are too small to be visualized on CT angiography.
is associated with an audible bruit, TIAs, or stroke. Involvement 
of the renal arteries is common and may cause hypertension. The 
cause and natural history of fibromuscular dysplasia are unknown 
(Chap. 275). TIA or stroke generally occurs only when the artery is 
severely narrowed or dissects. Anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy 
may be helpful.
Temporal (giant cell) arteritis (Chap. 356) is a relatively common 
affliction of elderly individuals in which the external carotid system, 
particularly the temporal arteries, undergo subacute granulomatous 
inflammation with giant cells. Occlusion of posterior ciliary arteries 
derived from the ophthalmic artery results in blindness in one or both 
eyes and can be prevented with glucocorticoids. It rarely causes stroke 
because the internal carotid artery is usually not inflamed. Idiopathic 
giant cell arteritis involving the great vessels arising from the aortic 
arch (Takayasu’s arteritis) may cause carotid or vertebral thrombosis; it 
is rare in the Western Hemisphere.
Necrotizing (or granulomatous) arteritis, occurring alone or in asso-
ciation with generalized polyarteritis nodosa or granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (Wegener’s), involves the distal small branches (<2 mm 
diameter) of the main intracranial arteries and produces small ische-
mic infarcts in the brain, optic nerve, and spinal cord. The CSF often 
shows pleocytosis, and the protein level is elevated. Primary central 
nervous system vasculitis is rare; small or medium-sized vessels are 
usually affected, without apparent systemic 
vasculitis. The differential diagnosis includes 
other inflammatory vasculopathies including 
infection (tuberculous, fungal), sarcoidosis, 
angiocentric lymphoma, carcinomatous men-
ingitis, and noninflammatory causes such 
as atherosclerosis, emboli, connective tissue 
disease, vasospasm, migraine-associated vas-
culopathy, and drug-associated causes. Some 
cases develop in the postpartum period and 
are self-limited.
Patients with any form of vasculopathy 
may present with insidious progression of 
combined white and gray matter infarc-
tions, prominent headache, and cognitive 
decline. Brain biopsy or high-resolution 
conventional x-ray angiography is usually 
required to make the diagnosis (Fig. 420-4). 
An inflammatory profile (elevated WBCs, 
elevated IgG index, bands on electropho-
resis) found on lumbar puncture favors an 
inflammatory cause. In cases where inflam-
mation is confirmed, aggressive immuno-
suppression with glucocorticoids, and often 
cyclophosphamide, is usually necessary to 
prevent progression; a diligent investigation 
for infectious causes such as tuberculosis is 
essential prior to immunosuppression. With 
prompt recognition and treatment, many 
patients can make an excellent recovery.
Drugs, in particular amphetamines and 
perhaps cocaine, may cause stroke on the 
basis of acute hypertension or drug-induced 
vasculopathy. This vasculopathy is com-
monly due to vasospasm or atherosclerosis 
but cases of inflammatory vasculitis have 
also been reported. No data exist on the 
value of any treatment, but cessation of stim-
ulants is prudent. Phenylpropanolamine has 
been linked with intracranial hemorrhage, 
as has cocaine and methamphetamine, per-
haps related to a drug-induced vasculopa-
thy. Moyamoya disease is a poorly understood 
occlusive disease involving large intracra-
nial arteries, especially the distal internal 
carotid artery and the stem of the MCA and 
FIGURE 420-4  Cerebral angiogram from a 32-year-old male with central nervous 
system vasculopathy. Dramatic beading (arrows) typical of vasculopathy is seen.


--- PDF PAGE 3133 ---

CHAPTER 420 Ischemic Stroke
3087
ACA. Vascular inflammation is absent. The lenticulostriate arteries 
develop a rich collateral circulation around the occlusive lesion, which 
gives the impression of a “puff of smoke” (moyamoya in Japanese) on 
conventional x-ray angiography. Other collaterals include transdural 
anastomoses between the cortical surface branches of the meningeal 
and scalp arteries. The disease occurs mainly in Asian children or 
young adults, but the appearance may be identical in adults who have 
atherosclerosis, particularly in association with diabetes. Intracranial 
hemorrhage may result from rupture of the moyamoya collaterals; 
thus, anticoagulation is risky. Progressive occlusion of large surface 
arteries can occur, producing large-artery distribution strokes. Surgical 
bypass of extracranial carotid arteries to the dura or MCAs may pre-
vent stroke and hemorrhage.
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) can occur with 
head injury, seizure, migraine, sympathomimetic drug use, eclampsia, 
and in the postpartum period. The pathophysiology is uncertain but 
likely involves a hyperperfusion state where blood pressure exceeds 
the upper limit of cerebral autoregulation resulting in cerebral edema 
(Chap. 301). Patients complain of headache and manifest fluctuating 
neurologic symptoms and signs, especially visual symptoms. Some-
times cerebral infarction ensues, but typically the clinical and imaging 
findings reverse completely. MRI findings are characteristic with the 
edema present within the occipital lobes but can be generalized and 
do not respect any single vascular territory. A closely related reversible 
cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (RCVS) typically presents with sud-
den, severe headache closely mimicking SAH. Patients may experience 
ischemic infarction and intracerebral hemorrhage and typically have 
new-onset, severe hypertension. Conventional x-ray angiography 
reveals changes in the vascular caliber throughout the hemispheres 
resembling vasculitis, but the process is noninflammatory. Oral cal-
cium channel blockers may be effective in producing remission, and 
recurrence is rare.
Leukoaraiosis, or periventricular white matter disease, is the result of 
multiple small-vessel infarcts within the subcortical white matter. It 
is readily seen on CT or MRI scans as areas of white matter injury 
surrounding the ventricles and within the corona radiata. The patho-
physiologic basis of the disease is lipohyalinosis of small penetrating 
arteries within the white matter, likely produced by chronic hyperten-
sion. Patients with periventricular white matter disease may develop 
a subcortical dementia syndrome, and it is likely that this common 
form of dementia may be delayed or prevented with antihypertensive 
medications (Chap. 425).
CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcor-
tical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy) is an inherited disorder that 
presents as small-vessel strokes, progressive dementia, and extensive 
symmetric white matter changes often including the anterior temporal 
lobes visualized by MRI. Approximately 40% of patients have migraine 
with aura, often manifest as transient motor or sensory deficits. Onset 
is usually in the fourth or fifth decade of life. This autosomal dominant 
condition is caused by one of several mutations in Notch-3, a member 
of a highly conserved gene family characterized by epidermal growth 
factor repeats in its extracellular domain. Other monogenic ischemic 
stroke syndromes include cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy 
with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL) and 
hereditary endotheliopathy, retinopathy, nephropathy, and stroke 
(HERNS). Fabry’s disease also produces both a large-vessel arterio-
pathy and small-vessel infarctions. The COL4A1 mutation is associated 
with multiple small vessel strokes with hemorrhagic transformation.
■
■TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ATTACKS
TIAs are episodes of stroke symptoms that last only briefly; the stan-
dard definition of duration is <24 h, but most TIAs last <1 h. If a rele-
vant brain infarction is identified on brain imaging, the clinical entity 
is now classified as stroke regardless of the duration of symptoms. A 
normal brain imaging study following a TIA does not rule-out TIA; 
rather, the clinical syndrome is diagnostic. The causes of TIA are similar 
to the causes of ischemic stroke, but because TIAs may herald stroke, 
they are an important risk factor that should be considered separately 
and urgently. TIAs may arise from emboli to the brain or from in situ 
thrombosis of an intracranial vessel. With a TIA, the occluded blood 
vessel reopens and neurologic function is restored.
The risk of stroke after a TIA is ~10–15% in the first 3 months, with 
most events occurring in the first 2 days. This risk can be directly esti-
mated using the well-validated ABCD2 score (Table 420-5). Therefore, 
urgent evaluation and treatment are justified. Because etiologies for 
stroke and TIA are identical, evaluation for TIA should parallel that 
of stroke (Fig. 420-2). The improvement characteristic of TIA is a con-
traindication to thrombolysis. However, because the risk of subsequent 
stroke in the first few days after a TIA is high, the opportunity to give 
rtPA rapidly if a subsequent stroke occurs may justify hospital admis-
sion for most patients. The combination of aspirin and clopidogrel was 
found to prevent stroke following TIA better than aspirin alone in a 
large Chinese randomized trial and is undergoing similar evaluation 
in an ongoing National Institutes of Health (NIH)-sponsored trial 
(POINT study). Failure to respond to the combination of aspirin and 
clopidogrel is linked to carriage of a common CYP2C19 polymorphism 
that leads to poor metabolism of clopidogrel into its active form. This 
mutation is common, particularly in Asians.
TREATMENT
Primary and Secondary Prevention of Stroke and TIA
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Many medical and surgical interventions, as well as lifestyle mod-
ifications, are available for preventing stroke. Some of these can be 
widely applied because of their low cost and minimal risk; others are 
expensive and carry substantial risk but may be valuable for selected 
high-risk patients. Identification and control of modifiable risk fac-
tors, and especially hypertension, is the best strategy to reduce the 
burden of stroke, and the total number of strokes could be reduced 
substantially by these means (Table 420-4).
ATHEROSCLEROSIS RISK FACTORS
The relationship of various factors to the risk of atherosclerosis is 
described in Chaps. 232 and 233. Older age, diabetes mellitus, hyper-
tension, tobacco smoking, abnormal blood cholesterol (particularly, 
low high-density lipoprotein [HDL] and/or elevated low-density 
lipoprotein [LDL]), and other factors are either proven or probable 
TABLE 420-5  Risk of Stroke Following Transient Ischemic Attack: The 
ABCD2 Score
CLINICAL FACTOR
SCORE
A: Age ≥60 years
1
B: SBP >140 mmHg or DBP >90 mmHg
1
C: Clinical symptoms
  Unilateral weakness
2
  Speech disturbance without weakness
1
D: Duration
  >60 min
2
  10–59 min
1
D: Diabetes (oral medications or insulin)
1
TOTAL SCORE
SUM EACH CATEGORY
ABCD2 Score Total
3-Month Rate of Stroke (%)a
0
0
1
2
2
3
3
3
4
8
5
12
6
17
7
22
aData ranges are from five cohorts.
Abbreviations: DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP, systolic blood pressure.
Source: SC Johnston et al: Validation and refinement of score to predict very early 
stroke risk after transient ischaemic attack. Lancet 369:283, 2007.


--- PDF PAGE 3134 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3088
risk factors for ischemic stroke, largely by their link to atherosclero-
sis. Risk of stroke is much greater in those with prior stroke or TIA. 
Many cardiac conditions predispose to stroke, including atrial fibril-
lation and recent MI. Oral contraceptives and hormone replacement 
therapy increase stroke risk, and although rare, certain inherited and 
acquired hypercoagulable states predispose to stroke.
Hypertension is the most significant of the risk factors; in general, 
all hypertension should be treated to a target of <130/80 mmHg. 
Recent data (the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial—SPRINT) 
suggest that lowering systolic blood pressure <120 mmHg reduces 
stroke and heart attack 43% compared to systolic blood pressure 
<140 mmHg, without an increased risk of syncope or falls. The 
presence of known cerebrovascular disease is not a contraindication 
to treatment aimed at achieving normotension. Data are particularly 
strong in support of thiazide diuretics and angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors.
Several trials have confirmed that statin drugs reduce the risk 
of stroke even in patients without elevated LDL or low HDL. The 
Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol Levels 
(SPARCL) trial showed benefit in secondary stroke reduction for 
patients with recent stroke or TIA who were prescribed atorvastatin, 
80 mg/d. The primary prevention trial, Justification for the Use of 
Statins in Prevention: An Intervention Trial Evaluating Rosuvastatin 
(JUPITER), found that patients with low LDL (<130 mg/dL) caused 
by elevated C-reactive protein benefitted by daily use of this statin. 
Primary stroke occurrence was reduced by 51% (hazard ratio 0.49, 
p = .004), and there was no increase in the rates of intracranial 
hemorrhage. Meta-analysis has also supported a primary treatment 
effect for statins given acutely for ischemic stroke. Therefore, a statin 
should be considered in all patients with prior ischemic stroke. 
Tobacco smoking should be discouraged in all patients (Chap. 448). 
The use of pioglitazone (an agonist of peroxisome proliferator- 
activated receptor gamma) in patients with type 2 diabetes and pre-
vious stroke does not lower stroke, MI, or vascular death rates, but is 
effective in lowering vascular events patients with stroke and insulin 
resistance alone. Diabetes prevention is likely the most effective 
strategy for primary and secondary stroke prevention.
ANTIPLATELET AGENTS FOR STROKE PREVENTION
Platelet antiaggregation agents can prevent atherothrombotic events, 
including TIA and stroke, by inhibiting the formation of intraar-
terial platelet aggregates. These can form on diseased arteries, 
induce thrombus formation, and occlude or embolize into the distal 
circulation. Aspirin, clopidogrel, and the combination of aspirin 
plus extended-release dipyridamole are the antiplatelet agents most 
commonly used for this purpose. Ticlopidine has been largely aban-
doned because of its adverse effects but may be used as an alterna-
tive to clopidogrel. Ticagrelor has not been found to be better than 
aspirin for stroke prevention.
Aspirin is the most widely studied antiplatelet agent. Aspirin 
acetylates platelet cyclooxygenase, which irreversibly inhibits the 
formation in platelets of thromboxane A2, a platelet aggregating and 
vasoconstricting prostaglandin. This effect is permanent and lasts 
for the usual 8-day life of the platelet. Paradoxically, aspirin also 
inhibits the formation in endothelial cells of prostacyclin, an antiag-
gregating and vasodilating prostaglandin. This effect is transient. As 
soon as aspirin is cleared from the blood, the nucleated endothelial 
cells again produce prostacyclin. Aspirin in low doses given once 
daily inhibits the production of thromboxane A2 in platelets without 
substantially inhibiting prostacyclin formation. Higher doses of 
aspirin have not been proven to be more effective than lower doses.
Ticlopidine and clopidogrel block the adenosine diphosphate 
(ADP) receptor on platelets and thus prevent the cascade result-
ing in activation of the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor that leads to 
fibrinogen binding to the platelet and consequent platelet aggrega-
tion. Ticlopidine is more effective than aspirin; however, it has the 
disadvantage of causing diarrhea, skin rash, and, in rare instances, 
neutropenia and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). 
Clopidogrel rarely causes TTP but does not cause neutropenia. The 
Clopidogrel versus Aspirin in Patients at Risk of Ischemic Events 
(CAPRIE) trial, which led to FDA approval, found that it was only 
marginally more effective than aspirin in reducing risk of stroke. 
The Management of Atherothrombosis with Clopidogrel in High-
Risk Patients (MATCH) trial was a large multicenter, randomized, 
double-blind study that compared clopidogrel in combination with 
aspirin to clopidogrel alone in the secondary prevention of TIA or 
stroke. The MATCH trial found no difference in TIA or stroke pre-
vention with this combination, but did show a small but significant 
increase in major bleeding complications (3 vs 1%). In the Clopi-
dogrel for High Atherothrombotic Risk and Ischemic Stabilization, 
Management, and Avoidance (CHARISMA) trial, which included 
a subgroup of patients with prior stroke or TIA along with other 
groups at high risk of cardiovascular events, there was no benefit 
of clopidogrel combined with aspirin compared to aspirin alone. 
Lastly, the SPS3 trial looked at the long-term combination of clop-
idogrel and aspirin versus clopidogrel alone in small-vessel stroke 
and found no improvement in stroke prevention and a significant 
increase in both hemorrhage and death. Thus, the long-term use 
of clopidogrel in combination with aspirin is not recommended for 
stroke prevention.
The short-term combination of clopidogrel with aspirin may be 
effective in preventing second stroke, however. A trial of 5170 Chinese 
patients enrolled within 24 h of TIA or minor ischemic stroke found 
that a clopidogrel-aspirin regimen (clopidogrel 300 mg load then 
75 mg/d with aspirin 75 mg for the first 21 days) was superior to 
aspirin (75 mg/d) alone, with 90-day stroke risk decreased from 11.7 
to 8.2% (p <.001) and no increase in major hemorrhage. This bene-
fit was limited to those not carrying the CYP2C19 polymorphism 
associated with clopidogrel hypometabolism. An international NIH-
sponsored trial of similar design is ongoing.
Dipyridamole is an antiplatelet agent that inhibits the uptake of 
adenosine by a variety of cells, including those of the vascular endo-
thelium. The accumulated adenosine is an inhibitor of aggregation. 
At least in part through its effects on platelet and vessel wall phos-
phodiesterases, dipyridamole also potentiates the antiaggregatory 
effects of prostacyclin and nitric oxide produced by the endothelium 
and acts by inhibiting platelet phosphodiesterase, which is respon-
sible for the breakdown of cyclic AMP. The resulting elevation in 
cyclic AMP inhibits aggregation of platelets. Dipyridamole is errati-
cally absorbed depending on stomach pH, but a newer formulation 
combines timed-release dipyridamole, 200 mg, with aspirin, 25 mg, 
and has better oral bioavailability. This combination drug was stud-
ied in three trials. The European Stroke Prevention Study (ESPS) II 
showed efficacy of both 50 mg/d of aspirin and extended-release 
dipyridamole in preventing stroke, and a significantly better risk 
reduction when the two agents were combined. The open-label 
ESPRIT (European/Australasian Stroke Prevention in Reversible 
Ischaemia Trial) trial confirmed the ESPS-II results. After 3.5 years of 
follow-up, 13% of patients on aspirin and dipyridamole and 16% on 
aspirin alone (hazard ratio 0.80, 95% confidence index [CI] 0.66–0.98) 
met the primary outcome of death from all vascular causes. In 
the Prevention Regimen for Effectively Avoiding Second Strokes  
(PRoFESS) trial, the combination of extended-release dipyridamole 
and aspirin was compared directly with clopidogrel with and 
without the angiotensin receptor blocker telmisartan; there were 
no differences in the rates of second stroke (9% each) or degree of 
disability in patients with median follow-up of 2.4 years. Telmisar-
tan also had no effect on these outcomes. This suggests that these 
antiplatelet regimens are similar and raises questions about default 
prescription of agents to block the angiotensin pathway in all stroke 
patients. The principal side effect of dipyridamole is headache. The 
combination capsule of extended-release dipyridamole and aspirin 
is approved for prevention of stroke.
Many large clinical trials have demonstrated clearly that most 
antiplatelet agents reduce the risk of all important vascular atheroth-
rombotic events (i.e., ischemic stroke, MI, and death due to all 
vascular causes) in patients at risk for these events. The overall rel-
ative reduction in risk of nonfatal stroke is about 25–30% and of all 


--- PDF PAGE 3135 ---

CHAPTER 420 Ischemic Stroke
3089
vascular events is about 25%. The absolute reduction varies consid-
erably, depending on the patient’s risk. Individuals at very low risk 
for stroke seem to experience the same relative reduction, but their 
risks may be so low that the “benefit” is meaningless. Conversely, 
individuals with a 10–15% risk of vascular events per year experi-
ence a reduction to about 7.5–11%.
Aspirin is inexpensive, can be given in low doses, and could be 
recommended for all adults to prevent both stroke and MI. However, 
it causes epigastric discomfort, gastric ulceration, and gastrointesti-
nal hemorrhage, which may be asymptomatic or life threatening. 
Consequently, not every 40- or 50-year-old should be advised to 
take aspirin regularly because the risk of atherothrombotic stroke is 
extremely low and is outweighed by the risk of adverse side effects. 
Conversely, every patient who has experienced an atherothrom-
botic stroke or TIA and has no contraindication should be taking 
an antiplatelet agent regularly because the average annual risk of 
another stroke is 8–10%; another few percent will experience an MI 
or vascular death. Clearly, the likelihood of benefit far outweighs the 
risks of treatment.
The choice of antiplatelet agent and dose must balance the risk 
of stroke, the expected benefit, and the risk and cost of treatment. 
However, there are no definitive data, and opinions vary. Many 
authorities believe low-dose (30–75 mg/d) and high-dose (650–1300 
mg/d) aspirin are about equally effective. Some advocate very low 
doses to avoid adverse effects, and still others advocate very high 
doses to be sure the benefit is maximal. Most physicians in North 
America recommend 81–325 mg/d, whereas most Europeans rec-
ommend 50–100 mg. Clopidogrel and extended-release dipyrida-
mole plus aspirin are being increasingly recommended as first-line 
drugs for secondary prevention. Similarly, the choice of aspirin, 
clopidogrel, or dipyridamole plus aspirin must balance the fact 
that the latter are more effective than aspirin but the cost is higher, 
and this is likely to affect long-term patient adherence. The use of 
platelet aggregation studies in individual patients taking aspirin is 
controversial because of limited data.
ANTICOAGULATION THERAPY AND EMBOLIC  
STROKE PREVENTION
Several trials have shown that anticoagulation (INR range, 2–3) in 
patients with chronic nonvalvular (nonrheumatic) atrial fibrillation 
(NVAF) prevents cerebral embolism and stroke and is safe. For 
primary prevention and for patients who have experienced stroke 
or TIA, anticoagulation with a VKA reduces the risk by about 67%, 
which clearly outweighs the 1–3% risk per year of a major bleeding 
complication. VKAs are difficult to dose, their effects vary with 
dietary intake of vitamin K, and they require frequent blood mon-
itoring of the PTT/INR. Several newer oral anticoagulants (OACs) 
have recently been shown to be more convenient and efficacious 
for stroke prevention in NVAF. A randomized trial compared the 
oral thrombin inhibitor dabigatran to VKAs in a noninferiority trial 
to prevent stroke or systemic embolization in NVAF. Two doses of 
dabigatran were used: 110 mg/d and 150 mg/d. Both dose tiers of 
dabigatran were noninferior to VKAs in preventing second stroke 
and systemic embolization, and the higher dose tier was superior 
(relative risk 0.66; 95% CI 0.53–0.82; p <.001) and the rate of major 
bleeding was lower in the lower dose tier of dabigatran compared 
to VKAs. Dabigatran requires no blood monitoring to titrate the 
dose, and its effect is independent of oral intake of vitamin K. Newer 
oral factor Xa inhibitors have also been found to be equivalent or 
safer and more effective than VKAs in NVAF stroke prevention. In 
the Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke and Other Thromboembolic 
Events in Atrial Fibrillation (ARISTOTLE) trial, patients were ran-
domized between apixaban, 5 mg twice daily, and dose-adjusted 
warfarin (INR 2–3). The combined endpoint of ischemic or hemor-
rhagic stroke or system embolism occurred in 1.27% of patients in 
the apixaban group and in 1.6% in the warfarin group (p <.001 for 
noninferiority and p <.01 for superiority). Major bleeding was 1% 
less, favoring apixaban (p <.001). Similar results were obtained in the 
Rivaroxaban Once Daily Oral Direct Factor Xa Inhibition Compared 
with Vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention of Stroke and Embolism 
Trial in Atrial Fibrillation (ROCKET-AF). Here, patients with NVAF 
were randomized to rivaroxaban versus warfarin: 1.7% of the factor 
Xa group and 2.2% of the warfarin group reached the endpoint of 
stroke and systemic embolism (p <.001 for noninferiority); intra-
cranial hemorrhage was also lower with rivaroxaban. Finally, the 
factor Xa inhibitor edoxaban was also found to be noninferior to 
warfarin. Thus, oral factor Xa inhibitors are at least a suitable alter-
native to VKAs, and likely are superior both in efficacy and perhaps 
compliance.
For patients who cannot take anticoagulant medications, clop-
idogrel plus aspirin was compared to aspirin alone in the Atrial 
Fibrillation Clopidogrel Trial with Irbesartan for Prevention of Vas-
cular Events (ACTIVE-A). Clopidogrel combined with aspirin was 
more effective than aspirin alone in preventing vascular events, 
principally stroke, but increased the risk of major bleeding (relative 
risk 1.57, p <.001).
The decision to use anticoagulation for primary prevention is 
based primarily on risk factors (Table 420-3). The history of a TIA 
or stroke tips the balance in favor of anticoagulation regardless of 
other risk factors. Intermittent atrial fibrillation carries the same 
risk of stroke as chronic atrial fibrillation, and several ambulatory 
studies of seemingly “cryptogenic” stroke have found evidence of 
intermittent atrial fibrillation in nearly 20% of patients monitored for 
a few weeks. Interrogation of implanted pacemakers also confirms 
an association between subclinical atrial fibrillation and stroke risk. 
Therefore, for patients with otherwise cryptogenic embolic stroke 
(no evidence of any other cause for stroke), ambulatory monitoring 
for 3–4 weeks is a reasonable strategy to determine the best prophy-
lactic therapy.
Because of the high annual stroke risk in untreated rheumatic 
heart disease with atrial fibrillation, primary prophylaxis against 
stroke has not been studied in a double-blind fashion. These patients 
generally should receive long-term anticoagulation. Dabigatran and 
the oral Xa inhibitors have not been studied in this population.
Anticoagulation also reduces the risk of embolism in acute MI. 
Most clinicians recommend a 3-month course of anticoagulation 
when there is anterior Q-wave infarction, substantial left ventricular 
dysfunction, congestive heart failure, mural thrombosis, or atrial 
fibrillation. OACs are recommended long-term if atrial fibrillation 
persists.
Stroke secondary to thromboembolism is one of the most serious 
complications of prosthetic heart valve implantation. The intensity 
of anticoagulation and/or antiplatelet therapy is dictated by the 
type of prosthetic valve and its location. Dabigatran may be less 
effective than warfarin, and the oral Xa inhibitors have not been 
studied in this population.
If the embolic source cannot be eliminated, anticoagulation 
should in most cases be continued indefinitely. Many neurologists 
recommend combining antiplatelet agents with anticoagulants for 
patients who “fail” anticoagulation (i.e., have another stroke or TIA), 
but the evidence basis for this is lacking.
ANTICOAGULATION THERAPY AND  
NONCARDIOGENIC STROKE
Data do not support the use of long-term VKAs for preventing 
atherothrombotic stroke for either intracranial or extracranial 
cerebrovascular disease. The Warfarin-Aspirin Recurrent Stroke 
Study (WARSS) found no benefit of warfarin sodium (INR 1.4–2.8) 
over aspirin, 325 mg, for secondary prevention of stroke but did 
find a slightly higher bleeding rate in the warfarin group; a Euro-
pean study confirmed this finding. The Warfarin and Aspirin for 
Symptomatic Intracranial Disease (WASID) study (see below) 
demonstrated no benefit of warfarin (INR 2–3) over aspirin in 
patients with symptomatic intracranial atherosclerosis and found 
a higher rate of bleeding complications. Trials are ongoing test-
ing Factor Xa medications for prevention of embolic stroke of 
unknown source.


--- PDF PAGE 3136 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3090
TREATMENT
Carotid Atherosclerosis
Carotid atherosclerosis can be removed surgically (endarterectomy) 
or mitigated with endovascular stenting with or without balloon 
angioplasty. Anticoagulation has not been directly compared with 
antiplatelet therapy for carotid disease.
SURGICAL THERAPY
Symptomatic carotid stenosis was studied in the North American 
Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial (NASCET) and the 
European Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST). Both showed a substantial 
benefit for surgery in patients with stenosis of ≥70%. In NASCET, 
the average cumulative ipsilateral stroke risk at 2 years was 26% 
for patients treated medically and 9% for those receiving the same 
medical treatment plus a carotid endarterectomy. This 17% abso-
lute reduction in the surgical group is a 65% relative risk reduction 
favoring surgery (Table 420-4). NASCET also showed a significant, 
although less robust, benefit for patients with 50–70% stenosis. ECST 
found harm for patients with stenosis <30% treated surgically.
A patient’s risk of stroke and possible benefit from surgery are 
related to the presence of retinal versus hemispheric symptoms, 
degree of arterial stenosis, extent of associated medical conditions 
(of note, NASCET and ECST excluded “high-risk” patients with sig-
nificant cardiac, pulmonary, or renal disease), institutional surgical 
morbidity and mortality, timing of surgery relative to symptoms, 
and other factors. A recent meta-analysis of the NASCET and ECST 
trials demonstrated that endarterectomy is most beneficial when 
performed within 2 weeks of symptom onset. In addition, benefit is 
more pronounced in patients >75 years, and men appear to benefit 
more than women.
In summary, a patient with recent symptomatic hemispheric 
ischemia, high-grade stenosis in the appropriate internal carotid 
artery, and an institutional perioperative morbidity and mortality 
rate of ≤6% generally should undergo carotid endarterectomy. If the 
perioperative stroke rate is >6% for any particular surgeon, however, 
the benefits of carotid endarterectomy are questionable.
The indications for surgical treatment of asymptomatic carotid dis-
ease have been clarified by the results of the Asymptomatic Carotid 
Atherosclerosis Study (ACAS) and the Asymptomatic Carotid Sur-
gery Trial (ACST). ACAS randomized asymptomatic patients with 
≥60% stenosis to medical treatment with aspirin or the same med-
ical treatment plus carotid endarterectomy. The surgical group had 
a risk over 5 years for ipsilateral stroke (and any perioperative 
stroke or death) of 5.1%, compared to a risk in the medical group of 
11%. Although this demonstrates a 53% relative risk reduction, the 
absolute risk reduction is only 5.9% over 5 years, or 1.2% annually  
(Table 420-4). Nearly one-half of the strokes in the surgery group 
were caused by preoperative angiograms. ACST randomized 
asymptomatic patients with >60% carotid stenosis to endarterec-
tomy or medical therapy. The 5-year risk of stroke in the surgical 
group (including perioperative stroke or death) was 6.4%, compared 
to 11.8% in the medically treated group (46% relative risk reduction 
and 5.4% absolute risk reduction).
In both ACAS and ACST, the perioperative complication rate was 
higher in women, perhaps negating any benefit in the reduction of 
stroke risk within 5 years. It is possible that with longer follow-up, 
a clear benefit in women will emerge. At present, carotid endarter-
ectomy in asymptomatic women remains particularly controversial.
In summary, the natural history of asymptomatic stenosis is an 
~2% per year stroke rate, whereas symptomatic patients experi-
ence a 13% per year risk of stroke. Whether to recommend carotid 
revascularization for an asymptomatic patient is somewhat contro-
versial and depends on many factors, including patient preference, 
degree of stenosis, age, gender, and comorbidities. Medical therapy 
for reduction of atherosclerosis risk factors, including cholesterol- 
lowering agents and antiplatelet medications, is generally recom-
mended for patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis. As with 
atrial fibrillation, it is imperative to counsel the patient about TIAs 
so that therapy can be revised if symptoms develop.
ENDOVASCULAR THERAPY
Balloon angioplasty coupled with stenting is being used with 
increasing frequency to open stenotic carotid arteries and maintain 
their patency. These techniques can treat carotid stenosis not only at 
the bifurcation but also near the skull base and in the intracranial 
segments. The Stenting and Angioplasty with Protection in Patients 
at High Risk for Endarterectomy (SAPPHIRE) trial randomized 
high-risk patients (defined as patients with clinically significant 
coronary or pulmonary disease, contralateral carotid occlusion, 
restenosis after endarterectomy, contralateral laryngeal-nerve palsy, 
prior radical neck surgery or radiation, or age >80) with symptom-
atic carotid stenosis >50% or asymptomatic stenosis >80% to either 
stenting combined with a distal emboli-protection device or endar-
terectomy. The risk of death, stroke, or MI within 30 days and ipsi-
lateral stroke or death within 1 year was 12.2% in the stenting group 
and 20.1% in the endarterectomy group (p = .055), suggesting that 
stenting is at the very least comparable to endarterectomy as a treat-
ment option for this patient group at high risk of surgery. However, 
the outcomes with both interventions may not have been better than 
leaving the carotid stenoses untreated, particularly for the asymp-
tomatic patients, and much of the benefit seen in the stenting group 
was due to a reduction in periprocedure MI. Two randomized trials 
comparing stents to endarterectomy in lower-risk patients have been 
published. The Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy versus 
Stenting Trial (CREST) enrolled patients with either asymptomatic 
or symptomatic stenosis. The 30-day risk of stroke was 4.1% in 
the stent group and 2.3% in the surgical group, but the 30-day risk 
of MI was 1.1% in the stent group and 2.3% in the surgery group, 
suggesting relative equivalence of risk between the procedures. At 
median follow-up of 2.5 years, the combined endpoint of stroke, MI, 
and death was the same (7.2% stent vs 6.8% surgery) and remained 
so at 10-year follow up. The rate of restenosis at 2 years was also 
similar in both groups. The International Carotid Stenting Study 
(ICSS) randomized symptomatic patients to stents versus endart-
erectomy and found a different result: At 120 days, the incidence of 
stroke, MI, or death was 8.5% in the stenting group versus 5.2% in 
the endarterectomy group (p =.006). At median follow-up of 5 years 
these differences were no longer significant except a small increase 
in non-disabling stroke in the stenting group but no change in the 
average disability. In meta-analysis, carotid endarterectomy (CEA) is 
less morbid in older patients (aged ≥70) then is stenting. Investiga-
tion is on-going in asymptomatic patients to compare medical ther-
apy to stenting and CEA. This will likely answer how well medical 
patients do with more modern medical therapy (statins, close blood 
pressure control, and life-style modification).
BYPASS SURGERY
Extracranial-to-intracranial (EC-IC) bypass surgery has been proven 
ineffective for atherosclerotic stenoses that are inaccessible to con-
ventional carotid endarterectomy. In patients with recent stroke, an 
associated carotid occlusion, and evidence of inadequate perfusion 
of the brain as measured with positron emission tomography, no 
benefit from EC-IC bypass was found in a trial stopped for futility.
INTRACRANIAL ATHEROSCLEROSIS
The WASID trial randomized patients with symptomatic stenosis 
(50–99%) of a major intracranial vessel to either high-dose aspirin 
(1300 mg/d) or warfarin (target INR, 2.0–3.0), with a combined 
primary endpoint of ischemic stroke, brain hemorrhage, or death 
from vascular cause other than stroke. The trial was terminated early 
because of an increased risk of adverse events related to warfarin 
anticoagulation. With a mean follow-up of 1.8 years, the primary 
endpoint was seen in 22.1% of patients in the aspirin group and 
21.8% of the warfarin group. Death from any cause was seen in 4.3% 
of the aspirin group and 9.7% of the warfarin group; 3.2% of patients 
on aspirin experienced major hemorrhage, compared to 8.3% of 
patients taking warfarin.


================================================================================
Ch421 Intracranial Hemorrhage
Pages 3137-3141
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3137 ---

CHAPTER 421 Intracranial Hemorrhage
3091
Intracranial stenting of intracranial atherosclerosis was found to 
be dramatically harmful compared to aspirin in the Stenting and 
Aggressive Medical Management for Preventing Recurrent Stroke 
in Intracranial Stenosis (SAMMPRIS) trial. This trial enrolled newly 
symptomatic TIA or minor stroke patients with associated 70–99% 
intracranial stenosis to primary stenting with a self-expanding stent 
or to medical management. Both groups received clopidogrel, aspi-
rin, statin, and aggressive control of blood pressure. The endpoint 
of stroke or death occurred in 14.7% of the stented group and 5.8% 
of the medically treated groups (p = .002). This low rate of second 
stroke was significantly lower than in the WASID trial and suggests 
that aggressive medical management had a marked influence on 
secondary stroke risk. A concomitant study of balloon-expandable 
stenting was halted early at 125 patients because of the negative 
SAMMPRIS results and due to harm. Therefore, routine use of 
intracranial stenting is harmful, and medical therapy is superior for 
intracranial atherosclerosis.
Dural Sinus Thrombosis  Limited evidence exists to support short-
term use of anticoagulants, regardless of the presence of intracranial 
hemorrhage, for venous infarction following sinus thrombosis. The 
long-term outcome for most patients, even those with intracerebral 
hemorrhage, is excellent.
■
■FURTHER READING
Goyal M et al: Endovascular thrombectomy after large-vessel 
ischaemic stroke: A meta-analysis of individual patient data from five 
randomised trials. Lancet 387:1723, 2016.
Group SR et al: A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood-
pressure control. N Engl J Med 373:2103, 2015.
January CT et al: 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the manage-
ment of patients with atrial fibrillation: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol 
64:e1, 2014.
Larsson SC et al: Prognosis of carotid dissecting aneurysms: Results 
from CADISS and a systematic review. Neurology 88:646, 2017.
Powers WJ et al: 2018 Guidelines for the Early Management of Patients 
With Acute Ischemic Stroke: A Guideline for Healthcare Professionals 
From the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. 
Stroke 49:e46, 2018.   
Saver JL et al: Time to treatment with endovascular thrombectomy 
and outcomes from ischemic stroke: A meta-analysis. JAMA 316:1279, 
2016.
Torbey MT et al: Evidence-based guidelines for the management of 
large hemispheric infarction: A statement for health care profes-
sionals from the Neurocritical Care Society and the German Society 
for Neuro-intensive Care and Emergency Medicine. Neurocrit Care 
22:146, 2015.
Intracranial hemorrhage is a form of stroke (see Chap. 419). Compared 
to ischemic stroke, patients with intracranial hemorrhage are more 
likely to present with headache; however, brain imaging is required 
to distinguish these entities. CT imaging of the head is highly sen-
sitive and specific for intracranial hemorrhage and determines the 
location(s) of bleeding. Hemorrhages are classified by their location 
and the underlying vascular pathology. Hemorrhage directly into the 
brain parenchyma, also known as intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH), and 
arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) of the brain will be considered 
Intracranial Hemorrhage
Wade S. Smith, J. Claude Hemphill, III,  
S. Claiborne Johnston 
421
here. Other categories of hemorrhage include bleeding into subdural 
and epidural spaces, usually caused by trauma (Chap 435), and sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage due to trauma or the rupture of an intracranial 
aneurysm (Chap. 302).
■
■DIAGNOSIS
Intracranial hemorrhage is often identified on noncontrast CT imaging 
of the brain during the acute evaluation of stroke. Because CT is more 
widely available and may be logistically easier to perform than MRI, 
CT imaging is generally the preferred method for acute stroke evalua-
tion (Fig. 421-1). The location of the hemorrhage narrows the differen-
tial diagnosis to a few entities. Table 421-1 lists the causes and anatomic 
spaces involved in hemorrhages.
■
■EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Close attention should be paid to airway management because a reduc-
tion in the level of consciousness is common and often progressive. 
The initial blood pressure should be maintained until the results of the 
CT scan are reviewed and demonstrate ICH. In theory, a higher blood 
pressure should promote hematoma expansion, but it remains unclear 
if lowering of blood pressure reduces hematoma growth. Recent clin-
ical trials have shown that systolic blood pressure (SBP) can be safely 
lowered acutely and rapidly to <140 mmHg in patients with sponta-
neous ICH whose initial SBP was 150–220 mmHg. The INTERACT2 
trial was a large phase 3 clinical trial to address the effect of acute 
blood pressure lowering on ICH functional outcome. INTERACT2 
randomized patients with spontaneous ICH within 6 h of onset and a 
baseline SBP of 150–220 mmHg to two different SBP targets (<140 and 
<180 mmHg). In those with the target SBP <140 mmHg, 52% had an 
outcome of death or major disability at 90 days compared with 55.6% 
of those with a target SBP <180 mmHg (p = .06). There was a signifi-
cant shift to improved outcomes in the lower blood pressure arm, 
whereas both groups had a similar mortality. ATACH2 was a similarly 
designed clinical trial that assessed the same blood pressure targets 
but demonstrated no difference in outcome between groups. Current 
U.S. and European guidelines emphasize that blood pressure lowering 
to a target SBP is likely safe and possibly beneficial. However, these 
guidelines were completed prior to publication of the ATACH2 results, 
thus the specific optimal target remains a point of debate. In patients 
who have higher SBP on presentation or who are deeply comatose with 
possible elevated intracranial pressure (ICP), it is unclear whether these 
clinical trial results apply. In patients who have ICP monitors in place, 
current recommendations are that maintaining the cerebral perfusion 
FIGURE 421-1  Hypertensive hemorrhage. Transaxial noncontrast computed 
tomography scan through the region of the basal ganglia reveals a hematoma 
involving the left putamen in a patient with rapidly progressive onset of right 
hemiparesis.


--- PDF PAGE 3138 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3092
pressure (mean arterial pressure [MAP] minus ICP) at 50–70 mmHg 
is reasonable, depending on the individual patient’s cerebral autoreg-
ulation status (Chap. 301). Blood pressure should be lowered with 
nonvasodilating IV drugs such as nicardipine, labetalol, or esmolol. 
Patients with cerebellar hemorrhages with depressed mental status or 
radiographic evidence of hydrocephalus should undergo urgent neu-
rosurgical evaluation; these patients require close monitoring because 
they can deteriorate rapidly. Based on the clinical examination and CT 
findings, further imaging studies may be necessary, including MRI or 
conventional x-ray angiography. Stuporous or comatose patients with 
clinical and imaging signs of herniation are generally treated presump-
tively for elevated ICP with tracheal intubation and sedation, adminis-
tration of osmotic diuretics such as mannitol or hypertonic saline, and 
elevation of the head of the bed while surgical consultation is obtained 
(Chap. 301). Reversal of coagulopathy and consideration of surgical 
evacuation of the hematoma (detailed below) are two other principal 
aspects of initial emergency management.
■
■INTRACEREBRAL HEMORRHAGE
ICH accounts for ~10% of all strokes, and about 35–45% of patients die 
within the first month. Incidence rates are particularly high in Asians 
and blacks. Hypertension, coagulopathy, sympathomimetic drugs 
(cocaine, methamphetamine), and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) 
cause most of these hemorrhages. Advanced age and heavy alcohol 
consumption increase the risk, and cocaine and methamphetamine use 
is one of the most important causes in the young.
Hypertensive ICH  • 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY  Hypertensive ICH 
usually results from spontaneous rupture of a small penetrating 
artery deep in the brain. The most common sites are the basal ganglia 
(especially the putamen), thalamus, cerebellum, and pons. The small 
TABLE 421-1  Causes of Intracranial Hemorrhage
CAUSE
LOCATION
COMMENTS
Head trauma
Intraparenchymal: frontal 
lobes, anterior temporal 
lobes; subarachnoid; 
extra-axial (subdural, 
epidural)
Coup and contrecoup injury 
during brain deceleration
Hypertensive 
hemorrhage
Putamen, globus 
pallidus, thalamus, 
cerebellar hemisphere, 
pons
Chronic hypertension produces 
hemorrhage from small 
(~30–100 μm) vessels in these 
regions
Transformation 
of prior ischemic 
infarction
Basal ganglion, 
subcortical regions, 
lobar
Occurs in 1–6% of ischemic 
strokes with predilection for 
large hemispheric infarctions
Metastatic brain 
tumor
Lobar
Lung, choriocarcinoma, 
melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, 
thyroid, atrial myxoma
Coagulopathy
Any
Risk for ongoing hematoma 
expansion
Drug
Any, lobar, subarachnoid
Cocaine, amphetamine
Arteriovenous 
malformation
Lobar, intraventricular, 
subarachnoid
Risk is ~2–3% per year for 
bleeding if previously unruptured
Aneurysm
Subarachnoid, 
intraparenchymal, rarely 
subdural
Mycotic and nonmycotic forms 
of aneurysms
Amyloid 
angiopathy
Lobar
Degenerative disease of 
intracranial vessels; associated 
with dementia, rare in patients 
<60 years
Cavernous 
angioma
Intraparenchymal
Multiple cavernous angiomas 
linked to mutations in KRIT1, 
CCM2, and PDCD10 genes
Dural 
arteriovenous 
fistula
Lobar, subarachnoid
Produces bleeding by venous 
hypertension
Capillary 
telangiectasias
Usually brainstem
Rare cause of hemorrhage
arteries in these areas seem most prone to hypertension-induced 
vascular injury. When hemorrhages occur in other brain areas or in 
nonhypertensive patients, greater consideration should be given to 
other causes such as hemorrhagic disorders, neoplasms, vascular mal-
formations, vasculitis, and CAA. The hemorrhage may be small, or a 
large clot may form and compress adjacent tissue, causing herniation 
and death. Blood may also dissect into the ventricular space, which 
substantially increases morbidity and may cause hydrocephalus.
Most hypertensive ICHs initially develop over 30–90 min, whereas 
those associated with anticoagulant therapy may evolve for as long as 
24–48 h. However, it is now recognized that about a third of patients 
even with no coagulopathy may have significant hematoma expansion 
with the first day. Within 48 h, macrophages begin to phagocytize the 
hemorrhage at its outer surface. After 1–6 months, the hemorrhage 
is generally resolved to a slitlike cavity lined with a glial scar and 
hemosiderin-laden macrophages.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS  ICH generally presents as the abrupt onset 
of a focal neurologic deficit. Seizures are uncommon. Although clinical 
symptoms may be maximal at onset, commonly the focal deficit wors-
ens over 30–90 min and is associated with a diminishing level of con-
sciousness and signs of increased ICP such as headache and vomiting.
The putamen is the most common site for hypertensive hemorrhage, 
and the adjacent internal capsule is usually damaged (Fig. 421-1). Con-
tralateral hemiparesis is therefore the sentinel sign. When mild, the face 
sags on one side over 5–30 min, speech becomes slurred, the arm and 
leg gradually weaken, and the eyes deviate away from the side of the 
hemiparesis. The paralysis may worsen until the affected limbs become 
flaccid or extend rigidly. When hemorrhages are large, drowsiness 
gives way to stupor as signs of upper brainstem compression appear. 
Coma ensues, accompanied by deep, irregular, or intermittent respi-
ration, a dilated and fixed ipsilateral pupil, and decerebrate rigidity. 
In milder cases, edema in adjacent brain tissue may cause progressive 
deterioration over 12–72 h.
Thalamic hemorrhages also produce a contralateral hemiplegia or 
hemiparesis from pressure on, or dissection into, the adjacent internal 
capsule. A prominent sensory deficit involving all modalities is usually 
present. Aphasia, often with preserved verbal repetition, may occur 
after hemorrhage into the dominant thalamus, and constructional 
apraxia or mutism occurs in some cases of nondominant hemorrhage. 
There may also be a homonymous visual field defect. Thalamic 
hemorrhages cause several typical ocular disturbances by extension 
inferiorly into the upper midbrain. These include deviation of the eyes 
downward and inward so that they appear to be looking at the nose, 
unequal pupils with absence of light reaction, skew deviation with 
the eye opposite the hemorrhage displaced downward and medially, 
ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome, absence of convergence, paralysis of 
vertical gaze, and retraction nystagmus. Patients may later develop 
a chronic, contralateral pain syndrome (Déjérine-Roussy syndrome).
In pontine hemorrhages, deep coma with quadriplegia often occurs 
over a few minutes. Typically, there is prominent decerebrate rigidity 
and “pinpoint” (1 mm) pupils that react to light. There is impairment of 
reflex horizontal eye movements evoked by head turning (doll’s-head 
or oculocephalic maneuver) or by irrigation of the ears with ice water 
(Chap. 300). Hyperpnea, severe hypertension, and hyperhidrosis are 
common. Most patients with deep coma from pontine hemorrhage 
ultimately die, or develop a locked-in state, but small hemorrhages are 
compatible with survival and significant recovery.
Cerebellar hemorrhages usually develop over several hours and are 
characterized by occipital headache, repeated vomiting, and ataxia of 
gait. In mild cases, there may be no other neurologic signs except for 
gait ataxia. Dizziness or vertigo may be prominent. There is often pare-
sis of conjugate lateral gaze toward the side of the hemorrhage, forced 
deviation of the eyes to the opposite side, or an ipsilateral sixth nerve 
palsy. Less frequent ocular signs include blepharospasm, involuntary 
closure of one eye, ocular bobbing, and skew deviation. Dysarthria and 
dysphagia may occur. As the hours pass, the patient often becomes stu-
porous and then comatose from brainstem compression or obstructive 
hydrocephalus; immediate surgical evacuation before severe brainstem 


--- PDF PAGE 3139 ---

CHAPTER 421 Intracranial Hemorrhage
3093
compression occurs may be lifesaving. Hydrocephalus from fourth 
ventricle compression can be relieved by external ventricular drainage; 
however, in this situation definitive hematoma evacuation is recom-
mended rather than treatment with ventricular drainage alone. If the 
deep cerebellar nuclei are spared, full recovery is common.
Lobar Hemorrhage  The major neurologic deficit with an occip-
ital hemorrhage is hemianopsia; with a left temporal hemorrhage, 
aphasia and delirium; with a parietal hemorrhage, hemisensory loss; 
and with frontal hemorrhage, arm weakness. Large hemorrhages may 
be associated with stupor or coma if they compress the thalamus or 
midbrain. Most patients with lobar hemorrhages have focal headaches, 
and more than one-half vomit or are drowsy. Stiff neck and seizures 
are uncommon.
Other Causes of ICH  CAA is a disease of the elderly in which 
arteriolar degeneration occurs and amyloid is deposited in the walls 
of the cerebral arteries. Amyloid angiopathy causes both single and 
recurrent lobar hemorrhages and is probably the most common cause 
of lobar hemorrhage in the elderly. It accounts for some intracranial 
hemorrhages associated with IV thrombolysis given for myocardial 
infarction. This disorder can be suspected in patients who present 
with multiple hemorrhages (and infarcts) over several months or 
years or in patients with “microbleeds” in the cortex, seen on brain 
MRI sequences sensitive for hemosiderin (iron-sensitive imaging), 
but it is definitively diagnosed by pathologic demonstration of Congo 
red staining of amyloid in cerebral vessels. The ε2 and ε4 allelic vari-
ations of the apolipoprotein E gene are associated with increased 
risk of recurrent lobar hemorrhage and may therefore be markers 
of amyloid angiopathy. Positron emission tomography imaging can 
image amyloid-beta deposits in CAA using specific antibody labels 
and may be helpful in diagnosing CAA noninvasively. Although 
cerebral biopsy is the most definitive method of diagnosis, evi-
dence of inflammation on lumbar puncture should prompt consider-
ation of CAA-associated vasculitis as an underlying cause and oral 
glucocorticoids may be beneficial. Non-inflammatory CAA has no 
specific treatment. Oral anticoagulants are typically avoided.
Cocaine and methamphetamine are frequent causes of stroke in 
young (age <45 years) patients. ICH, ischemic stroke, and sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) are all associated with stimulant use. 
Angiographic findings vary from completely normal arteries to 
large-vessel occlusion or stenosis, vasospasm, or changes consis-
tent with vasculopathy. The mechanism of sympathomimetic-related 
stroke is not known, but cocaine enhances sympathetic activity 
causing acute, sometimes severe, hypertension, and this may lead 
to hemorrhage. Slightly more than one-half of stimulant-related 
intracranial hemorrhages are intracerebral and the rest are subarach-
noid. In cases of SAH, a saccular aneurysm is usually identified. 
Presumably, acute hypertension causes aneurysmal rupture.
Head injury often causes intracranial bleeding. The common sites are 
intraparenchymal (especially temporal and inferior frontal lobes) and 
into the subarachnoid, subdural, and epidural spaces. Trauma must be 
considered in any patient with an unexplained acute neurologic deficit 
(hemiparesis, stupor, or confusion), particularly if the deficit occurred 
in the context of a fall (Chap. 435).
Intracranial hemorrhages associated with anticoagulant therapy can 
occur at any location; they are often lobar or subdural. Anticoagu-
lant-related ICHs may continue to evolve over 24–48 h, especially if 
coagulopathy is insufficiently reversed. Coagulopathy and thrombocy-
topenia should be reversed rapidly, as discussed below. ICH associated 
with hematologic disorders (leukemia, aplastic anemia, thrombocy-
topenic purpura) can occur at any site and may present as multiple 
ICHs. Skin and mucous membrane bleeding may be evident and offers 
a diagnostic clue.
Hemorrhage into a brain tumor may be the first manifestation of neo-
plasm. Choriocarcinoma, malignant melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, 
and bronchogenic carcinoma are among the most common metastatic 
tumors associated with ICH. Glioblastoma multiforme in adults and 
medulloblastoma in children may also have areas of ICH.
Hypertensive encephalopathy is a complication of malignant hyperten-
sion. In this acute syndrome, severe hypertension is associated with 
headache, nausea, vomiting, convulsions, confusion, stupor, and coma. 
Focal or lateralizing neurologic signs, either transitory or permanent, 
may occur but are infrequent and therefore suggest some other vas-
cular disease (hemorrhage, embolism, or atherosclerotic thrombosis). 
There are retinal hemorrhages, exudates, papilledema (hypertensive 
retinopathy), and evidence of renal and cardiac disease. In most cases, 
ICP and CSF protein levels are elevated. MRI brain imaging shows 
a pattern of typically posterior (occipital > frontal) brain edema that 
is reversible and termed reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy. The 
hypertension may be essential or due to chronic renal disease, acute 
glomerulonephritis, acute toxemia of pregnancy, pheochromocytoma, 
or other causes. Lowering the blood pressure reverses the process, but 
stroke can occur, especially if blood pressure is lowered too rapidly. 
Neuropathologic examination reveals multifocal to diffuse cerebral 
edema and hemorrhages of various sizes from petechial to massive. 
Microscopically, there is necrosis of arterioles, minute cerebral infarcts, 
and hemorrhages. The term hypertensive encephalopathy should be 
reserved for this syndrome and not for chronic recurrent headaches, 
dizziness, recurrent transient ischemic attacks, or small strokes that 
often occur in association with high blood pressure. Distinguishing 
hypertensive encephalopathy with ICH from hypertensive ICH is 
important since aggressive lowering of SBP to 140–180 mmHg acutely 
is usually considered in hypertensive ICH but less aggressive measures 
should be used in hypertensive encephalopathy. Having no alteration 
in mental status or other prodrome prior to the ICH favors hyperten-
sive ICH as the disease.
Primary intraventricular hemorrhage is rare and should prompt inves-
tigation for an underlying vascular anomaly. Sometimes bleeding 
begins within the periventricular substance of the brain and dissects 
into the ventricular system without leaving signs of intraparenchymal 
hemorrhage. Alternatively, bleeding can arise from periependymal 
veins. Vasculitis, usually polyarteritis nodosa or lupus erythematosus, 
can produce hemorrhage in any region of the central nervous system; 
most hemorrhages are associated with hypertension, but the arteritis 
itself may cause bleeding by disrupting the vessel wall. Nearly one-half 
of patients with primary intraventricular hemorrhage have identifiable 
bleeding sources seen using conventional angiography.
Sepsis can cause small petechial hemorrhages throughout the cere-
bral white matter. Moyamoya disease (Chap. 421), mainly an occlusive 
arterial disease that causes ischemic symptoms, may on occasion 
produce ICH, particularly in the young. Hemorrhages into the spinal 
cord are usually the result of an AVM, cavernous malformation, or 
metastatic tumor. Epidural spinal hemorrhage produces a rapidly evolv-
ing syndrome of spinal cord or nerve root compression (Chap. 434). 
Spinal hemorrhages usually present with sudden back pain and some 
manifestation of myelopathy.
Laboratory and Imaging Evaluation  Patients should have 
routine blood chemistries and hematologic studies. Specific atten-
tion to the platelet count and PT/PTT/INR is important to identify 
coagulopathy. CT imaging reliably detects acute focal hemorrhages 
in the supratentorial space. Rarely very small pontine or medullary 
hemorrhages may not be well delineated because of motion and bone- 
induced artifact that obscure structures in the posterior fossa. After 
the first 2 weeks, x-ray attenuation values of clotted blood diminish 
until they become isodense with surrounding brain. Mass effect and 
edema may remain. In some cases, a surrounding rim of contrast 
enhancement appears after 2–4 weeks and may persist for months. 
MRI, although more sensitive for delineating posterior fossa lesions, 
is generally not necessary for primary diagnosis in most instances. 
Images of flowing blood on MRI scan may identify AVMs as the cause 
of the hemorrhage. MRI, CT angiography (CTA), and conventional 
x-ray angiography are used when the cause of intracranial hemorrhage 
is uncertain, particularly if the patient is young or not hypertensive and 
the hematoma is not in one of the usual sites for hypertensive hemor-
rhage. CTA or postcontrast CT imaging may reveal one or more small 


--- PDF PAGE 3140 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3094 areas of enhancement within a hematoma; this “spot sign” is thought 
to represent ongoing bleeding. The presence of a spot sign is associated 
with an increased risk of hematoma expansion, increased mortality, 
and lower likelihood of favorable functional outcome. Because patients 
typically have focal neurologic signs and obtundation and often show 
signs of increased ICP, a lumbar puncture is generally unnecessary and 
should usually be avoided because it may induce cerebral herniation.
TREATMENT
Intracerebral Hemorrhage
ACUTE MANAGEMENT
After immediate attention to blood pressure and airway protection 
(see above), focus can switch to medical and surgical management. 
Approximately 40% of patients with a hypertensive ICH die, but 
survivors can have a good to complete recovery. The ICH Score 
(Table 421-2) is a validated clinical grading scale that is useful for 
stratification of mortality risk and clinical outcome. However, a 
specific ICH clinical grading scale should not be used to precisely 
prognosticate outcome because of the concern of creating a self-
fulfilling prophecy of poor outcome if early aggressive care is with-
held. Any identified coagulopathy should be corrected as soon as 
possible. For patients taking vitamin K antagonists (VKAs), rapid 
correction of coagulopathy can be achieved by infusing prothrombin 
complex concentrates (PCCs), which can be administered quickly, 
with vitamin K administered concurrently. Fresh frozen plasma 
(FFP) is an alternative but since it requires larger fluid volumes 
and longer time to achieve adequate reversal than PCC, it is not 
recommended if PCC is available. Idarucizumab is a monoclonal 
antibody to dabigatran and the administration of two doses reverses 
the anticoagulation effect of dabigatran quickly. PCC may partially 
reverse the effects of oral factor Xa inhibitors and are reasonable to 
administer if available; targeted drugs to reverse Xa inhibitors are 
under clinical investigation. When ICH is associated with thrombo-
cytopenia (platelet count <50,000/μL), transfusion of fresh platelets 
is indicated. A recent clinical trial of platelet transfusions in patients 
with ICH and without thrombocytopenia who are taking antiplate-
let drugs suggested no benefit and possible harm.
Hematomas may expand for several hours following the initial 
hemorrhage, even in patients without coagulopathy. However, the 
precise mechanism is unclear. A phase 3 trial of treatment with 
recombinant factor VIIa reduced hematoma expansion; however, 
clinical outcomes were not improved, so use of this drug is not 
recommended. Blood pressure lowering has been considered due to 
the theoretical risk of acutely elevated blood pressure on hematoma 
expansion, although recent clinical trials did not find a difference in 
hematoma expansion between the SBP targets of 140–180 mmHg.
Evacuation of supratentorial hematomas does not appear to 
improve outcome for most patients. The International Surgical Trial 
in Intracerebral Haemorrhage (STICH) randomized patients with 
supratentorial ICH to either early surgical evacuation or initial 
medical management. No benefit was found in the early surgery 
arm, although analysis was complicated by the fact that 26% of 
patients in the initial medical management group ultimately had 
surgery for neurologic deterioration. The follow-up study STICH-II 
found that surgery within 24 h of lobar, supratentorial hemorrhage 
did not improve overall outcome, but might have a role in select 
severely affected patients. Therefore, existing data do not support 
routine surgical evacuation of supratentorial hemorrhages in stable 
patients. However, many centers still consider surgery for patients 
deemed salvageable and who are experiencing progressive neuro-
logic deterioration due to herniation. Surgical techniques continue to 
evolve, and minimally invasive endoscopic hematoma evacuation is 
currently being investigated in clinical trials.
For cerebellar hemorrhages, a neurosurgeon should be consulted 
immediately to assist with the evaluation; most cerebellar hemato-
mas >3 cm in diameter will require surgical evacuation. If the patient 
is alert without focal brainstem signs and if the hematoma is <1 cm 
in diameter, surgical removal is usually unnecessary. Patients with 
hematomas between 1 and 3 cm require careful observation for signs 
of impaired consciousness, progressive hydrocephalus, and precipi-
tous respiratory failure. Hydrocephalus due to cerebellar hematoma 
requires surgical evacuation and should not be treated solely with 
ventricular drainage.
Tissue surrounding hematomas is displaced and compressed but 
not necessarily infarcted. Hence, in survivors, major improvement 
commonly occurs as the hematoma is reabsorbed and the adjacent 
tissue regains its function. Thus, careful management of the patient 
during the acute phase of the hemorrhage can lead to considerable 
recovery.
Surprisingly, ICP is often normal even with large ICHs. However, 
if the hematoma causes marked midline shift of structures with 
consequent obtundation, coma, or hydrocephalus, osmotic agents 
can be instituted in preparation for placement of a ventriculostomy 
or parenchymal ICP monitor (Chap. 301). Once ICP is recorded, 
CSF drainage (if available), osmotic therapy, and blood pressure 
management can be tailored to the individual patient to keep cere-
bral perfusion pressure (MAP minus ICP) at least 50–70 mmHg. 
For example, if ICP is found to be high, CSF can be drained from 
the ventricular space and osmotic therapy continued; persistent or 
progressive elevation in ICP may prompt surgical evacuation of the 
clot. Alternately, if ICP is normal or only mildly elevated, interven-
tions such as osmotic therapy may be tapered. Because hyperventi-
lation may actually produce ischemia by cerebral vasoconstriction, 
induced hyperventilation should be limited to acute resuscitation of 
the patient with presumptive high ICP and eliminated once other 
treatments (osmotic therapy or surgical treatments) have been insti-
tuted. Glucocorticoids are not helpful for the edema from intracere-
bral hematoma.
PREVENTION
Hypertension is the leading cause of primary ICH. Prevention 
is aimed at reducing chronic hypertension, eliminating excessive 
alcohol use, and discontinuing use of illicit drugs such as cocaine 
and amphetamines. Current guidelines recommend that patients 
with CAA should generally avoid oral anticoagulant medications, 
but antiplatelet agents may be administered if there is an indication 
based on atherothrombotic vascular disease.
VASCULAR ANOMALIES
Vascular anomalies can be divided into congenital vascular malforma-
tions and acquired vascular lesions.
TABLE 421-2  The ICH Score
CLINICAL OR IMAGING FACTOR
POINT SCORE
Age
<80 years
0
≥80 years
1
Hematoma Volume
<30 cc
0
≥30 cc
1
Intraventricular Hemorrhage Present
No
0
Yes
1
Infratentorial Origin of Hemorrhage
No
0
Yes
1
Glasgow Coma Scale Score
13–15
0
5–12
1
3–4
2
Total Score
0–6 Sum of each category above
Source: JC Hemphill et al: Stroke 32:891, 2001.


--- PDF PAGE 3141 ---

CHAPTER 421 Intracranial Hemorrhage
3095
■
■CONGENITAL VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS
True AVMs, venous anomalies, and capillary telangiectasias are lesions 
that usually remain clinically silent through life. AVMs are probably 
congenital, but cases of acquired lesions have been reported.
True AVMs are congenital shunts between the arterial and venous 
systems that may present with headache, seizures, and intracranial 
hemorrhage. AVMs consist of a tangle of abnormal vessels across the 
cortical surface or deep within the brain substance. AVMs vary in size 
from a small blemish a few millimeters in diameter to a large mass 
of tortuous channels composing an arteriovenous shunt of sufficient 
magnitude to raise cardiac output and precipitate heart failure. Blood 
vessels forming the tangle interposed between arteries and veins are 
usually abnormally thin and histologically resemble both arteries and 
veins. AVMs occur in all parts of the cerebral hemispheres, brainstem, 
and spinal cord, but the largest ones are most frequently located in the 
posterior half of the hemispheres, commonly forming a wedge-shaped 
lesion extending from the cortex to the ventricle.
Bleeding, headache, and seizures are most common between the 
ages of 10 and 30, occasionally as late as the fifties. AVMs are more 
frequent in men, and rare familial cases have been described. Familial 
AVM may be a part of the autosomal dominant syndrome of heredi-
tary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Rendu-Weber) syndrome due 
to mutations in either endoglin or activin receptor-like kinase 1, 
both involved in transforming growth factor (TGF) signaling and 
angiogenesis.
Headache (without bleeding) may be hemicranial and throbbing, 
like migraine, or diffuse. Focal seizures, with or without generalization, 
occur in ~30% of cases. One-half of AVMs become evident as ICHs. In 
most, the hemorrhage is mainly intraparenchymal with extension into 
the subarachnoid space in some cases. Unlike primary subarachnoid 
hemorrhages (Chap. 302), blood from a ruptured AVM is usually not 
deposited in the basal cisterns, and symptomatic cerebral vasospasm 
is rare. The risk of AVM rupture is strongly influenced by a history of 
prior rupture. Although unruptured AVMs have a hemorrhage rate of 
~2–4% per year, previously ruptured AVMs may have a rate as high 
as 17% a year, at least for the first year. Hemorrhages may be massive, 
leading to death, or may be as small as 1 cm in diameter, leading to 
minor focal symptoms or no deficit. The AVM may be large enough 
to steal blood away from adjacent normal brain tissue or to increase 
venous pressure significantly to produce venous ischemia locally and 
in remote areas of the brain. This is seen most often with large AVMs in 
the territory of the middle cerebral artery.
Large AVMs of the anterior circulation may be associated with a 
systolic and diastolic bruit (sometimes self-audible) over the eye, fore-
head, or neck and a bounding carotid pulse. Headache at the onset of 
AVM rupture is generally not as explosive as with aneurysmal rupture. 
MRI is better than CT for diagnosis, although noncontrast CT scanning 
sometimes detects calcification of the AVM and contrast may demon-
strate the abnormal blood vessels. Once identified, conventional x-ray 
angiography is the gold standard for evaluating the precise anatomy 
of the AVM.
Surgical treatment of AVMs presenting with hemorrhage often done 
in conjunction with preoperative embolization to reduce operative 
bleeding is usually indicated for accessible lesions. Stereotactic radio-
surgery, an alternative to conventional surgery, can produce a slow 
sclerosis of the AVM over 2–3 years.
Several angiographic features can be used to help predict future 
bleeding risk. Paradoxically, smaller lesions seem to have a higher 
hemorrhage rate. The presence of deep venous drainage, venous out-
flow stenosis, and intranidal aneurysms may increase rupture risk. 
Because of the relatively low annual rate of hemorrhage and the risk 
of complications due to surgical or endovascular treatment, the indi-
cation for surgery in asymptomatic AVMs is debated. The ARUBA (A 
Randomized Trial of Unruptured Brain Arteriovenous Malformations) 
trial randomized patients to medical management versus intervention 
(surgery, endovascular embolization, combination embolization and 
surgery, or gamma-knife). The trial was stopped prematurely for harm, 
with the medical arm achieving the combined endpoint of death or 
symptomatic stroke in 10.1% of patients compared to 30.7% in the inter-
vention group at an average follow-up time of 33 months. This highly 
significant finding argues against routine intervention for patients 
presenting without hemorrhage, although debate ensues regarding the 
generalizability of these results.
Venous anomalies are the result of development of anomalous cere-
bral, cerebellar, or brainstem venous drainage. These structures, unlike 
AVMs, are functional venous channels. They are of little clinical signif-
icance and should be ignored if found incidentally on brain imaging 
studies. Surgical resection of these anomalies may result in venous 
infarction and hemorrhage. Venous anomalies may be associated with 
cavernous malformations (see below), which do carry some bleeding 
risk.
Capillary telangiectasias are true capillary malformations that often 
form extensive vascular networks through an otherwise normal brain 
structure. The pons and deep cerebral white matter are typical loca-
tions, and these capillary malformations can be seen in patients with 
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Rendu-Weber) syndrome. 
If bleeding does occur, it rarely produces mass effect or significant 
symptoms. No treatment options exist.
■
■ACQUIRED VASCULAR LESIONS
Cavernous angiomas are tufts of capillary sinusoids that form within 
the deep hemispheric white matter and brainstem with no normal 
intervening neural structures. The pathogenesis is unclear. Familial cav-
ernous angiomas have been mapped to several different genes: KRIT1, 
CCM2, and PDCD10. Both KRIT1 and CCM2 have roles in blood vessel 
formation, whereas PDCD10 is an apoptotic gene. Cavernous angiomas 
are typically <1 cm in diameter and are often associated with a venous 
anomaly. Bleeding is usually of small volume, causing slight mass effect 
only. The bleeding risk for single cavernous malformations is 0.7–1.5% 
per year and may be higher for patients with prior clinical hemorrhage 
or multiple malformations. Seizures may occur if the malformation is 
located near the cerebral cortex. Surgical resection eliminates bleeding 
risk and may reduce seizure risk, but it is usually reserved for those 
malformations that form near the brain surface. Radiation treatment 
has not been shown to be of benefit.
Dural arteriovenous fistulas are acquired connections usually from 
a dural artery to a dural sinus. Patients may complain of a pulse- 
synchronous cephalic bruit (“pulsatile tinnitus”) and headache. 
Depending on the magnitude of the shunt, venous pressures may rise 
high enough to cause cortical ischemia or venous hypertension and 
hemorrhage, particularly SAH. Surgical and endovascular techniques 
are usually curative. These fistulas may form because of trauma, but 
most are idiopathic. There is an association between fistulas and dural 
sinus thrombosis. Fistulas have been observed to appear months to 
years following venous sinus thrombosis, suggesting that angiogenesis 
factors elaborated from the thrombotic process may cause these anom-
alous connections to form. Alternatively, dural arteriovenous fistulas 
can produce venous sinus occlusion over time, perhaps from the high 
pressure and high flow through a venous structure.
■
■FURTHER READING
Anderson CS et al: Rapid blood-pressure lowering in patients with 
acute intracerebral hemorrhage. N Engl J Med 368:2355, 2013.
Hemphill JC et al: Guidelines for the management of spontaneous 
intracerebral hemorrhage: A guideline for healthcare professionals 
from the American heart association/American stroke association. 
Stroke 46:2032, 2015.
Mohr JP et al: Medical management with or without interventional 
therapy for unruptured brain arteriovenous malformations (ARUBA): 
A multicentre, non-blinded, randomised trial. Lancet 383:614, 2014.
Qureshi AI et al: Intracerebral haemorrhage. Lancet 373:1632, 2009.
Steiner T et al: European Stroke Organisation (ESO) guidelines for the 
management of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Int J Stroke 
9:840, 2014.


================================================================================
Ch422 Migraine and Other Primary Headache Disorders
Pages 3142-3153
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3142 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3096
The general approach to headache as a cardinal symptom are covered 
elsewhere (Chap. 13); here, disorders in which headache and associated 
features occur in the absence of any exogenous cause are discussed. 
The most common are migraine, tension-type headache (TTH), and the 
trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias (TACs), notably cluster headache; 
the complete list is summarized in Table 422-1.
■
■MIGRAINE
Migraine, the second most common cause of headache, and the most 
common headache-related, and indeed neurologic, cause of disability in 
the world, afflicts ~15% of women and 6% of men over a 1-year period. 
It is usually an episodic headache associated with certain features 
such as sensitivity to light, sound, or movement; nausea and vomiting 
often accompany the headache. A useful description of migraine is a 
recurring syndrome of headache associated with other symptoms of 
neurologic dysfunction in varying admixtures (Table 422-2). A migraine 
attack has three phases: premonitory (prodrome), headache phase, 
and postdrome; each has distinct and sometimes disabling symptoms. 
About 20–25% of migraine patients have a fourth, aura, phase. Migraine 
can often be recognized by its activators, referred to as triggers.
Migraineurs are particularly sensitive to environmental and sensory 
stimuli; migraine-prone patients do not habituate easily to sensory 
stimuli. This sensitivity is amplified in females during the menstrual 
cycle. Headache can be initiated or amplified by various triggers, 
including glare, bright lights, sounds, or other types of afferent stimu-
lation; hunger; let-down from stress; physical exertion; stormy weather 
or barometric pressure changes; hormonal fluctuations during menses; 
lack of or excess sleep; and alcohol or other chemical stimulation, such 
as with nitrates. Knowledge of a patient’s susceptibility to specific 
triggers can be useful in management strategies involving lifestyle 
adjustments, although it is becoming recognized that some apparent 
triggers may in fact be part of the initial phase of the attack; i.e., the 
premonitory phase or prodrome.
Pathogenesis  The sensory sensitivity that is characteristic of 
migraine is probably due to dysfunction of monoaminergic sensory 
control systems located in the brainstem and hypothalamus (Fig. 422-1).
Activation of cells in the trigeminal nucleus results in the release of 
vasoactive neuropeptides, particularly calcitonin gene–related peptide 
(CGRP), at vascular terminals of the trigeminal nerve and within the 
trigeminal nucleus. Six CGRP receptor antagonists, gepants, have now 
been shown to be effective in the acute treatment of migraine, and four 
monoclonal antibodies to CGRP or its receptor have been shown to be 
effective in migraine prevention. Centrally, the second-order trigeminal 
neurons cross the midline and project to ventrobasal and posterior 
nuclei of the thalamus for further processing. Additionally, there are 
projections to the periaqueductal gray and hypothalamus, from which 
reciprocal descending systems have established antinociceptive effects. 
Other brainstem regions likely to be involved in descending modula-
tion of trigeminal pain include the nucleus locus coeruleus in the pons 
and the rostroventromedial medulla.
Pharmacologic and other data point to the involvement of the neu-
rotransmitter 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT; also known as serotonin) 
in migraine. In the late 1950s methysergide was found to antagonize 
certain peripheral actions of 5-HT and was introduced, based on its 
anti-inflammation properties, as the first drug capable of preventing 
migraine attacks. The triptans were designed to stimulate selectively 
subpopulations of 5-HT receptors; at least 14 different 5-HT receptors 
exist in humans. The triptans are potent agonists of 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D 
receptors, and some are active at the 5-HT1F receptor; the latter’s 
422 Migraine and Other 
Primary Headache 
Disorders
Peter J. Goadsby 
exclusive agonists are called ditans. Triptans arrest nerve signaling in 
the nociceptive pathways of the trigeminovascular system, at least 
in the trigeminal nucleus caudalis and trigeminal sensory thalamus, 
in addition to promoting cranial vasoconstriction, while ditans, now 
shown conclusively to be effective in acute migraine, act only at neural 
and not vascular targets. A range of neural targets are currently under 
investigation for the acute and preventive management of migraine.
Data also support a role for dopamine in the pathophysiology of 
migraine. Most migraine symptoms can be induced by dopaminergic 
stimulation. Moreover, there is dopamine receptor hypersensitivity in 
migraineurs, as demonstrated by the induction of yawning, nausea, 
vomiting, hypotension, and other symptoms of a migraine attack by 
dopaminergic agonists at doses that do not affect nonmigraineurs. Dopa-
mine receptor antagonists are effective therapeutic agents in migraine, 
especially when given parenterally or concurrently with other antimi-
graine agents. Moreover, hypothalamic activation, anterior to that seen 
in cluster headache, has now been shown in the premonitory (prodro-
mal) phase of migraine using functional imaging, and this may hold a 
key to understanding some part of the role of dopamine in the disorder.
Migraine genes identified by studying families with familial hemi-
plegic migraine (FHM) reveal involvement of ion channels, suggesting 
that alterations in membrane excitability can predispose to migraine. 
Mutations involving the Cav2.1 (P/Q)–type voltage-gated calcium 
channel CACNA1A gene are now known to cause FHM 1; this muta-
tion is responsible for about 50% of FHM cases. Mutations in the 
Na+-K+ATPase ATP1A2 gene, designated FHM 2, are responsible for 
about 20% of FHMs. Mutations in the neuronal voltage-gated sodium 
channel SCN1A cause FHM 3. Functional neuroimaging has suggested 
that brainstem regions in migraine (Fig. 422-2) and the posterior hypo-
thalamic gray matter region close to the human circadian pacemaker 
cells of the suprachiasmatic nucleus in cluster headache (Fig. 422-3) are 
good candidates for specific involvement in these primary headaches.
Diagnosis and Clinical Features 
Diagnostic criteria for 
migraine headache are listed in Table 422-3. A high index of suspi-
cion is required to diagnose migraine: the migraine aura, consisting 
of visual disturbances with flashing lights or zigzag lines moving 
across the visual field or of other neurologic symptoms, is reported in 
only 20–25% of patients. It should be distinguished from the pan-field 
television static-like disturbance now recognized as the visual snow 
syndrome. The first phase of a migraine attack for most patients is the 
premonitory (prodromal) phase consisting of some or all of the follow-
ing: yawning, tiredness, cognitive dysfunction, mood change, neck dis-
comfort, polyuria, and food cravings; this can last from a few hours to 
days. Typically, the headache phase follows with its associated features, 
such as nausea, photophobia, and phonophobia as well as allodynia. 
When questioned, these typical migraine symptoms also emerge in the 
premonitory phase, and typical premonitory symptoms also continue 
into the headache phase. As the headache lessens many patients enter 
a postdrome, most commonly feeling tired/weary, having problems 
concentrating, and experiencing mild neck discomfort that can last for 
hours and sometimes up to a day. A headache diary can often be helpful 
in making the diagnosis; this is also helpful in assessing disability and 
the frequency of treatment for acute attacks. Patients with episodes of 
migraine on eight or more days per month and with at least 15 total 
days of headache per month are considered to have chronic migraine 
(see “Chronic Daily Headache” in Chap. 13). Migraine must be differ-
entiated from TTH (discussed below), which is reported to be the most 
common primary headache syndrome. Migraine has several forms that 
have been defined (Table 422-1): migraine with and without aura and 
chronic migraine are the most important. Migraine at its most basic level is 
headache with associated features, and tension-type headache is headache that 
is featureless. Most patients with disabling headache probably have migraine.
Patients with acephalgic migraine (typical aura without headache, 
1.2.1.2 in Table 422-1) experience recurrent neurologic symptoms, often 
with nausea or vomiting, but with little or no headache. Vertigo can be 
prominent; it has been estimated that one-third of patients referred for 
vertigo or dizziness have a primary diagnosis of migraine. Migraine 
aura can have prominent brainstem symptoms, and the terms basilar 


--- PDF PAGE 3143 ---

CHAPTER 422 Migraine and Other Primary Headache Disorders
3097
TABLE 422-1  Primary Headache Disorders, Modified from International Classification of Headache Disorders-III-Beta (Headache Classification 
Committee of the International Headache Society, 2018)
1. Migraine
1.1  Migraine without aura
1.2  Migraine with aura
1.2.1  Migraine with typical aura
1.2.1.1  Typical aura with headache
1.2.1.2  Typical aura without headache
1.2.2  Migraine with brainstem aura
1.2.3  Hemiplegic migraine
1.2.3.1  Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM)
1.2.3.1.1  Familial hemiplegic migraine type 1
1.2.3.1.2  Familial hemiplegic migraine type 2
1.2.3.1.3  Familial hemiplegic migraine type 3
1.2.3.1.4  Familial hemiplegic migraine, other loci
1.2.3.2  Sporadic hemiplegic migraine
1.2.4  Retinal migraine
1.3  Chronic migraine
1.4  Complications of migraine
1.4.1  Status migrainosus
1.4.2  Persistent aura without infarction
1.4.3  Migrainous infarction
1.4.4  Migraine aura-triggered seizure
1.5  Probable migraine
1.5.1  Probable migraine without aura
1.5.2  Probable migraine with aura
1.6  Episodic syndromes that may be associated with migraine
1.6.1  Recurrent gastrointestinal disturbance
1.6.1.1  Cyclical vomiting syndrome
1.6.1.2  Abdominal migraine
1.6.2  Benign paroxysmal vertigo
1.6.3  Benign paroxysmal torticollis
2.  Tension-type headache
2.1  Infrequent episodic tension-type headache
2.2  Frequent episodic tension-type headache
2.3  Chronic tension-type headache
2.4  Probable tension-type headache
3.  Trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias
3.1  Cluster headache
3.1.1  Episodic cluster headache
3.1.2  Chronic cluster headache
3.2  Paroxysmal hemicrania
3.2.1  Episodic paroxysmal hemicrania
3.2.2  Chronic paroxysmal hemicrania
3.3  Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks
3.3.1  Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT)
3.3.1.1  Episodic SUNCT
3.3.1.2  Chronic SUNCT
3.3.2  Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms (SUNA)
3.3.2.1  Episodic SUNA
3.3.2.2  Chronic SUNA
3.4  Hemicrania continua
3.5  Probable trigeminal autonomic cephalalgia
4.  Other primary headache disorders
4.1  Primary cough headache
4.2  Primary exercise headache
4.3  Primary headache associated with sexual activity
4.4  Primary thunderclap headache
4.5  Cold-stimulus headache
4.5.1  Headache attributed to external application of a cold stimulus
4.5.2  Headache attributed to ingestion or inhalation of a cold stimulus
4.6  External-pressure headache
4.6.1  External-compression headache
4.6.2  External-traction headache
4.7  Primary stabbing headache
4.8  Nummular headache
4.9  Hypnic headache
4.10  New daily persistent headache (NDPH)


--- PDF PAGE 3144 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3098
TABLE 422-2  Symptoms Accompanying Severe Migraine Attacks in 
500 Patients
SYMPTOM
PATIENTS AFFECTED, %
Nausea
87
Photophobia
82
Lightheadedness
72
Scalp tenderness
65
Vomiting
56
Visual disturbances
36
Paresthesias
33
Vertigo
33
Photopsia
26
Alteration of consciousness
18
Diarrhea
16
Fortification spectra
10
Syncope
10
Seizure
4
Confusional state
4
Source: From NH Raskin: Headache, 2nd ed. New York, Churchill Livingston, 1988; 
with permission.
Dura
Cortex
Dorsal raphe
nucleus
Locus
coeruleus
Superior
salivatory nucleus
Magnus raphe
nucleus
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Cortex
Dorsal raphe
nucleus
Locus
coeruleus
Superior
salivatory nucleus
Magnus raphe
nucleus
Sphenopalatine
ganglion
Trigeminal
ganglion
TCC
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Quintothalamic
tract
Quintothalamic
tract
FIGURE 422-1  Brainstem pathways that modulate sensory input. The key pathway for pain in migraine is the trigeminovascular input from the meningeal vessels, 
which passes through the trigeminal ganglion and synapses on second-order neurons in the trigeminocervical complex (TCC). These neurons in turn project in the 
quintothalamic tract and, after decussating in the brainstem, synapse on neurons in the thalamus. Important modulation of the trigeminovascular nociceptive input 
comes from the dorsal raphe nucleus, locus coeruleus, and nucleus raphe magnus.
artery and basilar-type migraine have now been replaced by migraine with 
brainstem aura (Table 422-1).
TREATMENT
Migraine Headache
Once a diagnosis of migraine has been established, it is important to 
assess the extent of a patient’s disease and disability. The Migraine 
Disability Assessment Score (MIDAS) is a well-validated, easy-to-
use tool (Fig. 422-4).
Patient education is an important aspect of migraine management. 
Information for patients is available at websites such as the American  
Migraine Foundation (www.americanmigrainefoundation.org) and 
the Migraine Trust (www.migrainetrust.org). It is helpful for patients 
to understand that migraine is an inherited tendency to headache; 
that migraine can be modified and controlled by lifestyle adjust-
ments and medications, but it cannot be eradicated; and that, except 
on some occasions in women on oral estrogens or contraceptives, 
migraine is not associated with serious or life-threatening illnesses.
NONPHARMACOLOGIC MANAGEMENT
Migraine can often be managed to some degree by a variety of 
nonpharmacologic approaches. When patients can identify reliable 
triggers, their avoidance can be useful. A regulated lifestyle is help-
ful, including a healthy diet, regular exercise, regular sleep patterns, 
avoidance of excess caffeine and alcohol, and avoidance of acute 
changes in stress levels, being particularly wary of the let-down 
effect.
The measures that benefit a given individual should be used 
routinely because they provide a simple, cost-effective approach 
to migraine management. Patients with migraine do not encounter 
more stress than headache-free individuals; over-responsiveness 
to changes in stress appears to be the issue. Because the stresses of 
everyday living cannot be eliminated, lessening one’s response to 
stress by various techniques is helpful for many patients. These may 
include yoga, transcendental meditation, hypnosis, and condition-
ing techniques such as biofeedback. For most patients seen in clinical 
practice, this approach is, at best, an adjunct to pharmacotherapy. 
Nonpharmacologic measures are unlikely to prevent all migraine 
attacks. If these measures fail to prevent an attack, pharmacologic 
approaches are then needed.


--- PDF PAGE 3145 ---

CHAPTER 422 Migraine and Other Primary Headache Disorders
3099
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 422-2  Positron emission tomography (PET) activation in migraine. Hypothalamic, dorsal midbrain, and dorsolateral pontine activation is seen in triggered 
attacks in the premonitory phase before pain, whereas in migraine attacks, dorsolateral pontine activation persists, as it does in chronic migraine (not shown). The 
dorsolateral pontine area, which includes the noradrenergic locus coeruleus, is fundamental to the expression of migraine. Moreover, lateralization of changes in 
this region of the brainstem correlates with lateralization of the head pain in hemicranial migraine; the scans shown in panels C and D are of patients with acute 
migraine headache on the right and left side, respectively. (Panel A from FH Maniyar et al: Brain 137:232, 2014; panel B from SK Afridi et al: Arch Neurol 62:1270, 2005; 
Panels C and D from SK Afridi et al: Brain 128:932, 2005.)
A
B
FIGURE 422-3  A. Posterior hypothalamic gray matter region activation by positron emission tomography in a patient with acute cluster headache. (From A May et al: 
Lancet 352:275, 1998.) B. High-resolution T1-weighted magnetic resonance image obtained using voxel-based morphometry demonstrates increased gray matter 
activity, lateralized to the side of pain in a patient with cluster headache. (From A May et al: Nat Med 5:836, 1999.)


--- PDF PAGE 3146 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3100
TABLE 422-3  Simplified Diagnostic Criteria for Migraine
REPEATED ATTACKS OF HEADACHE LASTING 4–72 h IN PATIENTS WITH A 
NORMAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION, NO OTHER REASONABLE CAUSE FOR 
THE HEADACHE, AND:
AT LEAST 2 OF THE FOLLOWING 
FEATURES:
PLUS AT LEAST 1 OF THE 
FOLLOWING FEATURES:
Unilateral pain
Nausea/vomiting
Throbbing pain
Photophobia and phonophobia
Aggravation by movement
 
Moderate or severe intensity
 
Source: Adapted from the International Headache Society Classification 
(Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society, 
Cephalalgia 38:1-211, 2018).
On how many days in the last 3 months did you miss work or school because 
of your headaches?
How many days in the last 3 months was your productivity at work or school 
reduced by half or more because of your headaches (do not include days 
you counted in question 1 where you missed work or school)?
On how many days in the last 3 months did you not do household work 
because of your headaches?
How many days in the last 3 months was your productivity in household work 
reduced by half or more because of your headaches (do not include days 
you counted in question 3 where you did not do household work)?
On how many days in the last 3 months did you miss family, social, or leisure 
activities because of your headaches?
On how many days in the last 3 months did you have a headache? (If a 
headache lasted more than one day, count each day.)
On a scale of 0–10, on average how painful were these headaches? (Where 
0 = no pain at all, and 10 = pain as bad as it can be.)
*Migraine Disability Assessment Score
(Questions 1−5 are used to calculate the MIDAS score.)
Grade I—Minimal or Infrequent Disability: 0–5
Grade II—Mild or Infrequent Disability: 6–10
Grade III—Moderate Disability: 11–20
Grade IV—Severe Disability: > 20
© Innovative Medical Research 1997
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
A.
B.
days
days
days
days
days
days
...............................................................................................
............................
................................................................................
.....................
.................................................................
.........................................
..........................................
INSTRUCTIONS: Please answer the following questions about ALL headaches you have had 
over the last 3 months. Write zero if you did not do the activity in the last 3 months.
*MIDAS Questionnaire
FIGURE 422-4  The Migraine Disability Assessment Score (MIDAS) Questionnaire.
ACUTE ATTACK THERAPIES FOR MIGRAINE
The mainstay of pharmacologic therapy is the judicious use of 
one or more of the many medicines that are effective in migraine  
(Table 422-4). The selection of the optimal regimen for a given 
patient depends on a number of factors, the most important of 
which is the severity of the attack. Mild migraine attacks can usu-
ally be managed by oral agents; the average efficacy rate is 50–70%. 
Severe migraine attacks may require parenteral therapy. Most drugs 
effective in the treatment of migraine are members of one of three 
major pharmacologic classes: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 
5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists, and dopamine receptor antagonists. Two 
new classes of therapeutic agents, CGRP receptor antagonists, such 
as rimegepant and ubrogepant, and 5-HT1F receptor agonists, such 
as lasmiditan, should soon be available.
In general, an adequate dose of whichever agent is chosen should 
be used as soon as possible after the onset of an attack. If additional 
medication is required within 60 min because symptoms return or 
have not abated, the initial dose should be increased for subsequent 
attacks or a different class of drug tried as first-line treatment. 
Migraine therapy must be individualized; a standard approach for 
all patients is not possible. A therapeutic regimen may need to be 
constantly refined until one is identified that provides the patient 
with rapid, complete, and consistent relief with minimal side effects 
(Table 422-5).
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)  Both the severity 
and duration of a migraine attack can be reduced significantly by 
NSAIDs (Table 422-4). Indeed, many undiagnosed migraineurs 
self-treat with nonprescription NSAIDs. A general consensus is that 
NSAIDs are most effective when taken early in the migraine attack. 
However, the effectiveness of these agents in migraine is usually 
less than optimal in moderate or severe migraine attacks. The com-
bination of acetaminophen (paracetamol), aspirin, and caffeine has 
been approved for use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for the treatment of mild to moderate migraine. The combi-
nation of aspirin and metoclopramide has been shown to be compa-
rable to a single dose of oral sumatriptan. Important side effects of 
NSAIDs include dyspepsia and gastrointestinal irritation.
5-HT1B/1D RECEPTOR AGONISTS
Oral  Stimulation of 5-HT1B/1D receptors can stop an acute migraine 
attack. Ergotamine and dihydroergotamine are nonselective recep-
tor agonists, whereas the triptans are selective 5-HT1B/1D receptor 
agonists. A variety of triptans—sumatriptan, almotriptan, elet-
riptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, and zolmitriptan—are 
available for the treatment of migraine.
Each drug in the triptan class has similar pharmacologic prop-
erties but varies slightly in terms of clinical efficacy. Rizatriptan 
and eletriptan are, on a population basis, the most efficacious of 
the triptans currently available in the United States. Sumatriptan 
and zolmitriptan have similar rates of efficacy as well as time to 
onset, with an advantage of having multiple formulations, whereas 
almotriptan has a similar rate of efficacy to sumatriptan and is better 
tolerated, and frovatriptan and naratriptan are somewhat slower 
in onset and are also well tolerated. Clinical efficacy appears to 
be related more to the tmax (time to peak plasma level) than to the 


--- PDF PAGE 3147 ---

CHAPTER 422 Migraine and Other Primary Headache Disorders
3101
TABLE 422-4  Treatment of Acute Migraine
DRUG
TRADE NAME
DOSAGE
Simple Analgesics
 
 
Acetaminophen, aspirin, caffeine 
Excedrin Migraine
Two tablets or caplets q6h (max 8 per day) 
NSAIDs
 
 
Naproxen
Aleve, Anaprox, generic
220–550 mg PO bid
Ibuprofen
Advil, Motrin, Nuprin, generic
400 mg PO q3–4h
Tolfenamic acid
Clotam Rapid
200 mg PO; may repeat ×1 after 1–2 h
Diclofenac K
Cambia
50 mg PO with water
5-HT1B/1D Receptor Agonists
 
 
Oral
 
 
Ergotamine 1 mg, caffeine 100 mg
Cafergot
One or two tablets at onset, then one tablet q½h (max 6 per day, 10 per week)
Naratriptan
Amerge
2.5-mg tablet at onset; may repeat once after 4 h
Rizatriptan
Maxalt
5–10-mg tablet at onset; may repeat after 2 h (max 30 mg/d)
 
Maxalt-MLT
 
Sumatriptan
Imitrex
50–100-mg tablet at onset; may repeat after 2 h (max 200 mg/d)
Frovatriptan
Frova
2.5-mg tablet at onset, may repeat after 2 h (max 5 mg/d)
Almotriptan
Axert
12.5-mg tablet at onset, may repeat after 2 h (max 25 mg/d)
Eletriptan
Relpax
40 or 80 mg
Zolmitriptan
Zomig
2.5-mg tablet at onset; may repeat after 2 h (max 10 mg/d)
 
Zomig Rapimelt
 
Nasal
 
 
Dihydroergotamine
Migranal Nasal Spray
Prior to nasal spray, the pump must be primed 4 times; 1 spray (0.5 mg) is 
administered, followed in 15 min by a second spray
Sumatriptan
Imitrex Nasal Spray
5–20 mg intranasal spray as 4 sprays of 5 mg or a single 20 mg spray (may 
repeat once after 2 h, not to exceed a dose of 40 mg/d)
Zolmitriptan
Zomig
5 mg intranasal spray as one spray (may repeat once after 2 h, not to exceed a 
dose of 10 mg/d)
Parenteral
 
 
Dihydroergotamine
DHE-45
1 mg IV, IM, or SC at onset and q1h (max 3 mg/d, 6 mg per week)
Sumatriptan
Imitrex Injection
Alsuma
Sumavel DosePro
6 mg SC at onset (may repeat once after 1 h for max of 2 doses in 24 h)
Dopamine Receptor Antagonists
 
 
Oral
 
 
Metoclopramide
Reglan,a generica
5–10 mg/d
Prochlorperazine
Compazine,a generica
1–25 mg/d
Parenteral
 
 
Chlorpromazine
Generica
0.1 mg/kg IV at 2 mg/min; max 35 mg/d
Metoclopramide
Reglan,a generic
10 mg IV
Prochlorperazine
Compazine,a generica
10 mg IV
Other
 
 
Oral
 
 
Acetaminophen, 325 mg, plus 
dichloralphenazone, 100 mg, plus 
isometheptene, 65 mg
Midrin, generic
Two capsules at onset followed by 1 capsule q1h (max 5 capsules)
Parenteral
 
 
Opioids
Other
Neuromodulation
Noninvasive Vagus Nerve Stimulation (nVNS)
Single pulse transcranial magnetic  
stimulation (sTMS)
Generica
SpringTMS
gammaCore
Multiple preparations and dosages; see Table 10-1
Two pulses at onset followed by two further pulses
Two doses each of 120 seconds
aNot all drugs are specifically indicated by the FDA for migraine. Local regulations and guidelines should be consulted.
Note: Antiemetics (e.g., domperidone 10 mg or ondansetron 4 or 8 mg) or prokinetics (e.g., metoclopramide 10 mg) are sometimes useful adjuncts.
Abbreviations: 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
potency, half-life, or bioavailability. This observation is consistent 
with a large body of data indicating that faster-acting analgesics are 
more effective than slower-acting agents.
Unfortunately, monotherapy with a selective oral 5-HT1B/1D recep-
tor agonist does not result in rapid, consistent, and complete relief 
of migraine in all patients. Triptans are generally not effective in 
migraine with aura unless given after the aura is completed and the 
headache initiated. Side effects are common, although often mild and 
transient. Moreover, 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists are contraindicated 
in individuals with a history of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 


--- PDF PAGE 3148 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3102
TABLE 422-5  Clinical Stratification of Acute Specific  
Migraine Treatments
CLINICAL SITUATION
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Failed NSAIDs/analgesics
First tier
 
Sumatriptan 50 mg or 100 mg PO
 
Almotriptan 12.5 mg PO
 
Rizatriptan 10 mg PO
 
Eletriptan 40 mg PO
 
Zolmitriptan 2.5 mg PO
 
Slower effect/better tolerability
 
Naratriptan 2.5 mg PO
 
Frovatriptan 2.5 mg PO
 
Infrequent headache
 
Ergotamine/caffeine 1–2/100 mg PO
 
Dihydroergotamine nasal spray 2 mg
Early nausea or difficulties taking 
tablets 
 
Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
Sumatriptan 20 mg nasal spray
Rizatriptan 10 mg MLT wafer
Headache recurrence
Ergotamine 2 mg (most effective  
PR/usually with caffeine)
 
Naratriptan 2.5 mg PO
 
Almotriptan 12.5 mg PO
 
Eletriptan 40 mg
Tolerating acute treatments poorly
Naratriptan 2.5 mg
 
Almotriptan 12.5 mg
Single pulse transcranial magnetic 
stimulation
Noninvasive vagus nerve stimulation 
Early vomiting
Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
 
Sumatriptan 25 mg PR
 
Sumatriptan 6 mg SC
Menses-related headache
Prevention
 
Ergotamine PO at night
 
Estrogen patches
 
Treatment
 
Triptans
 
Dihydroergotamine nasal spray
Very rapidly developing symptoms
Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
 
Sumatriptan 6 mg SC
 
Dihydroergotamine 1 mg IM
Abbreviation: NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
disease. Recurrence of headache, within usual time course of an 
attack, is another important limitation of triptan use and occurs at 
least occasionally in most patients. Evidence from randomized con-
trolled trials shows that coadministration of a longer-acting NSAID, 
naproxen 500 mg, with sumatriptan will augment the initial effect of 
sumatriptan and, importantly, reduce rates of headache recurrence.
Ergotamine preparations offer a nonselective means of stimulat-
ing 5-HT1 receptors. A nonnauseating dose of ergotamine should be 
sought because a dose that provokes nausea is too high and may 
intensify head pain. Oral (excluding sublingual) formulations of 
ergotamine also contain 100 mg caffeine (theoretically to enhance 
ergotamine absorption and possibly to add additional analgesic 
activity). The average oral ergotamine dose for a migraine attack is  
2 mg. Because the clinical studies demonstrating the efficacy of 
ergotamine in migraine predated the clinical trial methodologies 
used with the triptans, it is difficult to assess the comparative 
efficacy of ergotamine versus the triptans. In general, with use of 
ergotamine there appears to be a much higher incidence of nausea 
than with triptans but less headache recurrence.
Nasal  Nasal formulations of dihydroergotamine, zolmitriptan, or 
sumatriptan can be useful in patients requiring a nonoral route of 
administration. The nasal sprays result in substantial blood levels 
within 30–60 min. Although in theory nasal sprays might provide 
faster and more effective relief of a migraine attack than oral for-
mulations, their reported efficacy is only ~50–60%. Studies with a 
new inhalational formulation of dihydroergotamine indicate that 
its absorption problems can be overcome to produce rapid onset of 
action with good tolerability.
Parenteral  Administration of drugs by injection, such as dihydro-
ergotamine and sumatriptan, is approved by the FDA for the rapid 
relief of a migraine attack. Peak plasma levels of dihydroergotamine 
are achieved 3 min after IV dosing, 30 min after IM dosing, and  
45 min after SC dosing. If an attack has not already peaked, SC or IM 
administration of 1 mg of dihydroergotamine is adequate for about 
80–90% of patients. Sumatriptan, 4–6 mg SC, is effective in ~50–80% 
of patients, and can now be administered by a needle-free device.
DOPAMINE RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
Oral  Oral dopamine receptor antagonists can be considered as 
adjunctive therapy in migraine. Drug absorption is impaired dur-
ing migraine because of reduced gastrointestinal motility. Delayed 
absorption occurs even in the absence of nausea and is related to 
the severity of the attack and not its duration. Therefore, when oral 
NSAIDs and/or triptan agents fail, the addition of a dopamine 
receptor antagonist, such as metoclopramide 10 mg or domperidone 
10 mg (not available in the United States), should be considered to 
enhance gastric absorption. In addition, dopamine receptor antago-
nists decrease nausea/vomiting and restore normal gastric motility.
Parenteral  Dopamine receptor antagonists (e.g., chlorpromazine, 
prochlorperazine, metoclopramide) by injection can also provide 
significant acute relief of migraine; they can be used in combination 
with parenteral 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists. A common IV protocol 
used for the treatment of severe migraine is the administration 
over 2 min of a mixture of 5 mg of prochlorperazine and 0.5 mg of 
dihydroergotamine.
OTHER OPTIONS FOR ACUTE MIGRAINE
Oral  The combination of acetaminophen, dichloralphenazone, 
and isometheptene, one to two capsules, has been classified by the 
FDA as “possibly” effective in the treatment of migraine. Because 
the clinical studies demonstrating the efficacy of this combination 
analgesic in migraine predated the clinical trial methodologies 
used with the triptans, it is difficult to compare the efficacy of this  
sympathomimetic compound to other agents.
Parenteral  Opioids are modestly effective in the acute treatment 
of migraine. For example, IV meperidine (50–100 mg) is given fre-
quently in the emergency room. This regimen “works” in the sense 
that the pain of migraine is eliminated. Importantly, it is clear from 
a recent randomized controlled trial that prochlorperazine is supe-
rior to hydromorphone in the emergency room setting. However, 
opioids are clearly suboptimal for patients with recurrent headache. 
Opioids do not treat the underlying headache mechanism; rather, 
they act to alter the pain sensation, and there is evidence their use 
may decrease the likelihood of a response to triptans in the future. 
Moreover, in patients taking oral opioids, such as oxycodone or 
hydrocodone, habituation or addiction can greatly confuse the 
treatment of migraine. Opioid craving and/or withdrawal can 
aggravate and accentuate migraine. Therefore, it is recommended 
that opioid use in migraine be limited to patients with severe, but 
infrequent, headaches that are unresponsive to other pharmacologic 
approaches or who have contraindications to other therapies.
Neuromodulation  Single pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(sTMS) is FDA-approved for the acute treatment of migraine. Two 
pulses can be applied at the onset of an attack and this can be 
repeated. The use of sTMS is safe where there is no cranial metal 
implant, and offers an option to patients seeking non-pharmaceuti-
cal approaches to treatment. Similarly, a noninvasive vagus nerve 
stimulator (nVNS) is FDA-approved for the treatment of migraine 
attacks in adults. One to two 120-second doses may be applied for 
attack treatment.


--- PDF PAGE 3149 ---

CHAPTER 422 Migraine and Other Primary Headache Disorders
3103
MEDICATION-OVERUSE HEADACHE
Acute attack medications, particularly opioid or barbiturate-containing 
compound analgesics, have a propensity to aggravate headache fre-
quency and induce a state of refractory daily or near-daily headache 
called medication-overuse headache. This condition is likely not a sepa-
rate headache entity but a reaction of the migraine patient’s biology 
to a particular medicine. Migraine patients who have two or more 
headache days a week should be cautioned about frequent analgesic 
use (see “Chronic Daily Headache” in Chap. 13).
PREVENTIVE TREATMENTS FOR MIGRAINE
Patients with an increasing frequency of migraine attacks or with 
attacks that are either unresponsive or poorly responsive to abortive 
treatments are good candidates for preventive agents. In general, a 
preventive medication should be considered in patients with four or 
more attacks a month. Significant side effects are associated with the 
use of many of these agents; furthermore, determination of dose can 
be difficult because the recommended doses have been derived for 
conditions other than migraine. The mechanism of action of these 
drugs is unclear; it seems likely that the brain sensitivity that under-
lies migraine is modified. Patients are usually started on a low dose 
of a chosen treatment; the dose is then gradually increased, up to a 
reasonable maximum, to achieve clinical benefit.
Treatments that have the capacity to stabilize migraine are listed 
in Table 422-6. Most treatments must be taken daily, and there is 
usually a lag of between 2 and 12 weeks before an effect is seen. 
The drugs that have been approved by the FDA for the preventive 
treatment of migraine include propranolol, timolol, sodium val-
proate, and topiramate. In addition, a number of other drugs appear 
to display preventive efficacy. This group includes amitriptyline, 
nortriptyline, flunarizine, phenelzine, and cyproheptadine. Placebo-
controlled trials of onabotulinum toxin type A in episodic migraine 
were negative, whereas, overall, placebo-controlled trials in chronic 
migraine were positive. The FDA has approved sTMS for the pre-
ventive treatment of migraine. It offers a well-tolerated, effective 
option for patients. Phenelzine is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor 
(MAOI); therefore, tyramine-containing foods, decongestants, and 
meperidine are contraindicated, and it is reserved for only very 
recalcitrant cases. Methysergide is now of historical interest only, 
since it is no longer manufactured. Melatonin has been reported to 
be useful, with controlled trial evidence but is not approved in the 
U.S. Monoclonal antibodies to the CGRP receptor (erenumab) or to 
the peptide (eptinezumab, fremanezumab, and galcanezumab) have 
all proven effective and well tolerated in migraine and should be 
available soon as preventive agents.
The probability of success with any one of the antimigraine 
drugs is 50%. Many patients are managed adequately with well- 
tolerated doses of candesartan, propranolol, amitriptyline, topi-
ramate, or valproate. If these agents fail or produce unacceptable 
side effects, neuromodulation approaches, such as sTMS, or related 
agents from the above classes, can be used (Table 422-6). Once effec-
tive stabilization is achieved, the drug is continued for ~6 months 
and then slowly tapered to assess the continued need. Many patients 
are able to discontinue medication and experience fewer and milder 
attacks for long periods, suggesting that these drugs may alter the 
natural history of migraine.
■
■TENSION-TYPE HEADACHE
Clinical Features  The term tension-type headache is commonly used 
to describe a chronic head-pain syndrome characterized by bilateral 
tight, band-like discomfort. The pain typically builds slowly, fluctuates 
in severity, and may persist more or less continuously for many days. 
The headache may be episodic or chronic (present >15 days per month).
A useful clinical approach is to diagnose TTH in patients whose 
headaches are completely without accompanying features such as 
nausea, vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, osmophobia, throbbing, 
and aggravation with movement. Such an approach neatly separates 
migraine, which has one or more of these features and is the main 
differential diagnosis, from TTH. The International Headache Society’s 
main definition of TTH allows an admixture of nausea, photophobia, 
or phonophobia in various combinations, although the appendix def-
inition does not; this illustrates the difficulty in distinguishing these 
two clinical entities. In clinical practice using the appendix definition to 
dichotomize patients on the basis of the presence of associated features 
TABLE 422-6  Preventive Treatments in Migrainea
DRUG
DOSE
SELECTED SIDE EFFECTS
Beta blocker
 
 
  Propranolol
40–120 mg bid
Reduced energy
  Metoprolol
25–100 mg bid
Tiredness
 
 
Postural symptoms
 
 
Contraindicated in asthma
Antidepressants
 
 
  Amitriptyline
10–75 mg at night
Drowsiness
  Dosulepin
25–75 mg at night
 
  Nortriptyline
25–75 mg at night
Note: Some patients may 
only need a total dose of 
10 mg, although generally 
1–1.5 mg/kg body weight 
is required
  Venlafaxine
75–150 mg/d
 
Anticonvulsants
 
 
  Topiramate
25–200 mg/d
Paresthesias
 
 
Cognitive symptoms
 
 
Weight loss
 
 
Glaucoma
 
 
Caution with 
nephrolithiasis
  Valproate
400–600 mg bid
Drowsiness
 
 
Weight gain
 
 
Tremor
 
 
Hair loss
 
 
Fetal abnormalities
 
 
Hematologic or liver 
abnormalities
Serotonergic drugs
 
 
  Pizotifenb
0.5–2 mg qd
Weight gain
  
  
Drowsiness
Other classes
 
 
  Flunarizineb
5–15 mg qd
Drowsiness
 
 
Weight gain
 
 
Depression
 
 
Parkinsonism
  Candesartan
4–24 mg daily
Dizziness
Neuromodulation
  Single pulse 
transcranial
  magnetic 
stimulation (sTMS)
4–24 pulses per day
Lightheadedness
Tingling
Tinnitus
Chronic migraine
 
 
  Onabotulinum toxin 
type A
155 U
Loss of brow furrow
No convincing evidence from controlled trials
 
  Verapamil
 
 
Controlled trials demonstrate no effect
 
  Nimodipine
 
 
  Clonidine
 
 
  Selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors: 
fluoxetine
 
 
aCommonly used preventives are listed with typical doses and common side 
effects. Not all listed medicines are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration; local regulations and guidelines should be consulted. bNot 
available in the United States. cNot currently available worldwide.


--- PDF PAGE 3150 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3104
TABLE 422-7  Clinical Features of the Trigeminal Autonomic Cephalalgias
 
CLUSTER HEADACHE
PAROXYSMAL HEMICRANIA
SUNCT/SUNA
Gender
M > F
F = M
F ~ M
Pain
 
 
 
  Type
Stabbing, boring
Throbbing, boring, stabbing
Burning, stabbing, sharp
  Severity
Excruciating
Excruciating
Severe to excruciating
  Site
Orbit, temple
Orbit, temple
Periorbital
Attack frequency
1/alternate day–8/d
1–20/d (>5/d for more than  
half the time)
3–200/d
Duration of attack
15–180 min
2–30 min
5–240 s
Autonomic features
Yes
Yes
Yes (prominent conjunctival injection 
and lacrimation)a
Migrainous featuresb
Yes
Yes
Yes
Alcohol trigger
Yes
No
No
Cutaneous triggers
No
No
Yes
Indomethacin effect
—
Yesc
—
Abortive treatment
Sumatriptan injection or nasal spray
No effective treatment
Lidocaine (IV)
 
Oxygen
nVNSc
 
 
Prophylactic treatment
Verapamil
Indomethacind
Lamotrigine
 
Topiramate
Melatoinin
 
Topiramate
 
Lithium
 
Gabapentin
aIf conjunctival injection and tearing are not present, consider SUNA. bNausea, photophobia, or phonophobia; photophobia and phonophobia are typically unilateral on 
the side of the pain. cNon-invasive vagus nerve stimulation is FDA approved in episodic cluster headache dIndicates complete response to indomethacin.
Abbreviations: SUNA, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic features; SUNCT, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache 
attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing.
(migraine) and the absence of associated features (TTH) is highly rec-
ommended. Indeed patients whose headaches fit the TTH phenotype 
and who have migraine at other times, along with a family history 
of migraine, migrainous illnesses of childhood, or typical migraine 
triggers to their migraine attacks, may be biologically different from 
those who have TTH headache with none of the features. TTH may be 
infrequent (episodic) or occur on 15 days or more a month (chronic).
Pathophysiology  The pathophysiology of TTH is incompletely 
understood. It seems likely that TTH is due to a primary disorder of 
central nervous system pain modulation alone, unlike migraine, which 
involves a more generalized disturbance of sensory modulation. Data 
suggest a genetic contribution to TTH, but this may not be a valid 
finding: given the current diagnostic criteria, the studies undoubtedly 
included many migraine patients. The name tension-type headache 
implies that pain is a product of nervous tension, but there is no clear evi-
dence for tension as an etiology. Muscle contraction has been considered 
to be a feature that distinguishes TTH from migraine, but there appear 
to be no differences in contraction between the two headache types.
TREATMENT
Tension-Type Headache
The pain of TTH can generally be managed with simple analgesics 
such as acetaminophen, aspirin, or NSAIDs. Behavioral approaches 
including relaxation can also be effective. Clinical studies have demon-
strated that triptans in pure TTH are not helpful, although triptans 
are effective in TTH when the patient also has migraine. For chronic 
TTH, amitriptyline is the only proven treatment (Table 422-6); other 
tricyclics, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and the benzodi-
azepines have not been shown to be effective. There is no evidence 
for the efficacy of acupuncture. Placebo-controlled trials of onabotu-
linum toxin type A in chronic TTH were negative.
■
■TRIGEMINAL AUTONOMIC CEPHALALGIAS, 
INCLUDING CLUSTER HEADACHE
The TACs describe a grouping of primary headaches including clus-
ter headache, paroxysmal hemicrania (PH), SUNCT (short-lasting 
unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection 
and tearing)/SUNA (short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache 
attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms), and hemicrania continua 
(Table 422-1). TACs are characterized by relatively short-lasting attacks 
of head pain associated with cranial autonomic symptoms, such as 
lacrimation, conjunctival injection, aural fullness, or nasal congestion 
(Table 422-7). Pain is usually severe and may occur more than once a 
day. Because of the associated nasal congestion or rhinorrhea, patients 
are often misdiagnosed with “sinus headache” and treated with 
decongestants, which are ineffective.
TACs must be differentiated from short-lasting headaches that do 
not have prominent cranial autonomic syndromes, notably trigeminal 
neuralgia (TN), primary stabbing headache, and hypnic headache. The 
cycling pattern and length, frequency, and timing of attacks are useful 
in classifying patients. Patients with TACs should undergo pituitary 
imaging and pituitary function tests because there is an excess of TAC 
presentations in patients with pituitary tumor–related headache, par-
ticularly prolactin and growth hormone secreting tumors.
Cluster Headache  Cluster headache is a relatively rare form of 
primary headache, although nonetheless a common condition, with a 
population frequency of ~0.1%. The pain is deep, usually retroorbital, 
often excruciating in intensity, nonfluctuating, and explosive in quality. 
A core feature of cluster headache is periodicity. At least one of the 
daily attacks of pain recurs at about the same hour each day for the 
duration of a cluster bout. The typical cluster headache patient has 
daily bouts of one to two attacks of relatively short-duration unilateral 
pain for 8–10 weeks a year; this is usually followed by a pain-free 
interval that averages a little less than 1 year. Cluster headache is 
characterized as chronic when there is <3 months of sustained remis-
sion without treatment. Patients are generally perfectly well between 
episodes. Onset of attacks is nocturnal in about 50% of patients, and 
men are affected three times more often than women. Patients with 
cluster headache tend to move about during attacks, pacing, rocking, or 
rubbing their head for relief; some may even become aggressive during 
attacks. This is in sharp contrast to patients with migraine, who prefer 
to remain motionless during attacks.
Cluster headache is associated with ipsilateral symptoms of cra-
nial parasympathetic autonomic activation: conjunctival injection or 


--- PDF PAGE 3151 ---

CHAPTER 422 Migraine and Other Primary Headache Disorders
3105
lacrimation, aural fullness, rhinorrhea or nasal congestion, or cranial 
sympathetic dysfunction such as ptosis. The sympathetic deficit is 
peripheral and likely to be due to parasympathetic activation with 
injury to ascending sympathetic fibers surrounding a dilated carotid 
artery as it passes into the cranial cavity. When present, photophobia 
and phonophobia are far more likely to be unilateral and on the same 
side of the pain, rather than bilateral, as is seen in migraine. This 
phenomenon of unilateral photophobia/phonophobia is characteristic 
of TACs. Cluster headache is likely to be a disorder involving central 
pacemaker neurons and neurons in the posterior hypothalamic region 
(Fig. 422-3).
TREATMENT
Cluster Headache
The most satisfactory treatment is the administration of drugs to 
prevent cluster attacks until the bout is over. However, treatment 
of acute attacks is required for all cluster headache patients at some 
time.
ACUTE ATTACK TREATMENT
Cluster headache attacks peak rapidly, and thus a treatment with 
rapid onset is required. Many patients with acute cluster headache 
respond very well to oxygen inhalation. This should be given as 
100% oxygen at 10–12 L/min for 15–20 min. It appears that high 
flow and high oxygen content are important. Sumatriptan 6 mg SC 
is rapid in onset and will usually shorten an attack to 10–15 min; 
there is no evidence of tachyphylaxis. Sumatriptan (20 mg) and 
zolmitriptan (5 mg) nasal sprays are both effective in acute cluster 
headache, offering a useful option for patients who may not wish 
to self-inject daily. Noninvasive vagus nerve stimulation (nVNS) is 
FDA approved for the acute treatment of attacks in episodic cluster 
headache using three 2-min stimulation cycles applied consecutively 
at the onset of headache on the side of pain; this may be repeated 
after nine minutes. Oral sumatriptan is not effective for prevention 
or for acute treatment of cluster headache.
PREVENTIVE TREATMENTS (TABLE 422-8)
The choice of a preventive treatment in cluster headache depends in 
part on the length of the bout. Patients with long bouts or those with 
chronic cluster headache require medicines that are safe when taken 
for long periods. For patients with relatively short bouts, limited 
courses of oral glucocorticoids can be very useful. A 10-day course 
of prednisone, beginning at 60 mg daily for 7 days and followed by 
a rapid taper, may interrupt the pain bout for many patients. Greater 
occipital nerve injection with lidocaine and glucocorticoids has been 
shown to be effective in randomized controlled trials, with a benefit 
that lasts up to 6–8 weeks.
Most experts favor verapamil as the first-line preventive treat-
ment for patients with chronic cluster headache or with prolonged 
bouts. While verapamil compares favorably with lithium in practice, 
some patients require verapamil doses far in excess of those admin-
istered for cardiac disorders. The initial dose range is 40–80 mg 
twice daily; effective doses may be as high as 960 mg/d. Side effects 
such as constipation, leg swelling, or gingival hyperplasia can be 
problematic. Of paramount concern, however, is the cardiovascular 
safety of verapamil, particularly at high doses. Verapamil can cause 
heart block by slowing conduction in the atrioventricular node, a 
condition that can be monitored by following the PR interval on a 
standard electrocardiogram (ECG). Approximately 20% of patients 
treated with verapamil develop ECG abnormalities, which can be 
observed with doses as low as 240 mg/d; these abnormalities can 
worsen over time in patients on stable doses. A baseline ECG is rec-
ommended for all patients. The ECG is repeated 10 days after a dose 
change in patients whose dose is being increased above 240 mg daily. 
Dose increases are usually made in 80-mg increments. For patients 
on long-term verapamil, ECG monitoring every 6 months is advised.
NEUROMODULATION THERAPY
When medical therapies fail in chronic cluster headache, neuromod-
ulation strategies can be used. Sphenopalatine ganglion (SPG) stim-
ulation with an implanted battery-free stimulator has been shown in 
randomized controlled trials to be effective in aborting attacks and 
reducing their frequency over time. nVNS compares favorably to 
standard-of-care in open label experience. Similarly, occipital nerve 
stimulation has been used open label and appears to be beneficial. 
Deep-brain stimulation of the region of the posterior hypothalamic 
gray matter is successful in about 50% of patients treated, although 
its risk-benefit ratio makes it inappropriate before all other less inva-
sive options have been explored.
■
■PAROXYSMAL HEMICRANIA
PH is characterized by frequent unilateral, severe, short-lasting 
episodes of headache. Like cluster headache, the pain tends to be 
retroorbital but may be experienced all over the head and is associated 
with autonomic phenomena such as lacrimation and nasal congestion. 
Patients with remissions are said to have episodic PH, whereas those 
with the nonremitting form are said to have chronic PH. The essential 
features of PH are unilateral; very severe pain; short-lasting attacks 
(2–45 min); very frequent attacks (usually >5 a day); marked autonomic 
features ipsilateral to the pain; rapid course (<72 h); and excellent 
response to indomethacin. In contrast to cluster headache, which pre-
dominantly affects males, the male-to-female ratio in PH is close to 1:1.
Indomethacin (25–75 mg tid), which can completely suppress 
attacks of PH, is the treatment of choice. Although therapy may be 
complicated by indomethacin-induced gastrointestinal side effects, 
currently there are no consistently effective alternatives. Topiramate is 
helpful in some cases. Piroxicam has been used, although it is not as 
effective as indomethacin. Verapamil, an effective treatment for cluster 
headache, does not appear to be useful for PH. nVNS can be useful in 
these patients and can be very effective. In occasional patients, PH can 
coexist with TN (PH-tic syndrome); similar to cluster-tic syndrome, 
each component may require separate treatment.
Secondary PH has been reported with lesions in the region of the 
sella turcica, including arteriovenous malformation, cavernous sinus 
meningioma, pituitary pathology, and epidermoid tumors. Secondary 
PH is more likely if the patient requires high doses (>200 mg/d) of 
indomethacin. In patients with apparent bilateral PH, raised cere-
brospinal fluid (CSF) pressure should be suspected. It is important to 
note that indomethacin reduces CSF pressure. When a diagnosis of 
PH is considered, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is indicated to 
exclude a pituitary lesion.
■
■SUNCT/SUNA
SUNCT is a rare primary headache syndrome characterized by severe, 
unilateral orbital or temporal pain that is stabbing or throbbing in 
quality. Diagnosis requires at least 20 attacks, lasting for 5–240 s; 
ipsilateral conjunctival injection and lacrimation should be present. In 
some patients, conjunctival injection or lacrimation is missing, and the 
diagnosis of SUNA can be made.
DIAGNOSIS  The pain of SUNCT/SUNA is unilateral and may be 
located anywhere in the head. Three basic patterns can be seen: single 
stabs, which are usually short-lived; groups of stabs; or a longer attack 
comprising many stabs between which the pain does not completely 
TABLE 422-8  Preventive Management of Cluster Headache
SHORT-TERM PREVENTION
LONG-TERM PREVENTION
EPISODIC CLUSTER 
HEADACHE
EPISODIC CLUSTER HEADACHE AND 
PROLONGED CHRONIC CLUSTER HEADACHE
Prednisone 1 mg/kg up to  
60 mg qd, tapering over  
21 days
Verapamil 160–960 mg/d
Greater occipital nerve 
injection
Verapamil 160–960 mg/d
Topiramatea 100–400 mg/d
nVNSb 6 to 24 stimulations/d
Lithium 400–800 mg/d
Melatonina 9–12 mg/d
Gabapentina 1200–3600 mg/d
aUnproven but of potential benefit. bNon-invasive vagus nerve stimulation.


--- PDF PAGE 3152 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3106 resolve, thus giving a “saw-tooth” phenomenon with attacks lasting 
many minutes. Each pattern may be seen in the context of an under-
lying continuous head pain. Characteristics that lead to a suspected 
diagnosis of SUNCT are the cutaneous (or other) triggers of attacks, a 
lack of refractory period to triggering between attacks, and the lack of a 
response to indomethacin. Apart from trigeminal sensory disturbance, 
the neurologic examination is normal in primary SUNCT/SUNA.
The diagnosis of SUNCT/SUNA is often confused with TN particu-
larly in first-division TN (Chap. 433). Minimal or no cranial autonomic 
symptoms and a clear refractory period to triggering indicate a diag-
nosis of TN.
SECONDARY (SYMPTOMATIC) SUNCT  SUNCT can be seen with posterior 
fossa or pituitary lesions. All patients with SUNCT/SUNA should be 
evaluated with pituitary function tests and a brain MRI with pituitary 
views.
TREATMENT
SUNCT/SUNA
ABORTIVE THERAPY
Therapy of acute attacks is not a useful concept in SUNCT/SUNA 
because the attacks are of such short duration. However, IV lido-
caine, which arrests the symptoms, can be used in hospitalized 
patients.
PREVENTIVE THERAPY
Long-term prevention to minimize disability and hospitalization is 
the goal of treatment. The most effective treatment for prevention is 
lamotrigine, 200–400 mg/d. Topiramate and gabapentin may also 
be effective. Carbamazepine, 400–500 mg/d, has been reported by 
patients to offer modest benefit.
Surgical approaches such as microvascular decompression or 
destructive trigeminal procedures are seldom useful and often pro-
duce long-term complications. Greater occipital nerve injection has 
produced limited benefit in some patients. Occipital nerve stimula-
tion is probably helpful in a subgroup of these patients. For intrac-
table cases, short-term prevention with IV lidocaine can be effective.
Hemicrania Continua  The essential features of hemicrania con-
tinua are moderate and continuous unilateral pain associated with fluc-
tuations of severe pain; complete resolution of pain with indomethacin; 
and exacerbations that may be associated with autonomic features, 
including conjunctival injection, lacrimation, and photophobia on the 
affected side. The age of onset ranges from 10 to 70 years; women are 
affected twice as often as men. The cause is unknown.
TREATMENT
Hemicrania Continua
Treatment consists of indomethacin; other NSAIDs appear to be of 
little or no benefit. The IM injection of 100 mg of indomethacin has 
been proposed as a diagnostic tool, and administration with a pla-
cebo injection in a blinded fashion can be very useful diagnostically. 
Alternatively, a trial of oral indomethacin, starting with 25 mg tid, 
then 50 mg tid, and then 75 mg tid, can be given. Up to 2 weeks at 
the maximal dose may be necessary to assess whether a dose has 
a useful effect. Topiramate can be helpful in some patients. nVNS 
can be useful in these patients. Occipital nerve stimulation probably 
has a role in patients with hemicrania continua who are unable to 
tolerate indomethacin.
■
■OTHER PRIMARY HEADACHES
Primary Cough Headache  Primary cough headache is a gener-
alized headache that begins suddenly, lasts for seconds or several min-
utes, sometimes up to a few hours, and is precipitated by coughing; it is 
preventable by avoiding coughing or other precipitating events, which 
can include sneezing, straining, laughing, or stooping. In all patients 
with this syndrome, serious etiologies must be excluded before a diag-
nosis of “benign” primary cough headache can be established. A Chiari 
malformation or any lesion causing obstruction of CSF pathways or 
displacing cerebral structures can be the cause of the head pain. Other 
conditions that can present with cough or exertional headache as 
the initial symptom include cerebral aneurysm, carotid stenosis, and 
vertebrobasilar disease. Benign cough headache can resemble benign 
exertional headache (below), but patients with the former condition 
are typically older.
TREATMENT
Primary Cough Headache
Indomethacin 25–50 mg two to three times daily is the treatment of 
choice. Some patients with cough headache obtain complete cessa-
tion of their attacks with lumbar puncture; this is a simple option 
when compared to prolonged use of indomethacin, and it is effective 
in about one-third of patients. The mechanism of this response is 
unclear.
Primary Exercise Headache  Primary exercise headache has 
features resembling both cough headache and migraine. It may be 
precipitated by any form of exercise; it often has the pulsatile quality of 
migraine. The pain lasts <48 h, is bilateral and often throbbing at onset; 
migrainous features may develop in patients susceptible to migraine. 
The duration tends to be shorter in adolescents than in older adults. 
Primary exercise headache can be prevented by avoiding excessive 
exertion, particularly in hot weather or at high altitude.
The mechanism of primary exercise headache is unclear. Acute 
venous distension likely explains one syndrome—the acute onset of 
headache with straining and breath holding, as in weightlifter’s head-
ache. Because exercise can result in headache in a number of serious 
underlying conditions (Chap. 13), these must be considered in patients 
with exercise headache. Pain from angina may be referred to the head, 
probably by central connections of vagal afferents, and may present as 
exercise headache (cardiac cephalgia). The link to exercise is the main 
clinical clue that headache is of cardiac origin. Pheochromocytoma may 
occasionally cause exercise headache. Intracranial lesions and stenosis 
of the carotid arteries are other possible etiologies.
TREATMENT
Primary Exercise Headache
Exercise regimens should begin modestly and progress gradually to 
higher levels of intensity. Indomethacin at daily doses from 25 to 150 
mg is generally effective in benign exertional headache. Indometha-
cin (50 mg), ergotamine (1 mg orally), and dihydroergotamine (2 mg 
by nasal spray) are useful prophylactic measures.
Primary Headache Associated with Sexual Activity  Three 
types of sex headache are reported: a dull bilateral ache in the head 
and neck that intensifies as sexual excitement increases; a sudden, 
severe, explosive headache occurring at orgasm; and a postural head-
ache developing after coitus. The last arises from vigorous sexual 
activity and is a form of low CSF pressure headache and thus not a 
primary headache disorder (Chap. 13). Headaches developing at the 
time of orgasm are not always benign; 5–12% of cases of subarachnoid 
hemorrhage are precipitated by sexual intercourse. Sex headache is 
reported by men more often than women and may occur at any time 
during the years of sexual activity. It may appear on several occasions 
in succession and then not trouble the patient again, even without an 
obvious change in sexual activity. In patients who stop sexual activity 
when headache is first noticed, the pain may subside within a period of 
5 min to 2 h. In about half of patients, sex headache will subside within 
6 months. Most patients with sex headache do not have exercise or 


--- PDF PAGE 3153 ---

CHAPTER 422 Migraine and Other Primary Headache Disorders
3107
cough headache; this clinical paradox is generally a marker of primary 
sex headache. Migraine is probably more common in patients with sex 
headache.
TREATMENT
Primary Sex Headache
Benign sex headaches recur irregularly and infrequently. Manage-
ment can often be limited to reassurance and advice about ceasing 
sexual activity if a mild, warning headache develops. Propranolol 
can be used to prevent headache that recurs regularly or frequently, 
but the dosage required varies from 40 to 200 mg/d. An alterna-
tive is the calcium channel–blocking agent diltiazem, 60 mg tid. 
Indomethacin (25–50 mg) or frovatriptan (2.5 mg) taken 30–45 min 
prior to sexual activity can also be helpful.
Primary Thunderclap Headache 
Sudden onset of severe 
headache may occur in the absence of any known provocation. The 
differential diagnosis includes the sentinel bleed of an intracranial 
aneurysm, cervicocephalic arterial dissection, and cerebral venous 
thrombosis. Headaches of explosive onset may also be caused by the 
ingestion of sympathomimetic drugs or of tyramine-containing foods 
in a patient who is taking MAOIs, or they may be a symptom of pheo-
chromocytoma. Whether thunderclap headache can be the presentation 
of an unruptured cerebral aneurysm is uncertain. When neuroimaging 
studies and lumbar puncture exclude subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
patients with thunderclap headache usually do very well over the 
long term. In one study of patients whose computed tomography (CT) 
scans and CSF findings were negative, ~15% had recurrent episodes 
of thunderclap headache, and nearly half subsequently developed 
migraine or TTH.
The first presentation of any sudden-onset severe headache should 
be diligently investigated with neuroimaging (CT or, when possible, 
MRI with MR angiography) and CSF examination. Reversible seg-
mental cerebral vasoconstriction may be seen in primary thunderclap 
headache without an intracranial aneurysm, and it is thought that 
this may be an under-diagnosed condition. In the presence of pos-
terior leukoencephalopathy, the differential diagnosis includes cere-
bral angiitis, drug toxicity (cyclosporine, intrathecal methotrexate/
cytarabine, pseudoephedrine, or cocaine), posttransfusion effects, 
and postpartum angiopathy. Treatment with nimodipine may be help-
ful, although the vasoconstriction of primary thunderclap headache 
resolves spontaneously.
Cold-Stimulus Headache  This refers to head pain triggered by 
application or ingestion/inhalation of something cold. It is bought on 
quickly and typically resolves within 10–30 min of the stimulus being 
removed. It is best recognized as “brain-freeze” headache or ice-cream 
headache when due to ingestion. Although cold may be uncomfortable 
at some level for many people, it is the reliable, severe, and somewhat 
prolonged nature of these pains that set them apart. The transient 
receptor potential cation subfamily M member 8 (TRPM8) channel, a 
known cold temperature sensor, may be a mediator of this syndrome.
External Pressure Headache  External pressure from compres-
sion or traction on the head can produce a pain that may have some 
generalized component, although the pain is largely focused around 
the site of the pressure. It typically resolves within an hour of the stim-
ulus being removed. Examples of stimuli include helmets, swimming 
goggles, or very long ponytails. Treatment is to recognize the problem 
and remove the stimulus.
Primary Stabbing Headache  The essential features of primary 
stabbing headache are stabbing pain confined to the head or, rarely, 
the face, lasting from 1 to many seconds and occurring as a single stab 
or a series of stabs; absence of associated cranial autonomic features; 
absence of cutaneous triggering of attacks; and a pattern of recurrence 
at irregular intervals (hours to days). The pains have been variously 
described as “ice-pick pains” or “jabs and jolts.” They are more 
common in patients with other primary headaches, such as migraine, 
the TACs, and hemicrania continua.
TREATMENT
Primary Stabbing Headache
The response of primary stabbing headache to indomethacin  
(25–50 mg two to three times daily) is usually excellent. As a general 
rule, the symptoms wax and wane, and after a period of control on 
indomethacin, it is appropriate to withdraw treatment and observe 
the outcome.
Nummular Headache  Nummular headache is felt as a round or 
elliptical discomfort that is fixed in place, ranges in size from 1 to 6 cm, 
and may be continuous or intermittent. Uncommonly it may be multi-
focal. It may be episodic but is more often continuous during exacerba-
tions. Accompanying the pain there may be a local sensory disturbance, 
such as allodynia or hypesthesia. Local dermatologic or bony lesions 
need to be excluded by examination and investigation. This condition 
can be difficult to treat when present in isolation; tricyclics, such as 
amitriptyline, or anticonvulsants, such as topiramate or valproate, 
are most often tried. This phenotype can be seen in combination with 
migraine and the TACs, in which cases treatment of the associated 
condition is often effective for the nummular headache as well.
Hypnic Headache  This headache syndrome typically begins a 
few hours after sleep onset. The headaches last from 15 to 30 min and 
are typically moderately severe and generalized, although they may 
be unilateral and can be throbbing. Patients may report falling back 
to sleep only to be awakened by a further attack a few hours later; up 
to three repetitions of this pattern occur through the night. Daytime 
naps can also precipitate head pain. Most patients are female, and the 
onset is usually after age 60 years. Headaches are bilateral in most, but 
may be unilateral. Photophobia, phonophobia, and nausea are usually 
absent. The major secondary consideration in this headache type is 
poorly controlled hypertension; 24-h blood pressure monitoring is 
recommended to detect this treatable condition.
TREATMENT
Hypnic Headache
Patients with hypnic headache generally respond to a bedtime dose 
of lithium carbonate (200–600 mg). For those intolerant of lithium, 
verapamil (160 mg) is an alternative strategy. One to two cups of 
coffee or caffeine, 60 mg orally, at bedtime may be effective in approx-
imately one-third of patients. Case reports also suggest that flunariz-
ine, 5 mg nightly, or indomethacin, 25–75 mg nightly, can be effective.
New Daily Persistent Headache  Primary new daily persistent 
headache (NDPH) occurs in both males and females. It can be of the 
migrainous type, with features of migraine, or it can be featureless, 
appearing as new-onset TTH. Those with migrainous features are the 
most common form, and include unilateral headache and throbbing 
pain; each feature is present in about one-third of patients. Nausea, 
photophobia, and/or phonophobia occur in about half of patients. 
Some patients have a previous history of migraine; however, the pro-
portion of NDPH sufferers with preexisting migraine is no greater than 
the frequency of migraine in the general population. NDPH may be 
more common in adolesents. Treatment of migrainous-type primary 
NDPH consists of using the preventive therapies effective in migraine 
(see above). Featureless NDPH is one of the primary headache forms 
most refractory to treatment. Standard preventive therapies can be 
offered but are often ineffective. The secondary NDPHs are discussed 
elsewhere (Chap. 13).
Acknowledgment
The Editors acknowledge the contributions of Neil H. Raskin to earlier editions 
of this chapter.


================================================================================
Ch423 Alzheimers Disease
Pages 3154-3160
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3154 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3108
■
■FURTHER READING
Charles A: Migraine. N Engl J Med 377:553, 2017.
Goadsby PJ: Bench to bedside advances in the 21st century for primary 
headache disorders: Migraine treatments for migraine patients. Brain 
139:2571, 2016.
Goadsby PJ et al: Pathophysiology of migraine: A disorder of sensory 
processing. Physiol Rev 97:553, 2017.
Lipton RB et al: Migraine prevalence, disease burden, and the need for 
preventive therapy. Neurology 68:343, 2007.
May A: Cluster headache: Pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management. 
Lancet 366:843, 2005.
Schankin CJ et al: “Visual snow”—a disorder distinct from persistent 
migraine aura. Brain 137:1419, 2014.
Tolner EA et al: From migraine genes to mechanisms. Pain 156  
Suppl 1:S64, 2015.
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
Approximately 10% of all persons aged >70 years have significant 
memory loss, and in more than half the cause is Alzheimer’s disease 
(AD). It is estimated that the median annual total cost of caring for a 
single patient with advanced AD is >$50,000, while the emotional toll 
for family members and caregivers is immeasurable. AD can manifest 
as early as the third decade of life, but it is the most common cause of 
dementia in the elderly. Patients most often present with an insidious 
loss of episodic memory followed by a slowly progressive dementia. 
In typical amnestic AD, brain atrophy begins in the medial temporal 
lobes before spreading to lateral and medial parietal and temporal 
lobes and lateral frontal cortex. Microscopically, there are widespread 
neuritic plaques containing amyloid beta (Aβ), neurofibrillary tangles 
(NFTs) composed of hyperphosphorylated tau filaments, and Aβ 
accumulation in blood vessel walls in cortex and leptomeninges (see 
“Pathology,” below). The identification of causative mutations and sus-
ceptibility genes for AD has provided a foundation for rapid progress 
in understanding the biological basis of the disorder. The major genetic 
risk for AD is the ε4 allele of the apolipoprotein E (ApoE) gene. Carry-
ing one ε4 allele increases the risk for AD by two- to threefold whereas 
two alleles increase the risk sixteenfold in both sexes.
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The cognitive changes of AD tend to follow a characteristic pattern, 
beginning with memory impairment and progressing to language 
and visuospatial deficits, followed by executive dysfunction. Yet, 
~20% of patients with AD present with non-memory complaints such 
as word-finding, organizational, or navigational difficulty. In other 
patients, visual processing dysfunction (referred to as posterior cortical 
atrophy syndrome) or a progressive “logopenic” aphasia characterized 
by difficulties with naming and repetition are the primary manifesta-
tions of AD for years before progressing to involve memory and other 
cognitive domains. Still other patients may present with an asymmetric 
akinetic-rigid-dystonic (“corticobasal”) syndrome or a dysexecutive/
behavioral, i.e., “frontal” variant of AD.
In the early stages of typical amnestic AD, the memory loss may 
go unrecognized or be ascribed to benign forgetfulness of aging. Once 
the memory loss becomes noticeable to the patient and spouse and 
falls 1.5 standard deviations below normal on standardized memory 
tests, the term mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is often used. This 
construct provides useful prognostic information, because ~50% of 
patients with MCI (roughly 12% per year) will progress to AD over 
4 years. Increasingly, the MCI construct is being replaced by the 
notion of “early symptomatic AD” to signify that AD is considered 
Alzheimer’s Disease
William W. Seeley, Bruce L. Miller 
423
the underlying disease (based on clinical or biomarker evidence) in 
a patient who remains functionally compensated. Even earlier in the 
course, “prodromal AD” refers to a person with biomarker evidence 
of AD (amyloid imaging positive with positron emission tomography 
(PET) or low cerebrospinal Aβ42 and mildly elevated tau) in the absence 
of symptoms. These refinements have been developed in anticipation 
of early-stage treatment and prevention trials that are well underway 
in humans. New evidence suggests that partial and sometimes gener-
alized seizures herald AD and can occur even prior to dementia onset, 
especially in younger patients.
Eventually, with AD, the cognitive problems begin to interfere with 
daily activities, such as keeping track of finances, following instruc-
tions on the job, driving, shopping, and housekeeping. Some patients 
are unaware of these difficulties (anosognosia), but most remain acutely 
attuned to their deficits. Changes in environment (travel, relocation, 
hospitalization) tend to destabilize the patient. Over time, patients 
become lost on walks or while driving. Social graces, routine behavior, 
and superficial conversation may be surprisingly intact, even into the 
later stages of the illness.
In the middle stages of AD, the patient is unable to work, is easily 
lost and confused, and requires daily supervision. Language becomes 
impaired—first naming, then comprehension, and finally fluency. 
Word-finding difficulties and circumlocution can be evident in the 
early stages, even when formal testing demonstrates intact naming and 
fluency. Apraxia emerges, manifesting as trouble performing learned 
sequential motor tasks such as using utensils or appliances. Visuospa-
tial deficits begin to interfere with dressing, eating, or even walking, 
and patients fail to solve simple puzzles or copy geometric figures. 
Simple calculations and clock reading become difficult in parallel.
In the late stages, some persons remain ambulatory, wandering 
aimlessly. Loss of judgment and reasoning is inevitable. Delusions are 
prevalent and usually simple, with common themes of theft, infidelity, 
or misidentification. Disinhibition and uncharacteristic belligerence 
may occur and alternate with passivity and withdrawal. Sleep-wake 
patterns are disrupted, and nighttime wandering becomes disturbing 
to the household. Some patients develop a shuffling gait with gener-
alized muscle rigidity associated with slowness and awkwardness of 
movement. Patients often look parkinsonian (Chap. 427) but rarely 
have a high-amplitude, low-frequency tremor at rest. There is a strong 
overlap between dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) (Chap. 426) and 
AD, and some AD patients develop more classical parkinsonian 
features.
In the end stages, patients with AD become rigid, mute, inconti-
nent, and bedridden, and help is needed with eating, dressing, and 
toileting. Hyperactive tendon reflexes and myoclonic jerks (sudden 
brief contractions of various muscles or the whole body) may occur 
spontaneously or in response to physical or auditory stimulation. Often 
death results from malnutrition, secondary infections, pulmonary 
emboli, heart disease, or, most commonly, aspiration. The typical dura-
tion of symptomatic AD is 8–10 years, but the course ranges from 1 to 
25 years. For unknown reasons, some patients with AD show a steady 
decline in function while others have prolonged plateaus without 
major deterioration.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A detailed discussion of the diagnosis of dementia is presented in 
Chap. 25. Early in the disease course, other etiologies of dementia 
should be excluded (see Tables 25-1, 25-3, and 25-4). Neuroimaging 
studies (computed tomography [CT] and magnetic resonance imaging 
[MRI]) do not show a single specific pattern with AD and may be 
normal early in the disease. As AD progresses, more distributed but 
usually posterior-predominant cortical atrophy becomes apparent, 
along with atrophy of the medial temporal memory structures (see 
Fig. 25-1). The main purpose of imaging is to exclude other disorders, 
such as primary and secondary neoplasms, vascular dementia, diffuse 
white matter disease, and normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH). 
Imaging also helps to distinguish AD from other degenerative disor-
ders, such as frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (Chap. 424) or the prion 
disorder Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) (Chap. 430), which feature 


--- PDF PAGE 3155 ---

CHAPTER 423 Alzheimer’s Disease
3109
distinctive imaging patterns. Functional imaging studies, such as PET, 
reveal hypometabolism in the posterior temporal-parietal cortex in AD 
(see Fig. 25-1). PET can also be used to detect the presence of fibrillar 
amyloid in the brain (see Fig. 25-4), and amyloid PET positivity is 
becoming a criterion for entry into AD treatment trials. Use of amyloid 
PET in routine clinical evaluation may be limited to specific clinical sce-
narios, however. Although amyloid PET binding is detected in AD, many 
asymptomatic healthy older individuals also show amyloid uptake, and 
the likelihood that these individuals will convert to clinical AD is still 
under study. Similarly, dementia due to a non-AD disorder can be the 
underlying etiology in a patient who tests positively on amyloid PET. 
Electroencephalogram (EEG) is normal or shows nonspecific slowing; 
prolonged EEG can be used to seek out intermittent nonconvulsive 
seizures. Routine spinal fluid examination is also normal. Cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) Aβ42 level is reduced, whereas phosphorylated tau protein is 
elevated, but the test characteristics of these assays can still make inter-
pretation challenging in individual patients. Slowly progressive decline in 
memory and orientation, normal results on laboratory tests, and an MRI or CT 
scan showing only distributed or posteriorly predominant cortical and hippocam-
pal atrophy are highly suggestive of AD. A clinical diagnosis of AD reached 
after careful evaluation is confirmed at autopsy about 90% of the time, 
with misdiagnosed cases usually resulting from pathological fronto-
temporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), DLB, hippocampal sclerosis of the 
elderly, or a mixture of mild AD changes with vascular or DLB pathology.
Simple clinical clues are useful in the differential diagnosis. Early 
prominent gait disturbance with only mild memory loss suggests vas-
cular dementia or, rarely, NPH (see below). Resting tremor with stooped 
posture, bradykinesia, and masked facies suggest PD (Chap. 427) or DLB 
(Chap. 426). When dementia occurs after a well-established diagnosis 
of PD, PD dementia (PDD) is usually the correct diagnosis, but many 
patients with this diagnosis will show a mixture of AD and Lewy body 
disease at autopsy. The early appearance of parkinsonian features in 
association with fluctuating alertness, visual hallucinations, or delu-
sional misidentification suggests DLB. Chronic alcoholism should 
prompt the search for vitamin deficiency. Loss of joint position and 
vibration sensibility accompanied by Babinski signs suggests vitamin 
B12 deficiency, especially in a patient with a history of autoimmune 
disease, small bowel resection or irradiation, or veganism (Chap. 95). 
Early onset of a focal seizure suggests a metastatic or primary brain 
neoplasm (Chap. 86). Previous or ongoing depression raises suspicion 
for depression-related cognitive impairment, although AD can feature 
a depressive prodrome. A history of treatment for insomnia, anxiety, 
psychiatric disturbance, or epilepsy suggests chronic drug intoxication. 
Rapid progression over a few weeks or months associated with rigid-
ity and myoclonus suggests CJD (Chap. 430). Prominent behavioral 
changes with intact navigation and focal anterior-predominant atrophy 
on brain imaging are typical of FTD. A positive family history of demen-
tia suggests either one of the familial forms of AD or one of the other 
genetic disorders associated with dementia, such as FTD (Chap. 424), 
Huntington’s disease (HD) (Chap. 428), prion disease (Chap. 430), or 
rare hereditary ataxias (Chap. 431).
■
■EPIDEMIOLOGY
The most important risk factors for AD are age >70 years and a positive 
family history. The prevalence of AD increases with each decade of adult 
life, reaching 20–40% of the population aged >85. A positive family his-
tory of dementia suggests a genetic contribution to AD, although auto-
somal dominant inheritance occurs in only 2% of patients. Female sex 
is a risk factor independent of the greater longevity of women, and 
women who carry a single Apo ε4 allele are more susceptible than are 
male ε4 carriers. A history of head trauma with concussion increases 
the risk for AD. AD is more common in groups with low educational 
attainment, but education influences test-taking ability, and it is clear 
that AD can affect persons of all intellectual levels. One study found 
that the capacity to express complex written language in early adult-
hood correlated with a decreased risk for AD. Numerous environ-
mental factors, including aluminum, mercury, and viruses, have been 
proposed as causes of AD, but rigorous studies have failed to demon-
strate a significant role for any of these exposures. Similarly, several 
studies suggest that the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents 
is associated with a decreased risk of AD, but this risk has not been 
confirmed in large prospective studies. Vascular disease, and stroke in 
particular, seems to lower the threshold for the clinical expression of 
AD. Also, in many patients with AD, amyloid angiopathy can lead to 
microhemorrhages, large lobar hemorrhages, ischemic infarctions most 
often in the subcortical white matter, or in rare cases an inflammatory 
leukoencephalopathy. Diabetes increases the risk of AD threefold. Ele-
vated homocysteine and cholesterol levels; hypertension; diminished 
serum levels of folic acid; low dietary intake of fruits, vegetables, and 
red wine; and low levels of exercise are all being explored as potential 
risk factors for AD.
■
■PATHOLOGY
At autopsy, the earliest and most severe degeneration is usually found 
in the medial temporal lobe (entorhinal/perirhinal cortex and hippo-
campus), inferolateral temporal cortex, and nucleus basalis of Meynert. 
The characteristic microscopic findings are neuritic plaques and NFTs 
(Fig. 423-1). These lesions accumulate in small numbers during normal 
brain aging but dominate the picture in AD. Increasing evidence sug-
gests that soluble amyloid species called oligomers may cause cellular 
dysfunction and represent the early toxic molecule in AD. Eventually, 
further amyloid polymerization and fibril formation lead to neuritic 
plaques, which contain a central core of amyloid, proteoglycans, ApoE, 
α-antichymotrypsin, and other proteins. Aβ is a protein of 39–42 amino 
acids that is derived proteolytically from a larger transmembrane pro-
tein, amyloid precursor protein (APP), when APP is cleaved by β and γ 
secretases (Fig. 423-2). The normal function of the Aβ peptides remains 
uncertain. APP has neurotrophic and neuroprotective properties. 
The plaque core is surrounded by a halo, which contains dystrophic, 
tau-immunoreactive neurites and activated microglia. The accumula-
tion of Aβ in cerebral arterioles is termed amyloid angiopathy. NFTs are 
composed of silver-staining neuronal cytoplasmic fibrils composed of 
abnormally phosphorylated tau protein; they appear as paired helical 
filaments by electron microscopy. Tau binds to and stabilizes microtu-
bules, supporting axonal transport of organelles, glycoproteins, neuro-
transmitters, and other important cargoes throughout the neuron. Once 
hyperphosphorylated, tau can no longer bind properly to microtubules 
and redistributes from the axon to throughout the neuronal cytoplasm 
and distal dendrites, compromising function. Other theories empha-
size that abnormal conformations of tau induce misfolding of native 
(unfolded) tau into pathological conformations and that this prion-like 
templating process is responsible for tau spreading (Chap. 417). Finally, 
patients with AD often show comorbid DLB or vascular pathology. 
Most prevailing rodent models of AD involve expression of mutant 
transgenes that leads to Aβ42 accumulation in the absence of tauopathy. 
Even in these models, diminishing neuronal tau ameliorates cognitive 
deficits and nonconvulsive seizures while Aβ42 continues to accumu-
late, raising hope for tau-lowering therapies in humans. Biochemi-
cally, AD is associated with a decrease in the cortical levels of several 
proteins and neurotransmitters, especially acetylcholine, its synthetic 
enzyme choline acetyltransferase, and nicotinic cholinergic receptors. 
Reduction of acetylcholine reflects degeneration of cholinergic neurons 
in the nucleus basalis of Meynert, located just below the thalamus and 
adjacent to the third ventricle, that project throughout the cortex. There 
is also noradrenergic and serotonergic depletion due to degeneration 
of upper brainstem nuclei such as the locus coeruleus (norepinephrine) 
and dorsal raphe (serotonin), where tau-immunoreactive neuronal 
cytoplasmic inclusions can be identified in early adult life, even in 
individuals lacking entorhinal cortex NFTs.
■
■GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Several genes play an important role in the pathogenesis of AD. 
One is the APP gene on chromosome 21. Adults with trisomy 21 
(Down’s syndrome) consistently develop the typical neuropatho-
logic hallmarks of AD if they survive beyond age 40 years, and many 
develop a progressive dementia superimposed on their baseline mental 
retardation. The extra dose of the APP gene on chromosome 21 is the 
initiating cause of AD in adult Down’s syndrome and results in excess 


--- PDF PAGE 3156 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3110
cerebral amyloid production. Supporting this hypothesis, some fami-
lies with early age-of-onset familial AD (FAD) have point mutations in 
APP. Although very rare, these families were the first examples of 
single-gene autosomal dominant transmission of AD.
Investigation of large families with multigenerational FAD led to 
the discovery of two additional AD-causing genes, the presenilins. 
Presenilin-1 (PSEN-1) is on chromosome 14 and encodes presenilin-1 
protein (also known as S182). Mutations in this gene cause an early 
age-of-onset AD, with onset typically before age 60 and often before 
age 50, transmitted in an autosomal dominant, highly penetrant fash-
ion. More than 100 different mutations have been found in the PSEN-1 
gene in families from a wide range of ethnic backgrounds. Presenilin-2 
(PSEN-2) is on chromosome 1 and encodes the presenilin-2 protein 
(also known as STM2). A mutation in the PSEN-2 gene was first found 
in a group of American families with Volga German ethnic background. 
Mutations in PSEN-1 are much more common than those in PSEN-2. 
The presenilins are highly homologous and encode similar proteins 
that at first appeared to have seven transmembrane domains (hence 
the designation STM), but subsequent studies have suggested eight 
such domains, with a ninth submembrane region. Both presenilins are 
cytoplasmic neuronal proteins that are widely expressed throughout 
the nervous system. They are homologous to a cell-trafficking protein, 
sel 12, found in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Patients with 
mutations in the presenilin genes have elevated plasma levels of Aβ42, 
and PSEN-1 mutations produce increased Aβ42 in the media in cell cul-
ture. PSEN-1 is involved in the cleavage of APP at the γ secretase site 
and mutations in either gene (PSEN-1 or APP) may disturb γ secretase 
cleavage. Mutations in PSEN-1 are the most common cause of early-
age-of-onset FAD, representing perhaps 40–70% of all cases. Mutations 
in PSEN-1 tend to produce AD with an earlier age of onset (mean onset 
45 years) and a shorter, more rapidly progressive course (mean dura-
tion 6–7 years) than the disease caused by mutations in PSEN-2 (mean 
onset 53 years; duration 11 years). Although some carriers of PSEN-2 
mutations have had onset of dementia after the age of 70, mutations 
in the presenilins rarely lead to late-age-of-onset AD. Clinical genetic 
testing for these uncommon mutations is available but likely to be 
revealing only in early-age-of-onset FAD and should be performed in 
association with formal genetic counseling.
The Apo ε gene on chromosome 19 is involved in the pathogenesis of 
AD. The protein product, apolipoprotein E, participates in cholesterol 
transport (Chap. 400), and the gene has three alleles: ε2, ε3, and ε4. The 
Apo ε4 allele confers increased risk of AD in the general population, 
including sporadic and late age-of-onset familial forms. Approximately 
24–30% of the non-demented white population has at least one ε4 
allele (12–15% allele frequency), and about 2% are ε4/ε4 homozy-
gotes. Among patients with AD, 40–65% have at least one ε4 allele, a 
highly significant elevation compared with controls. The increased risk 
associated with a single ε4 allele is especially prominent in women. 
Conversely, many patients with AD have no ε4 allele, and ε4 carri-
ers may never develop AD. Therefore, ε4 is neither necessary nor 
sufficient to cause AD. Nevertheless, the Apo ε4 allele represents the 
Nontoxic
Cell
membrane
Step 1: Cleavage by either α or β secretase
Step 2: Cleavage by γ secretase
β Secretase product
α Secretase product
APP
β
α
γ
Nontoxic
Toxic
Amyloidogenic
P3
Aβ40
Aβ42
FIGURE 423-2  Amyloid precursor protein (APP) is catabolized by `, a, and f 
secretases. A key initial step is the digestion by either β secretase (BASE) or α 
secretase (ADAM10 or ADAM17 [TACE]), producing smaller nontoxic products. 
Cleavage of the β secretase product by γ secretase (Step 2) results in either the 
toxic Aβ42 or the nontoxic Aβ40 peptide; cleavage of the α secretase product by 
γ secretase produces the nontoxic P3 peptide. Excess production of Aβ42 is a 
key initiator of cellular damage in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Therapeutics for AD 
have focused on attempts to reduce accumulation of Aβ42 by antagonizing β or γ 
secretases, promoting α secretase, or clearing Aβ42 that has already formed by 
use of specific antibodies.
A
B
FIGURE 423-1  Neuropathology of Alzheimer’s disease. A. Early neurofibrillary degeneration, consisting of neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads, preferentially 
affects the medial temporal lobes, especially the stellate pyramidal neurons that compose the layer 2 islands of entorhinal cortex, as shown using Gallyas silver 
staining. B. Higher magnification view reveals the fibrillar nature of tangles (arrows) and the complex structure of neuritic plaques (arrowheads), whose major 
component is Aβ (inset shows immunohistochemistry for Aβ). Scale bars are 500 μM in A, 50 μM in B, and 20 μM in B inset.


--- PDF PAGE 3157 ---

CHAPTER 423 Alzheimer’s Disease
3111
most important genetic risk factor for sporadic AD and acts as a dose- 
dependent disease modifier, with the earliest age of onset associated 
with the ε4 homozygosity. Precise mechanisms through which Apo ε4 
confers AD risk or hastens onset remain unclear, but ε4 leads to less effi-
cient amyloid clearance and to the production of toxic fragments from 
cleavage of the molecule. Apo ε can be identified in neuritic plaques 
and may also be involved in neurofibrillary tangle formation, because it 
binds to tau protein. Apo ε4 decreases neurite outgrowth in dorsal root 
ganglion neuronal cultures, perhaps indicating a deleterious role in the 
brain’s response to injury. Some evidence suggests that the ε2 allele 
may reduce AD risk. Use of Apo ε testing in AD diagnosis remains 
controversial because its predictive value remains unclear and many 
individuals with the ε4 allele will never develop dementia. Cognitively 
normal ε4 heterozygotes and homozygotes may show decreased pos-
terior cerebral cortical metabolic function by PET imaging, suggesting 
presymptomatic abnormalities due to AD or an inherited vulnerability 
of the AD-targeted network. In demented persons who meet clinical 
criteria for AD, finding an ε4 allele increases the reliability of diagnosis; 
however, the absence of an ε4 allele cannot be considered evidence 
against AD. Nevertheless, Apo ε4 remains the single most important 
biologic marker associated with AD risk, and studies of ε4’s functional 
role and diagnostic utility are progressing rapidly. The ε4 allele is not 
associated with risk for FTD, DLB, or CJD, although some evidence 
suggests that ε4 may worsen the expression of non-AD degenerative 
disorders, head trauma, and other brain injuries. Additional genes are 
also likely to be involved in AD, especially as minor risk alleles for 
sporadic forms of the disease. Genome-wide association studies have 
implicated the clusterin (CLU), phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin 
assembly protein (PICALM), and complement component (3b/4b) 
receptor 1 (CR1) genes, among others. CLU may play a role in synapse 
turnover, PICALM participates in clathrin-mediated endocytosis, and 
CR1 may be involved in amyloid clearance or synapse loss through the 
complement pathway. TREM2 is a gene involved with inflammation 
that increases the likelihood of dementia. Homozygous mutation carri-
ers develop a frontal dementia with bone cysts (Nasu-Hakola disease), 
whereas heterozygotes are predisposed to the development of AD.
TREATMENT
Alzheimer’s Disease
The management of AD is challenging and gratifying despite the 
absence of a cure or a robust pharmacologic treatment. The primary 
focus is on long-term amelioration of associated behavioral and neu-
rologic problems, as well as providing caregiver support.
Building rapport with the patient, family members, and other 
caregivers is essential. In the early stages of AD, memory aids such 
as notebooks and posted daily reminders can be helpful. Family 
members should emphasize activities that are pleasant while cur-
tailing those that increase stress on the patient. Kitchens, bathrooms, 
stairways, and bedrooms need to be made safe, and eventually 
patients will need to stop driving. Loss of independence and change 
of environment may worsen confusion, agitation, and anger. Com-
munication and repeated calm reassurance are necessary. Caregiver 
“burnout” is common, often resulting in nursing home placement of 
the patient or new health problems for the caregiver. Respite breaks 
for the caregiver help to maintain a successful long-term thera-
peutic milieu. Use of adult day care centers can be helpful. Local 
and national support groups, such as the Alzheimer’s Association 
and the Family Caregiver Alliance, are valuable resources. Internet 
access to these resources has become available to clinicians and 
families in recent years.
Donepezil (target dose, 10 mg daily), rivastigmine (target dose, 
6 mg twice daily or 9.5-mg patch daily), galantamine (target dose 
24 mg daily, extended-release), and memantine (target dose, 10 mg 
twice daily) are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) for the treatment of AD. Due to hepatotoxicity, tacrine 
is no longer used. Dose escalations for each of these medications 
must be carried out over 4–6 weeks to minimize side effects. The 
pharmacologic action of donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine 
is inhibition of the cholinesterases, primarily acetylcholinesterase, 
with a resulting increase in cerebral acetylcholine levels. Meman-
tine appears to act by blocking overexcited N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA) glutamate receptors. Double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
crossover studies with cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine 
in moderate to severe AD have shown them to be associated with 
improved caregiver ratings of patients’ functioning and with an 
apparent decreased rate of decline in cognitive test scores over 
periods of up to 3 years. The average patient on an anticholin-
esterase inhibitor maintains his or her mini-mental state examina-
tion (MMSE) score for close to a year, whereas a placebo-treated 
patient declines 2–3 points over the same time period. Memantine, 
used in conjunction with cholinesterase inhibitors or by itself, slows 
cognitive deterioration and decreases caregiver burden for patients 
with moderate to severe AD, but is not approved for mild AD. Each 
of these compounds has only modest efficacy for AD. Cholinesterase 
inhibitors are relatively easy to administer, and their major side 
effects are gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, diarrhea, cramps), 
altered sleep with unpleasant or vivid dreams, bradycardia (usually 
benign), and muscle cramps.
In a prospective observational study, the use of estrogen replace-
ment therapy appeared to protect—by about 50%—against devel-
opment of AD in women. This study seemed to confirm the results 
of two earlier case-controlled studies. Sadly, a prospective placebo-
controlled study of a combined estrogen-progesterone therapy 
for asymptomatic postmenopausal women increased, rather than 
decreased, the prevalence of dementia. This study markedly damp-
ened enthusiasm for hormonal treatments to prevent dementia. 
Additionally, no benefit has been found in the treatment of AD with 
estrogen alone.
A controlled trial of an extract of Ginkgo biloba found modest 
improvement in cognitive function in subjects with AD and vascu-
lar dementia. Unfortunately, a comprehensive 6-year multicenter 
prevention study using ginkgo found no slowing of progression to 
dementia in the treated group.
Vaccination against Aβ42 has proved highly efficacious in mouse 
models of AD, helping clear brain amyloid and preventing fur-
ther amyloid accumulation. In human trials, this approach led to 
life-threatening complications, including meningoencephalitis, in a 
minority of patients. Another experimental approach to AD treat-
ment has been the use of β and γ secretase inhibitors that diminish 
the production of Aβ42, but the first two placebo-controlled trials 
of γ secretase inhibitors, tarenflurbil and semagacestat, were neg-
ative, and semagacestat may have accelerated cognitive decline 
compared to placebo. Passive immunization with monoclonal anti-
bodies against Aβ42 has been tried in mild to moderate AD. These 
studies were negative, leading some to suggest that the patients 
treated were too advanced to respond to amyloid-lowering thera-
pies. Therefore, new trials have started in asymptomatic individuals 
with mild AD, in asymptomatic autosomal dominant forms of AD, 
and in cognitively normal elderly who are amyloid positive with 
PET. Medications that modify tau phosphorylation and aggregation, 
including tau antibodies, are beginning to be studied as possible 
treatments for both AD and non-AD tau-related disorders including 
FTD and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) (Chap. 424).
Several retrospective studies suggest that nonsteroidal anti- 
inflammatory agents and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A 
(HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins) may have a protective 
effect on dementia if used prior to the onset of disease but do not 
influence clinically symptomatic AD. Finally, there is now a strong 
interest in the relationship between diabetes and AD, and insulin- 
regulating studies are being conducted.
Mild to moderate depression is common in the early stages of 
AD and may respond to antidepressants or cholinesterase inhibi-
tors. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are commonly 
used due to their low anticholinergic side effects (for example, 
escitalopram, target dose 5–10 mg daily). Seizures can be treated 
with levetiracetam unless the patient had a different regimen that 


--- PDF PAGE 3158 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3112
was effective prior to the onset of AD. Agitation, insomnia, halluci-
nations, and belligerence are especially troublesome characteristics 
of some AD patients, and these behaviors can lead to nursing home 
placement. The newer generation of atypical antipsychotics, such as 
risperidone, quetiapine, and olanzapine, are being used in low doses 
to treat these neuropsychiatric symptoms. The few controlled stud-
ies comparing drugs against behavioral intervention in the treat-
ment of agitation suggest mild efficacy with significant side effects 
related to sleep, gait, and cardiovascular complications, including 
an increased risk of death. All antipsychotics carry a black box FDA 
warning for use in elderly patients with dementia and thus should 
be prescribed only with caution; however, careful, daily, nonphar-
macologic behavior management is often not available, rendering 
medications necessary for some patients. Finally, medications with 
strong anticholinergic effects should be vigilantly avoided, includ-
ing prescription and over-the-counter sleep aids (e.g., diphenhy-
dramine) or incontinence therapies (e.g., oxybutynin).
A general approach to the symptomatic management of dementia 
is presented in Chap. 25.
OTHER CAUSES OF DEMENTIA
FTD (Chap. 424), vascular dementia (Chap. 425), and DLB (Chap. 426), 
are covered in dedicated chapters. Additional important causes of 
dementia are described here.
Prion diseases such as CJD are rare neurodegenerative conditions 
(prevalence ~1 per million) that produce dementia. CJD is a rapidly 
progressive disorder associated with dementia, focal cortical signs, 
rigidity, and myoclonus, causing death <1 year after first symptoms 
appear. The rapidity of progression seen with CJD is uncommon in AD 
so that the distinction between the two disorders is usually straight-
forward. Cortical basal degeneration (CBD) (Chap. 424) and DLB 
(Chap. 426), more rapid degenerative dementias with prominent 
movement abnormalities, are more likely to be mistaken for CJD. 
The differential diagnosis for CJD includes other rapidly progres-
sive dementing conditions such as viral or bacterial encephalitides, 
Hashimoto’s encephalopathy, central nervous system (CNS) vasculitis, 
lymphoma, or paraneoplastic/autoimmune syndromes. The markedly 
abnormal periodic complexes on EEG and cortical ribboning and basal 
ganglia hyperintensities on fluid-attenuate inversion recovery MRI 
are diagnostic features of CJD, although rarely, prolonged focal or 
generalized seizures can produce a similar imaging appearance. Prion 
diseases are discussed in detail in Chap. 430.
Huntington’s disease (HD) (Chap. 428) is an autosomal dominant 
degenerative brain disorder. HD clinical hallmarks include chorea, 
behavioral disturbance, and executive impairment. Symptoms typ-
ically begin in the fourth or fifth decade, but there is a wide range, 
from childhood to >70 years. Memory is frequently not impaired 
until late in the disease, but attention, judgment, self-awareness, and 
executive functions are often deficient at an early stage. Depression, 
apathy, social withdrawal, irritability, and intermittent disinhibition 
are common. Delusions and obsessive-compulsive behavior may occur. 
Disease duration is variable but typically lasts ~15 years.
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus is a relatively uncommon but treatable 
syndrome. The clinical, physiologic, and neuroimaging characteristics 
of NPH must be carefully distinguished from those of other dementias 
associated with gait impairment. Historically, many patients treated 
for NPH have suffered from other dementias, particularly AD, vas-
cular dementia, DLB, and PSP. For NPH, the clinical triad includes an 
abnormal gait (ataxic or apractic), dementia (usually mild to moderate, 
with an emphasis on executive impairment), and urinary urgency or 
incontinence. Neuroimaging reveals enlarged lateral ventricles (hydro-
cephalus) with little or no cortical atrophy, although the sylvian fissures 
may appear propped open (so-called “boxcarring”), which can be mis-
taken for perisylvian atrophy. Crowding of dorsal frontal-parietal gyri 
helps distinguish NPH from other movement disorders, such as PSP 
and CBD, in which dorsal atrophy with sulcal widening is common. 
NPH is a communicating hydrocephalus with a patent aqueduct of 
Sylvius (see Fig. 25-3), in contrast to aqueductal stenosis, in which 
the aqueduct is small. Lumbar puncture opening pressure falls in 
the high-normal range, and the CSF protein, glucose, and cell counts 
are normal. NPH may be caused by obstruction to normal CSF flow 
over the cerebral convexities and delayed resorption into the venous 
system. The indolent nature of the process results in enlarged lateral 
ventricles with relatively little increase in CSF pressure. Presumed 
edema, stretching, and distortion of subfrontal white matter tracts may 
lead to clinical symptoms, but the precise underlying pathophysiology 
remains unclear. Some patients provide a history of conditions that 
produce meningeal scarring (blocking CSF resorption) such as pre-
vious meningitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage, or head trauma. Others 
with long-standing but asymptomatic congenital hydrocephalus may 
have adult-onset deterioration in gait or memory that is confused with 
NPH. In contrast to AD, the patient with NPH complains of an early 
and prominent gait disturbance without cortical atrophy on CT or MRI.
Numerous attempts to improve NPH diagnosis with various spe-
cial studies and predict the success of ventricular shunting have been 
undertaken. These tests include radionuclide cisternography (showing 
a delay in CSF absorption over the convexity) and various efforts to 
monitor and alter CSF flow dynamics, including a constant-pressure 
infusion test. None has proven to be specific or consistently useful. A 
transient improvement in gait or cognition may follow lumbar punc-
ture (or serial punctures) with removal of 30–50 mL of CSF, but this 
finding has also not proved to be consistently predictive of postshunt 
improvement. Perhaps the most reliable strategy is a period of close 
inpatient evaluation before, during, and after lumbar CSF drainage. 
Occasionally, when a patient with AD presents with gait impairment 
(at times due to comorbid subfrontal vascular injury) and absent or 
only mild cortical atrophy on CT or MRI, distinguishing NPH from 
AD can be challenging. Hippocampal atrophy on MRI favors AD, 
whereas a characteristic “magnetic” gait with external hip rotation, low 
foot clearance, and short strides, along with prominent truncal sway 
or instability, favors NPH. The diagnosis of NPH should be avoided 
when hydrocephalus is not detected on imaging studies, even if the 
symptoms otherwise fit. Thirty to fifty percent of patients identified by 
careful diagnosis as having NPH will improve with ventricular shunt-
ing. Gait may improve more than cognition, but many reported failures 
to improve cognitively may have resulted from comorbid AD. Short- 
lasting improvement is common. Patients should be carefully selected 
for shunting, because subdural hematoma, infection, and shunt failure 
are known complications and can be a cause for early nursing home 
placement in an elderly patient with previously mild dementia.
Intracranial hypotension, sometimes called sagging brain syndrome, 
is a disorder caused by low CSF pressure, leading to downward pres-
sure on the subcortical structures and disruption of cerebral function. 
It presents in a variable manner with headache, often exacerbated by 
coughing or a Valsalva maneuver or by moving from lying to standing. 
Other common symptoms include dizziness, vomiting, disruption of 
sleep-wake cycles, and sometimes a progressive behavioral variant 
FTD-like syndrome (Chap. 424). Although sometimes idiopathic, this 
syndrome can be caused by CSF leaks secondary to lumbar puncture, 
head trauma, or spinal cord arachnoid cysts. Treatment consists of 
finding and patching CSF leaks.
Dementia can accompany chronic alcoholism (Chap. 445) and may result 
from associated malnutrition, especially of B vitamins, particularly thia-
mine. Other poorly defined aspects of chronic alcoholism may, however, 
also produce cerebral damage. A rare idiopathic syndrome of dementia 
and seizures with degeneration of the corpus callosum has been reported 
primarily in male Italian red wine drinkers (Marchiafava-Bignami 
disease).
Thiamine (vitamin B1) deficiency causes Wernicke’s encephalopathy 
(Chap. 301). The clinical presentation is usually a malnourished patient 
(frequently but not necessarily alcoholic) with confusion, ataxia, and 
diplopia resulting from inflammation and necrosis of periventricular 
midline structures, including dorsomedial thalamus, mammillary 
bodies, midline cerebellum, periaqueductal gray matter, and trochlear 


--- PDF PAGE 3159 ---

CHAPTER 423 Alzheimer’s Disease
3113
and abducens nuclei. Damage to the dorsomedial thalamus correlates 
most closely with the memory loss. Prompt administration of parent-
eral thiamine (100 mg intravenously for 3 days followed by daily oral 
dosage) may reverse the disease if given within the first days of symp-
tom onset. Prolonged untreated thiamine deficiency can result in an 
irreversible and profound amnestic syndrome (Korsakoff’s syndrome) 
or even death.
In Korsakoff’s syndrome, the patient is unable to recall new informa-
tion despite normal immediate memory, attention span, and level of 
consciousness. Memory for new events is seriously impaired, whereas 
knowledge acquired prior to the illness remains relatively intact. 
Patients are easily confused, disoriented, and cannot store information 
for more than a few minutes. Superficially, they may be conversant, 
engaging, and able to perform simple tasks and follow immediate 
commands. Confabulation is common, although not always present. 
There is no specific treatment because the previous thiamine deficiency 
has produced irreversible damage to the medial thalamic nuclei and 
mammillary bodies. Mammillary body atrophy may be visible on MRI 
in the chronic phase (see Fig. 301-6).
Vitamin B12 deficiency, as can occur in pernicious anemia, causes 
a megaloblastic anemia and may also damage the nervous system 
(Chaps. 95 and 434). Neurologically, it most commonly produces a spi-
nal cord syndrome (myelopathy) affecting the posterior columns (loss 
of vibration and position sense) and corticospinal tracts (hyperactive 
tendon reflexes with Babinski signs); it also damages peripheral nerves 
(neuropathy), resulting in sensory loss with depressed tendon reflexes. 
Damage to myelinated axons may also cause dementia. The mechanism 
of neurologic damage is unclear but may be related to a deficiency of 
S-adenosyl methionine (required for methylation of myelin phospho-
lipids) due to reduced methionine synthase activity or accumulation of 
methylmalonate, homocysteine, and propionate, providing abnormal 
substrates for fatty acid synthesis in myelin. Use of histamine blockers 
or metformin, vegan diets, autoimmunity against gastric parietal cells, 
and various causes of malabsorption are the typical causes for vitamin 
B12 deficiency. The neurologic sequelae of vitamin B12 deficiency may 
occur in the absence of hematologic manifestations, making it critical 
to avoid using the complete blood count (CBC) and blood smear as a 
substitute for measuring B12 blood levels. Treatment with parenteral 
vitamin B12 (1000 μg intramuscularly daily for a week, weekly for a 
month, and monthly for life for pernicious anemia) stops progression 
of the disease if instituted promptly, but complete reversal of advanced 
nervous system damage will not occur.
Deficiency of nicotinic acid (pellagra) is associated with skin rash 
over sun-exposed areas, glossitis, and angular stomatitis (Chap. 326). 
Severe dietary deficiency of nicotinic acid along with other B vitamins 
such as pyridoxine may result in spastic paraparesis, peripheral neur-
opathy, fatigue, irritability, and dementia. This syndrome has been seen 
in prisoners of war and in concentration camps but should be consid-
ered in any malnourished individual. Low serum folate levels appear 
to be a rough index of malnutrition, but isolated folate deficiency has 
not been proved as a specific cause of dementia.
CNS infections usually cause delirium and other acute neurologic 
syndromes. However, some chronic CNS infections, particularly 
those associated with chronic meningitis (Chap. 134), may produce 
a dementing illness. The possibility of chronic infectious meningi-
tis should be suspected in patients presenting with a dementia or 
behavioral syndrome, who also have headache, meningismus, cranial 
neuropathy, and/or radiculopathy. Between 20 and 30% of patients 
in the advanced stages of HIV infection become demented (Chap. 
197). Cardinal features include psychomotor retardation, apathy, and 
impaired memory. This syndrome may result from secondary oppor-
tunistic infections but can also be caused by direct infection of CNS 
neurons with HIV. Neurosyphilis (Chap. 177) was a common cause of 
dementia in the preantibiotic era; it is now uncommon but can still be 
encountered in patients with multiple sex partners, particularly among 
patients with HIV. Characteristic CSF changes consist of pleocytosis, 
increased protein, and a positive Venereal Disease Research Laboratory 
(VDRL) test.
Primary and metastatic neoplasms of the CNS (Chap. 86) usually 
produce focal neurologic findings and seizures rather than dementia, 
but if tumor growth begins in the frontal or temporal lobes, the initial 
manifestations may be memory loss or behavioral changes. A paraneo-
plastic syndrome of dementia associated with occult carcinoma (often 
small-cell lung cancer) is termed limbic encephalitis. In this syndrome, 
confusion, agitation, seizures, poor memory, emotional changes, and 
frank dementia may occur. Paraneoplastic encephalitis associated with 
NMDA receptor antibodies presents as a progressive psychiatric disor-
der with memory loss and seizures; affected patients are often young 
women with ovarian teratoma (Chap. 90).
A nonconvulsive seizure disorder (Chap. 418) may underlie a syn-
drome of confusion, clouding of consciousness, and garbled speech. 
Often, psychiatric disease is suspected, but an EEG demonstrates the 
epileptic nature of the illness. If recurrent or persistent, the condition 
may be termed complex partial status epilepticus. The cognitive distur-
bance often responds to anticonvulsant therapy. The etiology may 
be previous small strokes or head trauma; some cases are idiopathic. 
Nonconvulsive temporal lobe seizures can also emerge early in the 
course of AD.
It is important to recognize systemic diseases that indirectly affect 
the brain and produce chronic confusion or dementia. Such conditions 
include hypothyroidism; vasculitis; and hepatic, renal, or pulmonary 
disease. Hepatic encephalopathy may begin with irritability and confu-
sion and slowly progress to agitation, lethargy, and coma.
Isolated vasculitis of the CNS (CNS granulomatous angiitis) 
(Chaps. 356 and 419) occasionally causes a chronic encephalopathy 
associated with confusion, disorientation, and clouding of conscious-
ness. Headache is common, and strokes and cranial neuropathies 
may occur. Brain imaging studies may be normal or nonspecifically 
abnormal. CSF analysis reveals a mild pleocytosis or protein eleva-
tion. Cerebral angiography can show multifocal stenoses involving 
medium-caliber vessels, but some patients have only small-vessel dis-
ease that is not revealed on angiography. The angiographic appearance 
is not specific and may be mimicked by atherosclerosis, infection, or 
other causes of vascular disease. Brain or meningeal biopsy demon-
strates endothelial cell proliferation and mononuclear infiltrates within 
blood vessel walls. The prognosis is often poor, although the disorder 
may remit spontaneously. Some patients respond to glucocorticoids or 
chemotherapy.
Chronic metal exposure represents a rare cause of dementia. The 
key to diagnosis is to elicit a history of exposure at work or home. 
Chronic lead poisoning from inadequately fire-glazed pottery has 
been reported. Fatigue, depression, and confusion may be associated 
with episodic abdominal pain and peripheral neuropathy. Gray lead 
lines appear in the gums, usually accompanied by an anemia with 
basophilic stippling of red blood cells. The clinical presentation can 
resemble that of acute intermittent porphyria, including elevated lev-
els of urine porphyrins as a result of the inhibition of δ-aminolevulinic 
acid dehydrase. The treatment is chelation therapy with agents such as 
ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). Chronic mercury poisoning 
produces dementia, peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, and tremulousness 
that may progress to a cerebellar intention tremor or choreoathetosis. 
The confusion and memory loss of chronic arsenic intoxication is also 
associated with nausea, weight loss, peripheral neuropathy, pigmenta-
tion and scaling of the skin, and transverse white lines of the fingernails 
(Mees’ lines). Treatment is chelation therapy with dimercaprol (BAL). 
Aluminum poisoning is rare but was documented with the dialysis 
dementia syndrome, in which water used during renal dialysis was 
contaminated with excessive amounts of aluminum. This poisoning 
resulted in a progressive encephalopathy associated with confusion, 
nonfluent aphasia, memory loss, agitation, and, later, lethargy and 
stupor. Speech arrest and myoclonic jerks were common and associ-
ated with severe and generalized EEG changes. The condition has been 
eliminated by the use of deionized water for dialysis.
Recurrent head trauma in professional athletes may lead to a 
dementia previously referred to as “punch-drunk” syndrome or demen-
tia pugilistica but now known as chronic traumatic encephalopathy 


--- PDF PAGE 3160 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3114 (CTE) to signify its relevance to contact sport athletes other than boxers 
(Chap. 435). The symptoms can be progressive, beginning late in an 
athlete’s career or, more often, after retirement. Early in the course, a 
personality change associated with social instability and sometimes 
paranoia and delusions occurs. Later, memory loss progresses to 
full-blown dementia, often associated with parkinsonian signs and 
ataxia or intention tremor. At autopsy, the cerebral cortex shows tau- 
immunoreactive NFTs that are more prominent than amyloid plaques 
(which are usually diffuse or absent rather than neuritic). NFTs and 
tau-positive reactive astrocytes are often clustered in the depths of 
cortical sulci and in a perivascular distribution. TDP-43 inclusions 
(Chap. 424) have also been reported, highlighting the overlap with the 
FTD spectrum. Loss of neurons in the substantia nigra is a variable 
feature, and some with TDP-43 inclusions also develop motor neuron 
disease (MND) (Chap. 429).
Chronic subdural hematoma (Chap. 435) is also occasionally associ-
ated with dementia, often in the context of underlying cortical atrophy 
from conditions such as AD or HD.
Transient global amnesia (TGA) is characterized by the sudden onset 
of a severe episodic memory deficit, usually occurring in persons aged 
>50 years. Often the amnesia occurs in the setting of an emotional stim-
ulus or physical exertion. During the attack, the individual is alert and 
communicative, general cognition seems intact, and there are no other 
neurologic signs or symptoms. The patient may seem confused and 
repeatedly ask about his or her location in place and time. The ability to 
form new memories returns after a period of hours, and the individual 
returns to normal with no recall for the period of the attack. Frequently 
no cause is determined, but cerebrovascular disease, epilepsy (7% in 
one study), migraine, or cardiac arrhythmias have all been implicated. 
Approximately one-quarter of patients experience recurrent attacks. 
Rare instances of permanent memory loss have been reported in 
patients with TGA-like spells, usually representing ischemic infarction 
of the hippocampus or dorsomedial thalamic nucleus bilaterally. Sei-
zure activity due to AD should always be suspected in this syndrome.
The ALS/parkinsonian/dementia complex of Guam is a rare degenerative 
disease that has occurred in the Chamorro natives on the island of 
Guam. Individuals may have any combination of parkinsonian fea-
tures, dementia, and MND. The most characteristic pathologic features 
are the presence of NFTs in degenerating neurons of the cortex and 
substantia nigra and loss of motor neurons in the spinal cord, although 
recent reanalysis has shown that some patients with this illness also 
show coexisting TDP-43 pathology. Epidemiologic evidence supports 
a possible environmental cause, such as exposure to a neurotoxin or 
an infectious agent with a long latency period. One interesting but 
unproven candidate neurotoxin is the seed of the false palm tree, which 
Guamanians traditionally used to make flour. The amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) syndrome is no longer present in Guam, but a dement-
ing illness with rigidity continues to be seen.
Rarely, adult-onset leukodystrophies, lysosomal storage diseases, 
and other genetic disorders can present as a dementia in middle to late 
life. Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) causes a progressive psy-
chiatric or dementia syndrome associated with an extensive, confluent 
frontal white matter abnormality. MLD is diagnosed by measuring 
reduced arylsulfatase A enzyme activity in peripheral white blood 
cells. Adult-onset presentations of adrenoleukodystrophy have been 
reported in female carriers, and these patients often feature spinal 
cord and posterior white matter involvement. Adrenoleukodystrophy 
is diagnosed by demonstrating increased levels of plasma very-long-
chain fatty acids. CADASIL is another genetic syndrome associated 
with white matter disease, often frontally and temporally predominant. 
Diagnosis is made with skin biopsy, which shows osmophilic granules 
in arterioles, or, increasingly, through genetic testing for mutations in 
Notch 3. The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses are a genetically heteroge-
neous group of disorders associated with myoclonus, seizures, vision 
loss, and progressive dementia. Diagnosis is made by finding eosino-
philic curvilinear inclusions within white blood cells or neuronal tissue.
Psychogenic amnesia for personally important memories can be 
seen. Whether this results from deliberate avoidance of unpleasant 
memories, outright malingering, or unconscious repression remains 
unknown and probably depends on the patient. Event-specific amnesia 
is more likely to occur after violent crimes such as homicide of a close 
relative or friend or sexual abuse. It may develop in association with 
severe drug or alcohol intoxication and sometimes with schizophrenia. 
More prolonged psychogenic amnesia occurs in fugue states that also 
commonly follow severe emotional stress. The patient with a fugue 
state suffers from a sudden loss of personal identity and may be found 
wandering far from home. In contrast to neurologic amnesia, fugue states 
are associated with amnesia for personal identity and events closely associated 
with the personal past. At the same time, memory for other recent events 
and the ability to learn and use new information are preserved. The 
episodes usually last hours or days and occasionally weeks or months 
while the patient takes on a new identity. On recovery, there is a resid-
ual amnesia gap for the period of the fugue. Very rarely does selective 
loss of autobiographic information reflect a focal injury to the brain 
areas involved with these functions.
Psychiatric diseases may mimic dementia. Severely depressed or 
anxious individuals may appear demented, a phenomenon some-
times called pseudodementia. Memory and language are usually intact 
when carefully tested, and a significant memory disturbance usually 
suggests an underlying dementia, even if the patient is depressed. 
Patients in this condition may feel confused and unable to accomplish 
routine tasks. Vegetative symptoms, such as insomnia, lack of energy, 
poor appetite, and concern with bowel function, are common. Onset 
is often more abrupt, and the psychosocial milieu may suggest promi-
nent reasons for depression. Such patients respond to treatment of the 
underlying psychiatric illness. Schizophrenia is usually not difficult 
to distinguish from dementia, but occasionally the distinction can be 
problematic. Schizophrenia generally has a much earlier age of onset 
(second and third decades) than most dementing illnesses and is asso-
ciated with intact memory. The delusions and hallucinations of schizo-
phrenia are usually more complex, bizarre, and threatening than those 
of dementia. Some chronic schizophrenics develop an unexplained 
progressive dementia late in life that is not related to AD. Conversely, 
FTD, HD, vascular dementia, DLB, AD, or leukoencephalopathy can 
begin with schizophrenia-like features, leading to the misdiagnosis 
of a psychiatric condition. Later age of onset, significant deficits on 
cognitive testing, or the presence of abnormal neuroimaging suggest 
a degenerative condition. Memory loss may also be part of a conver-
sion disorder. In this situation, patients commonly complain bitterly of 
memory loss, but careful cognitive testing either does not confirm the 
deficits or demonstrates inconsistent or unusual patterns of cognitive 
problems. The patient’s behavior and “wrong” answers to questions 
often indicate that he or she understands the question and knows the 
correct answer.
Clouding of cognition by chronic drug or medication use, often pre-
scribed by physicians, is an important cause of dementia. Sedatives, 
tranquilizers, and analgesics used to treat insomnia, pain, anxiety, or 
agitation may cause confusion, memory loss, and lethargy, especially 
in the elderly. Discontinuation of the offending medication often 
improves mentation.
■
■FURTHER READING
Braak H, Del Tredici K: Where, when, and in what form does 
sporadic Alzheimer’s disease begin? Curr Opin Neurol 25:708, 2012.
Cohen AD, Klunk WE: Early detection of Alzheimer’s disease using 
PiB and FDG PET. Neurobiol Dis 72 Pt A:117, 2014.
Haas C: Strategies, development, and pitfalls of therapeutic options for 
Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 28:241, 2012.
Musiek ES, Holtzman DM: Origins of Alzheimer’s disease: Reconciling 
cerebrospinal fluid biomarker and neuropathology data regarding the 
temporal sequence of amyloid-beta and tau involvement. Curr Opin 
Neurol 25:715, 2012.
Selkoe DJ, Hardy J: The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 
25 years. EMBO Mol Med 8:595, 2016.


================================================================================
Ch424 Frontotemporal Dementia
Pages 3161-3163
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3161 ---

CHAPTER 424 Frontotemporal Dementia
3115
(GGGGCC) expansions in a noncoding exon of C9ORF72 are the most 
recently identified and represent the most common genetic cause of 
familial or sporadic FTD (usually presenting as bvFTD with or without 
MND) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). The expansion is asso-
ciated with C9ORF72 haploinsuffiency, nuclear mRNA foci containing 
transcribed portions of the expansion and other mRNAs, neuronal 
cytoplasmic inclusions containing dipeptide repeat proteins translated 
from the repeat mRNA, and transactive response DNA-binding protein 
of 43 kDa (TDP-43) neuronal cytoplasmic and glial inclusions. The 
pathogenic significance of these various features is a topic of vigorous 
investigation. MAPT mutations lead to a change in the alternate splic-
ing of tau or cause loss of function in the tau molecule, thereby altering 
microtubule binding. With GRN, mutations in the coding sequence of 
the gene encoding progranulin protein result in mRNA degradation 
due to nonsense-mediated decay, leading to a ~50% reduction in circu-
lating progranulin protein levels. Intriguingly, homozygous GRN 
mutations were recently reported to cause neuronal ceroid lipofuscino-
sis, focusing investigators on the lysosome as a site of molecular dys-
function in GRN-related FTD. Progranulin is a growth factor that binds 
to tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors and participates in tissue 
repair and tumor growth. How progranulin mutations lead to FTD 
remains unknown, but the most likely mechanisms include lysosomal 
dysfunction and enhanced neuroinflammation. Both MAPT and GRN 
mutations can be associated with parkinsonian features, whereas ALS 
is rare. Infrequently, mutations in the valosin-containing protein (VCP, 
chromosome 9), TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK-1), T  cell-restricted 
intracellular antigen-1 (TIA1), and charged multivesicular body protein 
2b (CHMP2b, chromosome 3) genes also lead to autosomal dominant 
familial FTD. Mutations in the TARDBP (encoding TDP-43) and FUS 
(encoding fused in sarcoma [FUS]) genes (see below) cause familial 
ALS, sometimes in association with an FTD syndrome, although a few 
patients presenting with FTD alone have been reported.
■
■NEUROPATHOLOGY
The gross pathologic hallmark of FTLD is a focal atrophy of frontal, 
insular, and/or temporal cortex, which can be visualized with neu-
roimaging studies (Fig. 424-1) and is often profound at autopsy. Despite 
the appearance of advanced disease, however, imaging studies suggest 
that atrophy often begins focally in one hemisphere before spreading 
to anatomically interconnected cortical and subcortical regions. Loss of 
cortical serotonergic innervation is seen in many patients. In contrast to 
AD, the cholinergic system is relatively spared in FTD, which accounts 
for the poor efficacy of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors in this group.
Although early studies suggested that 15–30% of patients with FTD 
showed underlying AD at autopsy, progressive refinement in clinical 
diagnosis has improved pathologic prediction accuracy, and most 
patients diagnosed with FTD at a dementia clinic with expertise in 
FTD will show underlying FTLD pathology. Microscopic findings seen 
across all patients with FTLD include gliosis, microvacuolation, and 
neuronal loss, but the disease is subtyped according to the protein com-
position of neuronal and glial inclusions, 
which contain either tau or TDP-43 in 
~90% of patients, with the remaining 
~10% showing inclusions containing 
FUS (Fig. 424-2).
■
■PATHOGENESIS
The toxicity and spreading capacity 
of misfolded tau underlies the patho-
genesis of many familial cases and is 
emerging as a key factor in sporadic 
tauopathies, although loss of tau micro-
tubule stabilizing function may also play 
a role. TDP-43 and FUS, in contrast, 
are RNA/DNA binding proteins whose 
roles in neuronal function are still being 
actively investigated, but one key role 
may be the chaperoning of mRNAs to 
the distal neuron for activity-dependent 
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) refers to a group of clinical syndromes 
united by their links to underlying frontotemporal lobar degenera-
tion (FTLD) pathology. FTD most often begins in the fifth to seventh 
decades and is nearly as prevalent as AD in this age group. Early 
studies suggested that FTD may be more common in men than women, 
however more recent reports cast doubt on this finding. Although a 
family history of dementia is common, autosomal dominant inheri-
tance is seen in only 10–20% of all FTD cases.
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The clinical heterogeneity seen in both familial and sporadic forms of 
FTD is remarkable. Three core clinical syndromes have been described 
(Fig. 424-1). In the behavioral variant (bvFTD), the most common FTD 
syndrome, social and emotional systems dysfunction manifests as apa-
thy, disinhibition, compulsivity, loss of empathy, and overeating, often 
but not always accompanied by deficits in executive control. Two forms 
of primary progressive aphasia (PPA), the semantic and nonfluent/
agrammatic variants, are commonly due to FTLD and included under 
the FTD umbrella. In the semantic variant, patients slowly lose the ability 
to decode word, object, person-specific, and emotion meaning, whereas 
patients with the nonfluent/agrammatic variant develop profound 
inability to produce words, often with prominent motor speech impair-
ment. Any of these three clinical syndromes, but most often bvFTD, 
may be accompanied by motor neuron disease (MND) (Chap. 429), in 
which case the term FTD-MND is applied. In addition, the corticobasal 
syndrome (CBS) and progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSP-S) 
can be considered part of the FTLD clinical spectrum. Furthermore, 
patients may evolve from any of the major syndromes described above 
to have prominent features of another syndrome.
Findings at the bedside are dictated by the anatomic localization of 
the disorder. Medial and orbital frontal and anterior insula degenera-
tion predicts bvFTD. Patients with nonfluent/agrammatic PPA show 
dominant hemisphere lateral frontal and precentral gyrus atrophy. 
Anterior temporal degeneration presents with semantic variant PPA. 
Parietal functions such as visuospatial processing and arithmetic 
may remain normal late into any FTD syndrome. Many patients with 
nonfluent aphasia or bvFTD later develop aspects of PSP-S, as disease 
spreads into subcortical or brainstem structures, or CBS-like features, 
as disease moves into peri-rolandic cortices.
■
■GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
The most common autosomal dominantly inherited mutations 
causing FTD involve the C9ORF72 (chromosome 9), GRN (chro-
mosome 17), and MAPT (chromosome 17) genes. Hexanucleotide 
Frontotemporal Dementia
William W. Seeley, Bruce L. Miller 
424
FIGURE 424-1  Three major frontotemporal dementia (FTD) clinical syndromes. Coronal magnetic resonance imaging 
sections from representative patients with behavioral variant FTD (left) and the semantic (center) and nonfluent/
agrammatic (right) variants of primary progressive aphasia (PPA). Areas of early and severe atrophy in each syndrome are 
highlighted (white arrowheads). The behavioral variant features anterior cingulate and frontoinsular atrophy, spreading to 
orbital and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Semantic variant PPA shows prominent temporopolar atrophy, more often on 
the left. Nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA is associated with dominant frontal opercular and dorsal insula degeneration. 


--- PDF PAGE 3162 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3116
translation within dendritic spines. Because these proteins also form 
intracellular aggregates and produce similar anatomic progression, 
protein toxicity and spreading may also factor heavily in the pathogen-
esis of FTLD-TDP and FTLD-FUS.
Increasingly, misfolded proteins in neurodegenerative disease are 
being recognized as having “prion-like” properties in that they can 
template the misfolding of their natively folded (or unfolded) protein 
counterparts, a process that creates exponential amplification of pro-
tein misfolding within a cell and may promote transcellular and even 
transsynaptic protein propagation between cells. This hypothesis could 
provide a unifying explanation for the stereotypical patterns of disease 
spread observed in each syndrome (Chap. 417).
Although the term Pick’s disease was once used to describe a pro-
gressive degenerative disorder characterized by selective involvement 
of the anterior frontal and temporal neocortex and pathologically by 
intraneuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (Pick bodies), it is now used only 
in reference to a specific FTLD-tau histopathologic entity. Classical Pick 
bodies are argyrophilic, staining positively with the Bielschowsky silver 
method (but not with the Gallyas method) and also with immunostain-
ing for hyperphosphorylated tau. Recognition of the three FTLD major 
molecular classes has allowed delineation of distinct FTLD subtypes 
within each class. These subtypes, based on the morphology and dis-
tribution of the neuronal and glial inclusions (Fig. 424-3), account for 
the vast majority of patients, and some subtypes show strong clinical or 
genetic associations (Fig. 424-2). Despite this progress, clinical features 
do not allow reliable prediction of the underlying FTLD subtype, or 
even the major molecular class, for all clinical syndromes. Molecular 
PET imaging with ligands chosen to bind misfolded tau protein shows 
great promise and is already being applied to the study of patients with 
AD and FTD. Because FTLD-tau and FTLD-TDP account for 90% of 
FTLD patients, the ability to detect pathological tau protein deposition 
in vivo would greatly improve prediction accuracy, especially when 
amyloid PET imaging is negative.
■
■TREATMENT
The burden on caregivers of patients with FTD is extremely high, 
especially when the illness disrupts core emotional and personality 
functions of the loved one. Treatment is symptomatic, and there 
are currently no therapies known to slow progression or improve 
symptoms. Many of the behaviors that may accompany FTD, such 
as depression, hyperorality, compulsions, and irritability, can be ame-
liorated with antidepressants, especially SSRIs. Because FTD is often 
accompanied by parkinsonism, antipsychotics, which can exacerbate 
this problem, must be used with caution. A general approach to the 
symptomatic management of dementia is presented in Chap. 25.
■
■PROGRESSIVE SUPRANUCLEAR PALSY SYNDROME
PSP-S (also known as Richardson syndrome) is a degenerative disorder 
that involves the brainstem, basal ganglia, diencephalon, and selected 
areas of cortex. Clinically, PSP-S begins with falls and executive or sub-
tle personality changes (such as mental rigidity, impulsivity, or apathy). 
Shortly thereafter, a progressive oculomotor syndrome ensues that 
begins with square wave jerks, followed by slowed saccades (vertical 
worse than horizontal) before resulting in progressive supranuclear 
ophthalmoparesis. Dysarthria, dysphagia, and symmetric axial rigid-
ity can be prominent features that emerge at any point in the illness. 
A stiff, unstable posture with hyperextension of the neck and a slow, 
jerky, toppling gait are characteristic. Frequent unexplained and some-
times spectacular falls are common secondary to a combination of axial 
rigidity, inability to look down, and poor judgment. Even once patients 
have severely limited voluntary eye movements, they retain oculoce-
phalic reflexes (demonstrated using a vertical doll’s head maneuver); 
thus, the oculomotor disorder is supranuclear. The dementia overlaps 
with bvFTD, featuring apathy, frontal-executive dysfunction, poor 
judgment, slowed thought processes, impaired verbal fluency, and 
difficulty with sequential actions and with shifting from one task to 
another. These features are common at presentation and often precede 
the motor syndrome. Some patients with a pathologic diagnosis of 
PSP begin with a nonfluent aphasia or motor speech disorder and 
progress to classical PSP-S. Response to l-dopa is limited or absent; no 
other treatments exist. Death occurs within 5–10 years of onset. Like 
Pick’s disease, increasingly the term PSP is used to refer to a specific 
histopathologic entity within the FTLD-tau class. In PSP, accumulation 
of hyperphosphorylated 4-repeat tau is seen within neurons and glia. 
Tau neuronal inclusions often appear tangle-like and may be large, 
spherical (“globose”) and coarse in subcortical structures. The most 
prominent involvement is in the subthalamic nucleus, globus palli-
dus, substantia nigra, locus coeruleus, periaqueductal gray, tectum, 
Pick’s
3R tau
FTDP-17
MAPT
Other: CTE,
AGD, MST, GGT
CBD
4R tau
PSP
4R tau
aFTLD-U
BIBD
NIFID/
NIBD
FUS NOS
FUS
Type U
(C9ORF72)
(TARDBP)
Type D
VCP
Type A
(PGRN)
(C9ORF72)
Type B
(C9ORF72)
Type C
Alzheimer’s
disease
bvFTD
svPPA
nfvPPA
FTD-MND
CBS
PSPS
FTLD-tau
FTLD-TDP*
FTLD-FUS
FTLD-3
CHMP2B
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD)
FIGURE 424-2  Frontotemporal dementia syndromes are united by underlying frontotemporal lobar degeneration pathology, which can be divided according to the 
presence of tau, TDP-43, or FUS-containing inclusions in neurons and glia. Correlations between clinical syndromes and major molecular classes are shown with colored 
shading. Despite improvements in clinical syndromic diagnosis, a small percentage of patients with some frontotemporal dementia syndromes will show Alzheimer’s 
disease neuropathology at autopsy (gray shading). aFTLD-U, atypical frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions; AGD, argyrophilic grain 
disease; BIBD, basophilic inclusion body disease; bvFTD, behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia; CBD, corticobasal degeneration; CBS, corticobasal syndrome; 
CTE, chronic traumatic encephalopathy; FTD-MND, frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease; FTDP-17, frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked 
to chromosome 17; FUS, fused in sarcoma; GGT, globular glial tauopathy; MST, multisystem tauopathy; nfvPPA, nonfluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive 
aphasia; NIBD, neurofilament inclusion body disease; NIFID, neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease; PSP, progressive supranuclear palsy; PSP-S, progressive 
supranuclear palsy syndrome; svPPA, semantic variant primary progressive aphasia; Type U, unclassifiable type. 


--- PDF PAGE 3163 ---

CHAPTER 424 Frontotemporal Dementia
3117
oculomotor nuclei, and dentate nucleus of cerebellum. Neocortical tan-
gle-like inclusions, like those in AD, often take on a more flame-shaped 
morphology, but on electron microscopy, PSP tangles can be shown to 
consist of straight tubules rather than the paired helical filaments found 
in AD. Furthermore, PSP is associated with prominent tau-positive 
glial inclusions, such as tufted astrocytes (Fig. 424-3), coiled oligoden-
droglial inclusions (“coiled bodies”), or, least often, thorny astrocytes. 
Most patients with PSP-S show PSP at autopsy, although small num-
bers will show another tauopathy (corticobasal degeneration [CBD] or 
Pick’s disease; Fig. 424-2).
In addition to its overlap with FTD and CBS (see below), PSP is often 
confused with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (PD). Although elderly 
patients with PD may have restricted upgaze, they do not develop 
downgaze paresis or other abnormalities of voluntary eye movements 
typical of PSP. Dementia occurs in ~20% of patients with PD, often due 
to the emergence of a full-blown DLB-like syndrome. Furthermore, 
the behavioral syndromes seen with DLB differ from PSP (see below). 
Dementia in PD becomes more likely with increasing age, increasing 
severity of extrapyramidal signs, long disease duration, and the pres-
ence of depression. Patients with PD who develop dementia also show 
cortical atrophy on brain imaging. Neuropathologically, there may be 
AD-related changes in the cortex or LBD-related α-synuclein inclusions 
in both the limbic system and cerebral cortex. PD is discussed in detail 
in Chap. 427.
■
■CORTICOBASAL SYNDROME
CBS is a slowly progressive dementia-movement disorder associated 
with severe degeneration in perirolandic cortex and basal ganglia 
(substantia nigra and striatopallidum). Patients typically present with 
asymmetric onset of rigidity, dystonia, myoclonus, and apraxia of one 
limb, at times associated with alien limb phenomena in which the limb 
exhibits unintended motor actions such as grasping, groping, drifting, 
or undoing. Eventually CBS becomes bilateral and leads to dysarthria, 
slow gait, action tremor, and a frontal-predominant dementia. Whereas 
CBS refers to the clinical syndrome, CBD refers to a specific histopatho-
logical FTLD-tau entity (Fig. 424-2). Although CBS was once thought 
to be pathognomonic for CBD, increasingly it has been recognized that 
CBS can be due to CBD, PSP, FTLD-TDP, or even AD, which accounts 
for up to 30% of CBS in some series. In CBD, the microscopic fea-
tures include ballooned, achromatic, tau-positive neurons; astrocytic 
plaques (Fig. 424-3); and other dystrophic glial tau pathomorphologies 
that overlap with those seen in PSP. Most specifically, CBD features a 
severe tauopathy burden in the subcortical white matter, consisting 
of axonal threads and oligodendroglial coiled bodies. As shown in 
Fig. 424-2, patients with bvFTD, nonfluent/agrammatic PPA, and 
PSP-S may also show CBD at autopsy, emphasizing the importance 
of distinguishing clinical and pathologic constructs and terminology. 
Treatment of CBS remains symptomatic; no disease-modifying thera-
pies are available.
■
■FURTHER READING
Irwin DJ et al: Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: Defining pheno-
typic diversity through personalized medicine. Acta Neuropathol 
129:469, 2015.
Mackenzie I et al: Nomenclature and nosology for neuropathologic 
subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: An update. Acta 
Neuropathol 119:1, 2010.
Olney NT et al: Frontotemporal dementia. Neurol Clin 35:339, 2017.
Onyike CU, Diehl-Schmid J: The epidemiology of frontotemporal 
dementia. Int Rev Psychiatry 25:130, 2013.
Roberson ED: Mouse models of frontotemporal dementia. Ann Neurol 
72:837, 2012.
A
B
C
D
E
F
FIGURE 424-3  Neuropathology in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). FTLD-tau (A–C) and FTLD-TDP (D–F) account for >90% of patients with FTLD, and 
immunohistochemistry reveals characteristic lesions in each of the major histopathologic subtypes within each class: A. Pick bodies in Pick’s disease; B. a tufted 
astrocyte in progressive supranuclear palsy; C. an astrocytic plaque in corticobasal degeneration; D. small compact or crescentic neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions and 
short, thin neuropil threads in FTLD-TDP, type A; E. diffuse/granular neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (with a relative paucity of neuropil threads) in FTLD-TDP, type B; and 
F. long, tortuous dystrophic neurites in FTLD-TDP, type C. TDP can be seen within the nucleus in neurons lacking inclusions but mislocalizes to the cytoplasm and forms 
inclusions in FTLD-TDP. Immunostains are 3-repeat tau (A), phospho-tau (B and C), and TDP-43 (D–F). Sections are counterstained with hematoxylin. Scale bar applies 
to all panels and represents 50 μm in A, B, C, and E and 100 μm in D and F. 


================================================================================
Ch425 Vascular Dementia
Pages 3164-3164
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3164 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3118
remains complex and the neuropsychology of dementia due to SVD 
remains controversial. SVD typically causes occlusion of the deep- 
penetrating arterioles and disease of draining venules, causing dam-
age to subcortical structures such as the basal ganglia, thalami, and 
white matter tracts. In addition, cerebral microinfarcts, first observed 
microscopically in autopsy series, then visualized on 7T MRI, have also 
showed strong associations with cognitive impairment. Larger lesions, 
referred to as lacunar infarcts, can result in either a stepwise or gradual 
decline in cognition sometimes referred to as etat lacunaire. Lacunes 
average 2 mm in volume, but can range from 0.2 to 15 mm.
Although most VCI-VaD cases caused by SVD are sporadic, there are 
also several genetic SVD-related VaD syndromes. The most prevalent is 
cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), a genetic disorder linked to a muta-
tion in the NOTCH3 gene on chromosome 19. CADASIL presents as 
small vessel strokes, progressive dementia and extensive white matter 
disease often beginning in mid-adult life (Chap. 420). Through altered 
extracellular molecular signaling pathways and protein elimination 
failure and accumulation, pericytes and endothelia of small vessels are 
involved. CADASIL may offer a unique opportunity to study “pure” 
VaD, as individuals diagnosed with CADASIL tend to display cogni-
tive decline at an early age, when the likelihood of comorbid neurode-
generative diseases is lower.
In addition to infarcts and hemorrhages, SVD is also associated with 
blood-brain-barrier compromise, acculmulating white matter disease, 
and a state of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion, hippocampal atrophy 
and sclerosis. Neuroimaging markers of SVD, such as white matter 
hyperintensities (WMH) of presumed vascular origin, microbleeds, 
cortical microinfarcts, and enlarged Virchow-Robin spaces (eVRS) 
increase the risk of dementia, with conventional vascular risk fac-
tors explaining little of the variance in the absence of these changes. 
Otto Binswanger described the drastic effect of white matter injury 
when he observed eight patients with gradual cognitive deterioration 
and notable white matter changes. Binswanger’s disease, commonly 
referred to as subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy, is considered 
a prototypical clinical syndrome of VCI and a pathologically homoge-
nous subgroup. On neuroimaging, a progressive confluent subcortical 
and periventricular white matter disease is seen (see Fig. 25-2), with 
hypoperfusion and hypometabolism. Novel neuroimaging techniques 
for assessment of blood brain barrier integrity, such as dynamic 
contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI), in combination with biofluid 
markers, have shown a characteristic unrelenting progressive course 
of hypoxic injury with inflammatory disruption of blood brain barrier. 
Individuals with Binswanger’s disease typically have hypertension or 
systemic vascular disease, and the clinical course may include gradual 
accumulation of focal neurological deficits. Neuropathological features 
include extensive demyelination and destruction of white matter with 
relative sparing of the subcortical U fibers. The resulting dementia syn-
drome is largely dysexecutive. From a cognitive and behavioral stand-
point, affected individuals typically display apathy, mood alterations 
with mild depression, executive dysfunction, and slowed information 
processing. They can also have marked motor slowing and symmetric 
parkinsonism.
A strategically placed infarct, usually in the thalamus, basal ganglia 
or angular gyrus can also result in marked cognitive dysfunction and 
dementia. For example, a single paramedian artery (artery of Perche-
ron) supplies both anteromedial thalamic regions, and occlusion of this 
artery can lead to bilateral infarction of the dorsomedial nucleus and 
the mammillothalamic tracts, resulting in altered mental status, vertical 
gaze palsy, and memory impairment. Similarly, an infarct in the inferior 
genu of the internal capsule may strategically disrupt the inferior and 
medial thalamic peduncles carrying thalamo-cortical fibers important 
for cognition and memory.
A consensus on frequency, causal factors, underlying neuropathol-
ogy, clinical symptoms, characteristic neuropsychological presenta-
tions, and developmental course of VaD has yet to emerge. Issues 
related to comorbidity are particularly challenging. A large number of 
dementia patients with significant CVD show multiple pathologies, 
most frequently a mix of AD and/or Lewy body disease. Despite 
Vascular Dementia
Joel Kramer, William W. Seeley,   
Bruce L. Miller 
425
Vascular cognitive impairment and vascular dementia (VCI-VaD) 
denote deficits in cognition and behavior, along a spectrum of severity, 
that are associated with cerebrovascular disease (CVD). A dementia 
syndrome results when CVD is severe enough to cause significant 
deficits in occupational, social, or functional abilities. VaD is among 
the most common causes of dementia in the elderly, although its preva-
lence is disputed. Vascular disease can disrupt structural cognitive net-
works with lesions such as microinfarcts, microbleeds, macroinfarcts, 
large hemorrhages, and chronic progressive white matter degenera-
tion, as well as altered cerebral hemodynamics, such as hypoperfusion, 
disrupted cerebrovascular autoregulation (Chap. 301) neurovascular 
decoupling (loss of normal hemodynamic responses to neural activity), 
and blood brain barrier dysfunction. The pathophysiological underpin-
nings of VCI-VaD remain an active area of research.
Age remains the strongest risk factor for CVD and stroke. By the age 
of 70, 70% of the population has white matter disease and lesions on 
neuroimaging, with small infarcts (lacunar infarcts) found in 11–24% of 
the population. In addition to genetic predisposition, risk factors that 
directly contribute to CVD include chronic hypertension, hyperlipi-
demia, diabetes, and smoking. Cardiac disease, such as atrial fibrilla-
tion or heart failure, can also cause cognitive impairment via embolic 
infarcts and hypoxemia due to inadequate cerebral blood flow.
A review of data from across the globe indicates good evidence for 
variability in CVD and stroke risk. Intracranial atherosclerosis, for 
example, is higher in Asians, Hispanics, and American blacks than 
it is in European and American whites, while whites may have more 
extracranial disease. The causes of these disparities remain under 
investigation, but likely include genetics, lifestyle, and access to health 
care.
VaD is strongly associated with hemorrhagic and ischemic strokes, 
with an estimated one-third of stroke survivors affected by post-stroke 
dementia or cognitive impairment. Hemorrhages, including subdural, 
intracerebral and subarachnoid bleeds, account for roughly 20% of all 
strokes. The disruption of cerebral networks caused by hemorrhage 
depends to a certain extent on size and location. Subarachnoid hem-
orrhage (SAH) has a more intricate relation with cognitive deficits. For 
instance, a history of SAH can triple the lifetime risk of developing a 
dementia syndrome; the molecular underpinnings of this observation 
are being actively studied. Of note, hemorrhagic strokes may occur as 
a result of vessel wall damage and inflammation associated with cere-
bral amyloid angiopathy (CAA). The build-up of β-amyloid protein 
in cerebral blood vessels that increases their susceptibility to rupture. 
Although CAA is frequently present in patients with Alzheimer’s dis-
ease (AD) (Chap. 423), it can also be found in the absence of neocortical 
amyloid plaques or in individuals with specific genetic predispositions 
and lead to cognitive impairment in the absence of AD.
Ischemic strokes compose 80% of all strokes. Large vessel and small 
vessel disease (SVD) can lead to dementia, although the mechanisms 
and clinical presentation vary. In a cross-sectional study of 706 VaD 
cases, large vessel disease, often referred to as multi-infarct dementia, 
made up roughly 18% of all cases. Neurobehavioral symptoms vary as 
a function of cerebral lesion size and location, and can include aphasia, 
apraxia, agnosia, and inattention syndromes. Some ambiguity between 
lesion location and cognitive symptoms continues to persist. This may 
be a result of the interconnected nature of cognitive, behavioral func-
tional, and structural networks of the brain, as well as the remote con-
sequences of cerebral inflammation and blood-brain barrier disruption 
caused by strokes.
Of all CVD subtypes, chronic cerebral SVD shows the strongest 
association with cognitive impairment. SVD accounts for 36–67% of 
all VaDs. Nonetheless, the relationship between SVD and dementia 


================================================================================
Ch426 Dementia with Lewy Bodies
Pages 3165-3165
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3165 ---

CHAPTER 426 Dementia with Lewy Bodies
3119
variability in reported prevalence, the consistent decrease of pure 
VaD with age and the related increase in mixed pathologies is well 
established and reflect the complex interactions between CVD, brain 
aging, and accumulation of abnormal proteins in neurodegeneration. 
Unsurprisingly, post-stroke dementia risk factors extensively overlap 
with those identified for AD, including older age, low education, 
hypertension, diabetes, smoking, and cerebral atrophy and hippocam-
pal sclerosis. Additionally, concurrent CVD lowers the threshold for 
dementia due to AD and Lewy body disease (Chap. 426).
Treatment of VaD must be focused on accurate diagnosis of VaD so 
that new ischemic injury can be prevented by stabilizing or removing 
the underlying causes. Effective control of modifiable risk factors 
(Chap. 2), including hypertension (Chap. 271), smoking (Chap. 448), 
alcohol intake (Chap. 445), sodium consumption, diabetes melli-
tus (Chap. 397), obesity (Chap. 395), and the metabolic syndrome 
(Chap. 401), are key to slowing the rising global prevalence of this con-
dition. There is a great need for sensitive and specific in vivo biomark-
ers of VCI-VaD for early diagnosis and ultimately a surrogate marker 
of therapeutic efficacy in clinical trials.
■
■FURTHER READING
Gardener H et al: Brain health and shared risk factors for dementia 
and stroke. Nat Rev Neurol 11:651, 2015.
Gorelick PB et al: Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and 
dementia. Stroke 42:2672, 2011.
McAleese KE et al: Post-mortem assessment in vascular dementia: 
Advances and aspirations. BMC Medicine 14:129, 2016.
Rizzi L et al: Global epidemiology of dementia: Alzheimer’s and 
vascular types. Biomed Res Int 2014:908915, 2014.
Rosenberg GA et al: Consensus statement for diagnosis of subcortical 
small vessel disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 36:6, 2016.
Sachdev P et al: Diagnostic criteria for vascular cognitive disorders: A 
VASCOG statement. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 28:206, 2014.
Although Lewy body disease (LBD) was once conceptualized as a 
disease of the substantia nigra, modern human postmortem studies 
with alpha-synuclein immunohistochemistry revealed that Lewy body 
and Lewy neurite pathology most often begins in the enteric and auto-
nomic nervous systems before ascending through the brainstem to the 
substantia nigra, limbic system, and ultimately the cerebral cortex. In 
other individuals, disease may begin in the olfactory bulb and spread 
inward through olfactory system connections. These sites of onset, 
positioned as they are at neural interfaces with the environment, have 
suggested to some that a toxic environmental exposure may trigger the 
disease. Individual patients vary in their adherence to these general 
patterns, and the tempo and topology of progression dictate the clinical 
syndrome. Some patients with long-standing Parkinson’s disease (PD) 
(Chap. 427) without cognitive impairment slowly develop a dementia 
that is associated with visual hallucinations and fluctuating alertness. 
In this scenario, the term Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD) is often 
used. In other patients, dementia and a neuropsychiatric syndrome 
precede or co-emerge with the parkinsonism, and the patient is diag-
nosed with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The DLB syndrome is characterized by visual hallucinations, par-
kinsonism, fluctuating alertness, neuroleptic sensitivity, rapid eye 
movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD), and often hyposmia 
and excessive daytime sleepiness. Delusions related to persecution, 
Dementia with Lewy Bodies
William W. Seeley, Caroline M. Tanner,   
Bruce L. Miller 
426
invasion, and person or place identity (reduplicative paramnesia) 
are common. Both PDD and DLB may be accompanied or preceded 
by symptoms referable to brainstem pathology below the substantia 
nigra including constipation, orthostatic lightheadedness, depression/ 
anxiety, and RBD, and most researchers now conceptualize DLB and 
PDD as points on a spectrum of LBD pathology. When orthostatic 
hypotension is present, DLB must be distinguished from multiple sys-
tem atrophy with parkinsonism (MSA-P) (Chap. 432). Recurrent, dis-
abling syncope early in the course, accompanied by laryngeal spasms 
and anterocollis, suggest MSA-P. In DLB, orthostasis can appear early 
but rarely becomes disabling until well into the course, when neurop-
sychiatric symptoms and cognitive dysfunction are well-established.
Patients with DLB and PDD are highly sensitive to metabolic per-
turbations, and in some patients the first manifestation of illness is a 
delirium, often precipitated by an infection, new medicine, or other 
systemic disturbance. A hallucinatory delirium induced by l-dopa, 
prescribed for parkinsonian symptoms attributed to PD, may like-
wise provide the initial clue to a DLB or PDD diagnosis. Conversely, 
patients with mild cognitive deficits and hallucinations may receive 
typical or atypical antipsychotic medications, which induce profound 
parkinsonism at low doses due to a subclinical LBD-related nigral 
dopaminergic neuron loss. Minor day-to-day variation in cognitive 
functioning is common across dementias, but in DLB fluctuations 
can be marked, with bouts of confusion, lethargy, or even stupor that 
may rapidly resolve. Cognitively, DLB features relative preservation 
of episodic memory but often more severe visuospatial and executive 
deficits than seen in patients with early stages of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Iodine-123-meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) cardiac scintigraphy to 
illustrate cardiac postganglionic sympathetic denervation and dopa-
mine transporter imaging using SPECT or PET can both be useful in 
distinguishing dementia with parkinsonism due to LBD from that due 
to AD alone.
■
■NEUROPATHOLOGY
The key neuropathological feature in LBD is the presence of Lewy 
bodies and Lewy neurites throughout specific brainstem nuclei, sub-
stantia nigra, amygdala, cingulate gyrus, and, ultimately, the neocortex. 
Formal staging criteria identify three stages of ascension: (1) brain-
stem predominant, (2) transitional limbic, and (3) diffuse neocortical, 
although healthy older individuals may also show isolated scattered 
Lewy body pathology in the substantia nigra, amygdala, or olfactory 
bulb. Lewy bodies are intraneuronal cytoplasmic inclusions that stain 
with periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) but are now identified with antibodies 
to the presynaptic protein, α-synuclein. Lewy bodies are composed of 
straight neurofilaments 7–20 nm long with surrounding amorphous 
material and contain epitopes recognized by antibodies against phos-
phorylated and nonphosphorylated neurofilament proteins, ubiquitin, 
and α-synuclein. Generally neuronal and synaptic loss, rather than 
Lewy pathology per se, best predict the clinical deficits. A profound 
cholinergic deficit, owing to basal forebrain and pedunculopontine 
nucleus involvement, is present in many patients with DLB and may be 
a factor responsible for the fluctuations, inattention, and visual hallu-
cinations. Adrenergic deficits from locus ceruleus involvement further 
undermine arousal and alerting.
TREATMENT
Dementia with Lewy Bodies
Due to the frequent comorbidity with AD and the cholinergic 
deficit in DLB, cholinesterase inhibitors often provide significant 
benefit, reducing hallucinosis, stabilizing delusional symptoms, 
and even helping with RBD in some patients. Exercise programs 
maximize motor function and protect against fall-related injury. 
Antidepressants are often necessary. Atypical antipsychotics may be 
required for psychosis but can worsen extrapyramidal syndromes, 
even at low doses, and should be used cautiously, given the side 
effects including an increased risk of death. Patients with DLB are 
extremely sensitive to dopaminergic medications (Chap. 427), which 


================================================================================
Ch427 Parkinsons Disease
Pages 3166-3177
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3166 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3120
must be carefully titrated; tolerability may be improved by concom-
itant use of a cholinesterase inhibitor. A general approach to the 
symptomatic management of dementia is presented in Chap. 25.
■
■FURTHER READING
Goedert M et al: 100 years of Lewy pathology. Nat Rev Neurol 9:13, 
2013.
McKeith IG et al: Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy 
bodies: Fourth consensus report of the DLB Consortium. Neurology 
89:88, 2017.
Morra LF, Donovick PJ: Clinical presentation and differential diagno-
sis of dementia with Lewy bodies: A review. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 
29:569, 2014.
Sonni I et al: Clinical validity of presynaptic dopaminergic imaging 
with 123I-ioflupane and noradrenergic imaging with 123I-MIBG in 
the differential diagnosis between Alzheimer’s disease and dementia 
with Lewy bodies in the context of a structured 5-phase development 
framework. Neurobiol Aging 52:228, 2017.
Velayudhan L et al: New therapeutic strategies for Lewy body demen-
tias. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 17:68, 2017.
PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND RELATED 
DISORDERS
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common age-related neu-
rodegenerative disease, exceeded only by Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Its 
cardinal clinical features were first described by the English physician 
James Parkinson in 1817. It is noteworthy that James Parkinson was 
a general physician who captured the essence of this condition based 
on a visual inspection of a mere handful of patients, several of whom 
he only observed and did not formally examine. It is estimated that 
the number of people with PD in the most populous nations world-
wide was ~4 million persons in 2005, and this number is expected to 
more than double to ~9 million by the year 2030 based on the aging of 
the population. The mean age of onset of PD is about 60 years, and the 
lifetime risk is ~2% for men and 1.3% for women. The frequency of PD 
increases with aging, but cases can be seen in individuals in their twen-
ties and even younger, particularly in association with a gene mutation.
Clinically, PD is characterized by rest tremor, rigidity (stiffness), 
bradykinesia (slowing), and gait dysfunction with postural instability. 
These are known as the “cardinal features” of the disease. Additional 
clinical features can include freezing of gait, speech difficulty, swal-
lowing impairment, autonomic disturbances, and a series of nonmotor 
features that include sensory alterations, mood disorders, sleep dys-
function, cognitive impairment, and dementia (see Table 427-1 and 
discussion below).
Pathologically, the hallmark features of PD are degeneration of 
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc), 
reduced striatal dopamine, and intraneuronal proteinaceous inclusions 
known as Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites that primarily contain the 
protein α-synuclein (Fig. 427-1). While interest has primarily focused 
on the dopamine system, neuronal degeneration with inclusion body 
formation can also affect cholinergic neurons of the nucleus basalis of 
Meynert (NBM), norepinephrine neurons of the locus coeruleus (LC), 
serotonin neurons in the raphe nuclei of the brainstem, and neurons of 
the olfactory system, cerebral hemispheres, spinal cord, and peripheral 
autonomic nervous system. This “nondopaminergic” pathology is 
likely responsible for the development of the nondopaminergic clinical 
features listed in Table 427-1. There is some evidence that Lewy body 
427 Parkinson’s Disease
C. Warren Olanow, Christine Klein,  
Anthony H.V. Schapira 
TABLE 427-1  Clinical Features of Parkinson’s Disease
CARDINAL 
MOTOR 
FEATURES
OTHER MOTOR 
FEATURES
NONMOTOR FEATURES
Bradykinesia
Rest tremor
Rigidity
Postural instability
Micrographia
Masked facies 
(hypomimia)
Reduced eye blinking
Drooling
Soft voice (hypophonia)
Dysphagia
Freezing
Anosmia
Sensory disturbances (e.g., 
pain)
Mood disorders (e.g., 
depression)
Sleep disturbances (e.g., RBD)
Autonomic disturbances
  Orthostatic hypotension
  Gastrointestinal 
disturbances
  Genitourinal disturbances
  Sexual dysfunction
Cognitive impairment/
Dementia
Abbreviations: RBD, rapid eye movement behavior disorder.
pathology can begin in the peripheral autonomic nervous system, 
olfactory system, and dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve in 
the lower brainstem, and then spread in a predictable and sequential 
manner to affect the upper brainstem (SNc) and cerebral hemispheres 
(Braak staging). These studies suggest that the classic degeneration of 
SNc dopamine neurons and the cardinal motor features of PD develop 
at a mid-stage of the disease. Indeed, epidemiologic studies suggest 
that clinical symptoms reflecting early involvement of nondopaminer-
gic neurons such as constipation, anosmia, rapid eye movement (REM) 
behavior sleep disorder, and cardiac denervation can precede the onset 
of the classic motor features of PD by several years if not decades. 
Based on these findings, efforts are underway to accurately define a 
premotor stage of PD.
■
■DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Parkinsonism is a generic term that is used to define a syndrome man-
ifest by bradykinesia with rigidity and/or tremor. It has a differential 
diagnosis (Table 427-2) that reflects differences in the site of damage 
and pathology in the various components of the basal ganglia. The 
basal ganglia comprise a group of subcortical nuclei that include the 
striatum (putamen and caudate nucleus), subthalamic nucleus (STN), 
globus pallidus pars externa (GPe), globus pallidus pars interna (GPi), 
and the SNc (Fig. 427-2). Among the different forms of parkinsonism, 
PD is the most common (~75% of cases). Historically, PD was diag-
nosed based on the presence of two of three parkinsonian features 
(tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia). However, postmortem studies found 
a 24% error rate when diagnosis was based solely on these criteria. 
Clinicopathologic correlation studies subsequently determined that 
parkinsonism associated with rest tremor, asymmetry of motor impair-
ment, and a good response to levodopa was more likely to predict the 
correct pathologic diagnosis. With these revised criteria (known as the 
U.K. Brain Bank Criteria), a clinical diagnosis of PD could be confirmed 
pathologically in as many as 99% of cases. The International Parkin-
son’s Disease and Movement Disorder Society (MDS) has recently 
suggested revised clinical criteria for PD (known as the MDS Clinical 
Diagnostic Criteria for Parkinson’s disease) that are currently under-
going international validation. While motor parkinsonism has been 
retained as the core feature of the disease, the diagnosis of PD as the 
cause of parkinsonism relies on three additional categories of diagnos-
tic features: supportive criteria (features that increase confidence in the 
diagnosis of PD), absolute exclusion criteria, and red flags (which must 
be counterbalanced by supportive criteria to permit a diagnosis of PD). 
Utilizing these criteria, two levels of certainty have been delineated; 
clinically established PD, and probable PD. The key diagnostic criteria 
for PD based on MDS criteria are illustrated in Table 427-2.
Imaging of the brain dopamine system in patients with PD can 
be performed using positron emission tomography (PET) or sin-
gle-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). These studies 


--- PDF PAGE 3167 ---

CHAPTER 427 Parkinson’s Disease
3121
typically show reduced and asymmetric uptake of striatal dopamin-
ergic biomarkers, particularly in the posterior putamen with relative 
sparing of the caudate nucleus (Fig. 427-3). These findings reflect the 
degeneration of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons and the loss of 
striatal terminals. Imaging can be useful in patients where there is diag-
nostic uncertainty (e.g., essential tremor, dystonic tremor, psychogenic 
tremor) or in research studies, but is rarely necessary in routine practice 
because the diagnosis can usually be established on clinical criteria 
alone. This may change in the future when there is a disease-modify-
ing therapy and it is critically important to make a correct diagnosis 
as early as possible. Genetic testing can be helpful for establishing a 
A
B
C
FIGURE 427-1  Pathologic specimens from a patient with Parkinson’s disease (PD) compared to a normal control demonstrating (A) reduction of pigment in SNc in 
PD (right) versus control (left), (B) reduced numbers of cells in SNc in PD (right) compared to control (left), and (C) Lewy bodies (arrows) within melanized dopamine 
neurons in PD. SNc, substantia nigra pars compacta.
TABLE 427-2  Differential Diagnosis of Parkinsonism
Parkinson’s Disease
  Sporadic
  Genetic
Dementia with Lewy bodies
Atypical Parkinsonism
  Multiple-system atrophy (MSA)
    Cerebellar type (MSA-c)
    Parkinson type (MSA-p)
Progressive supranuclear palsy
    Parkinsonism
    Richardson variant
Corticobasal Syndrome
Frontotemporal dementia
Secondary Parkinsonism
  Drug-induced
  Tumor
  Infection
  Vascular
  Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
  Trauma
  Liver failure
  Toxins (e.g., carbon monoxide, 
manganese, MPTP, cyanide, hexane, 
methanol, carbon disulfide)
Neurodegenerative Disorders and other 
forms of parkinsonism
  Wilson’s disease
  Huntington’s disease
  Neurodegeneration with brain iron 
accumulation
  SCA 3 (spinocerebellar ataxia)
  Fragile X–associated 
ataxia-tremor-parkinsonism
  Prion disease
  X-linked Dystonia-parkinsonism
  Alzheimer’s disease with parkinsonism
  Dopa-Responsive Dystonia
Abbreviations: MPTP, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine.
diagnosis, but is not routinely employed as monogenic forms are rare 
and likely account for no more than 5% of cases (see discussion below). 
A genetic form of PD should be considered in patients with a positive 
family history, early age of onset (<40 years), a specific clinical picture 
or a particular ethnic background, and in research studies. Mutations 
of the LRRK2 gene have attracted particular interest because they are 
the most common known cause of familial PD and are responsible 
for ~1% of typical sporadic cases of the disease. Mutations in LRRK2 
are a particularly frequent cause (~25%) of PD in Ashkenazi Jews and 
North African Berber Arabs; however, there is considerable variability 
in penetrance and many carriers never develop clinical features of PD. 


--- PDF PAGE 3168 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3122
Striatum
(Putamen and
Caudate)
Globus Pallidus
Globus Pallidus
SNc
A
B
STN
SNc
Striatum
Globus Pallidus
FIGURE 427-2  Basal ganglia nuclei. Schematic (A) and postmortem (B) coronal sections illustrating the various components of the basal ganglia. SNc, substantia 
nigra pars compacta; STN, subthalamic nucleus.
Genetic testing is of particular interest to identify at-risk individuals 
in a research setting. There is also some evidence that diagnosis of PD, 
and even pre-PD, may possible based on the presence of increased iron 
accumulation in the SNc using transcranial sonography or special MRI 
protocols.
Atypical, Secondary and Other Forms of Parkinsonism  
Atypical parkinsonism refers to a group of neurodegenerative con-
ditions that usually are associated with more widespread pathology 
than found in PD (potentially with degeneration of striatum, globus 
A
B
FIGURE 427-3  [11C]Dihydrotetrabenazine positron emission tomography (a 
marker of VMAT2) in healthy control (A) and Parkinson’s disease (B) patient. 
Note the reduced striatal uptake of tracer, which is most pronounced in the 
posterior putamen and tends to be asymmetric. (Courtesy of Dr. Jon Stoessl.)
pallidus, cerebellum and brainstem as well as the SNc). These include 
Multiple System Atrophy (MSA), Progressive Supranuclear Palsy 
(PSP), and Corticobasal syndrome (CBS). As a group, they present with 
parkinsonism (rigidity and bradykinesia) but manifest clinical differ-
ences from PD reflecting the differences in their underlying pathology. 
In comparison to PD, the atypical parkinsonisms are characterized clin-
ically by early involvement of speech and gait, absence of rest tremor, 
lack of motor asymmetry, poor or no response to levodopa, and a more 
aggressive clinical course. In the early stages, they may show a modest 
benefit from levodopa and can be difficult to distinguish from PD, but 
the diagnosis becomes clearer with disease evolution. Pathologically, 
neurodegeneration involves the SNc (typically without Lewy bodies) 
and has more extensive neurodegeneration than occurs in PD (see 
below for individual conditions). Neuroimaging of the dopamine sys-
tem is usually not helpful, as striatal dopamine depletion can be seen 
in both PD and atypical parkinsonism. By contrast, metabolic imaging 
of the basal ganglia/thalamus network (using 2-F-deoxyglucose) may 
be helpful, showing a pattern of decreased activity in the GPi with 
increased activity in the thalamus, the reverse of what is seen in PD.
MSA manifests as a combination of parkinsonian, cerebellar, and 
autonomic features and can be divided into a predominant parkinso-
nian (MSA-p) or cerebellar (MSA-c) form. Clinically, MSA is suspected 
when a patient presents with features of atypical parkinsonism as 
described above in conjunction with cerebellar signs and/or prominent 
autonomic dysfunction, usually orthostatic hypotension (Chap. 432). 
Pathologically, MSA is characterized by degeneration of the SNc, 
striatum, cerebellum, and inferior olivary nuclei coupled with char-
acteristic glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) that stain positively for 
α-synuclein. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can show pathologic 
iron accumulation in the striatum on T2-weighted scans, high signal 
change in the region of the external surface of the putamen (putaminal 
rim) in MSA-p, or cerebellar and brainstem atrophy (the pontine “hot 
cross bun” sign [Fig. 432-2]) in MSA-c. There is currently no established 
evidence for any gene mutation/genetic risk factor for MSA. Recent 
studies suggest the possibility that MSA may be a prion disorder (see 
discussion below).
PSP is a form of atypical parkinsonism that is characterized by slow 
ocular saccades, eyelid apraxia, and restricted vertical eye movements 
with particular impairment of downward gaze. Patients frequently 
experience hyperextension of the neck with early gait disturbance and 
falls. In later stages, speech and swallowing difficulty and cognitive 
impairment may become evident. There is usually little or no response 
to levodopa. Two clinical forms of PSP have been identified; a “Parkin-
son” form that can closely resemble PD in the early stages including a 
positive response to levodopa, and the more classic “Richardson” form 
that is characterized by the features described above. MRI may reveal a 
characteristic atrophy of the midbrain with relative preservation of the 
pons on midsagittal images (the so-called “hummingbird sign”). Patho-
logically, PSP is characterized by degeneration of the SNc, striatum, 


--- PDF PAGE 3169 ---

CHAPTER 427 Parkinson’s Disease
3123
a mitochondrial toxin that is selectively taken up by, and damages, 
dopamine neurons. However, MPTP or MPTP-like compounds have 
not been linked to sporadic PD. Epidemiologic studies have reported 
an increased risk of developing PD in association with exposure to pes-
ticides, rural living, farming, and drinking well water. Dozens of other 
associations have also been reported in individual studies but results 
have been inconsistent, and no environmental factor has yet been 
proven to be a cause or to contribute to the cause of PD. Some possible 
protective factors have also been identified in epidemiologic studies 
including caffeine, smoking, intake of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs, and calcium channel blockers. The validity of these findings and 
the responsible mechanism also remain to be established.
About 5–15% of cases are familial in origin, and mutations in several 
PD-linked genes have been identified (Table 427-4). While monogenic 
mutations have been shown to be causative of PD, genetic risk factors 
that increase the risk of developing PD have also been identified. 
Large-size genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified 
26 independent gene variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms) as PD 
risk factors including variants in the SNCA, LRRK2, MAPT, and GBA 
genes as well as in the HLA region on chromosome 6. It has been pro-
posed that many cases of PD may be due to a “double hit” involving 
an interaction between (a) one or more genetic risk factors that induce 
susceptibility coupled with (b) exposure to a toxic environmental fac-
tor that may induce epigenetic or somatic DNA alterations or has the 
potential to directly damage the dopaminergic system. In this scenario, 
both factors are required for PD to ensue, while the presence of either 
one alone is not sufficient to cause the disease. Notably, however, even 
if a genetic or environmental risk factor doubles the risk to develop 
PD, this only results in a lifetime risk of 4% or lower, and thus cannot 
presently be used for individual patient counseling.
Several factors have been implicated in the pathogenesis of cell 
death in PD, including oxidative stress, inflammation, excitotoxicity, 
mitochondrial dysfunction, and the accumulation of misfolded pro-
teins with consequent proteolytic stress. Recent studies have demon-
strated that with aging, dopamine neurons switch from sodium to 
calcium pacing through calcium channels, potentially making these 
high-energy neurons vulnerable to calcium-mediated neurotoxicity. 
Whatever the pathogenic mechanism, cell death appears to occur, at 
TABLE 427-3  Features Suggesting an Atypical or Secondary Cause  
of Parkinsonism
SYMPTOMS/SIGNS
ALTERNATIVE DIAGNOSIS TO 
CONSIDER
History
Early speech and gait impairment 
(Lack of tremor, lack of motor 
asymmetry)
Atypical parkinsonism
Exposure to neuroleptics
Drug-induced parkinsonism
Onset prior to age 40
Genetic form of PD
Liver disease
Wilson’s disease, non-Wilsonian 
hepatolenticular degeneration
Early hallucinations and dementia 
with later development of PD features
Dementia with Lewy bodies
Diplopia, impaired down gaze
PSP
Poor or no response to an adequate 
trial of levodopa
Atypical or secondary parkinsonism
Physical Examination
Dementia as first or early feature
Dementia with Lewy bodies
Prominent orthostatic hypotension
MSA-p
Prominent cerebellar signs
MSA-c
Slow saccades with impaired down 
gaze
PSP
High-frequency (6–10 Hz) symmetric 
postural tremor with a prominent 
kinetic component
Essential tremor
Abbreviations: MSA-c, multiple-system atrophy–cerebellar type; MSA-p, multiple-
system atrophy–Parkinson’s type; PD, Parkinson’s disease; PSP, progressive 
supranuclear palsy.
STN, midline thalamic nuclei, and pallidum, coupled with neurofibril-
lary tangles and inclusions that stain for the tau protein. Mutations in 
the MAPT gene which encodes for the tau protein have been detected 
in some familial cases.
CBS is the least common of the three atypical parkinsonisms and 
usually presents with asymmetric dystonic contractions and clumsi-
ness of one hand coupled with cortical sensory disturbances manifest 
as apraxia, agnosia, focal limb myoclonus, or alien limb phenomenon 
(where the limb assumes a position in space without the patient being 
aware of the position or recognizing that the limb belongs to him/her). 
Dementia may occur at any stage of the disease. Both cortical and basal 
ganglia features are required to make this diagnosis. MRI frequently 
shows asymmetric cortical atrophy but this must be carefully sought. 
Pathologic findings include achromatic neuronal degeneration with tau 
deposits. Considerable overlap may occur both clinically and patholog-
ically between CBS and PSP, and they may be difficult to distinguish 
without pathologic confirmation.
Secondary parkinsonisms occur as a result of a variety of primary 
conditions including drugs, stroke, tumor, infection, or exposure to tox-
ins such as carbon monoxide or manganese that can cause damage to 
specific regions of the basal ganglia. Clinical features reflect the region 
of the basal ganglia that has been damaged. For example, strokes or 
tumors that affect the SNc may have a clinical picture identical to PD, 
whereas toxins such as carbon monoxide or manganese that damage 
the globus pallidus more closely resemble atypical parkinsonism. 
Dopamine-blocking agents such as neuroleptics are the most common 
cause of secondary parkinsonism. These drugs are most widely used in 
psychiatry, but medical physicians should be aware that drugs such as meto-
clopramide which are primarily used to treat gastrointestinal problems are 
also neuroleptic agents and may induce secondary parkinsonism. These 
drugs can also cause acute and tardive dyskinesias (see Chap. 428). 
Other drugs that can cause secondary parkinsonism include tetrabena-
zine, calcium channel blockers (flunarizine, cinnarizine), amiodarone, 
and lithium.
Parkinsonism can also be seen in Dopa-Responsive Dystonia, a 
condition that results from a mutation in the GTP-Cyclohydrolase 1 gene 
which can lead to a defect in a cofactor for tyrosine hydroxylase and 
the impaired manufacture of dopa and dopamine. While it typically 
presents as dystonia (Chap. 428), it can present as a biochemically 
based form of parkinsonism (due to reduced synthesis of dopamine) 
which closely resembles PD and responds to levodopa, but is not asso-
ciated with abnormalities on fluoro-dopa positron emission tomog-
raphy (FD-PET) nor neurodegeneration. This diagnosis should be 
considered in individuals aged <20 years who present with a clinical 
picture resembling PD.
Finally, parkinsonism can be seen as a feature of a variety of other 
degenerative disorders such as Wilson’s disease, Huntington’s disease 
(especially the juvenile form known as the Westphal variant), certain 
forms of spinocerebellar ataxias, and neurodegenerative disorders 
with brain iron accumulation such as pantothenate kinase (PANK)–
associated neurodegeneration (formerly known as Hallervorden-Spatz 
disease).
Some features that suggest that parkinsonism might be due to a 
condition other than PD are shown in Table 427-3.
■
■ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
Most PD cases occur sporadically (~85–90%) and are of unknown cause. 
Gene mutations (see below) are the only known causes of PD. Twin stud-
ies performed several decades ago suggested that environmental factors 
might play an important role in patients with an age of onset ≥50 years, 
with genetic factors being more important in younger-onset patients. 
However, the demonstration of later onset genetic variants (e.g., LRRK2 
and GBA) argues against the emphasis on environmental factors, 
even in individuals >50 years of age. The environmental hypothe-
sis received some support in the 1980s with the demonstration that 
MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine), a by-product 
of the illicit manufacture of a heroin-like drug, caused a PD-like 
syndrome in addicts in northern California. MPTP is transported 
into the central nervous system, where it is oxidized to form MPP+, 


--- PDF PAGE 3170 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3124
TABLE 427-4  Confirmed Genetic Causes of Parkinson’s Disease*
DESIGNATION* 
AND 
REFERENCE
GENEREVIEWS AND OMIM REFERENCE
CLINICAL CLUES
INHERITANCE
PREVIOUS LOCUS 
SYMBOL
1. Classical PD
PARK-SNCA
GeneReviews http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 168601
Missense mutations cause classical 
parkinsonism. Duplication or 
triplication mutations in this gene 
cause early onset parkinsonism with 
prominent dementia.
AD
PARK1
PARK-LRRK2
GeneReviews http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1208/
OMIM 607060
Clinically typical PD
AD
PARK8
PARK-VPS35
GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 614203
Clinically typical PD
AD
PARK17
2. Early-onset PD
PARK-Parkin
GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1155/
OMIM 600116
Often presents with dystonia, 
typically in a leg
AR
PARK2
PARK-PINK1
GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 605909
Often presents with psychiatric 
features
AR
PARK6
PARK-DJ1
GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 606324
AR
PARK7
3. Parkinsonism
PARK-ATP13A2
GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 606693
Kufor-Rakeb syndrome with 
parkinsonism and dystonia;
additional features: Supranuclear 
gaze palsy, spasticity/pyramidal 
signs, dementia, facial-faucial-
finger mini-myoclonus, dysphagia, 
dysarthria, olfactory dysfunction
AR
PARK9
PARK-FBXO7
GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM: 260300
Early onset parkinsonism with 
pyramidal signs
AR
PARK15
PARK-DNAJC6
GeneReviews: n/a
OMIM 615528
May present with mental retardation 
and seizures
AR
PARK19
PARK-SYNJ1
GeneReviews: n/a
OMIM 615530
May have seizures, cognitive decline, 
abnormal eye movements, and 
dystonia
AR
PARK20
*According to the recommendations of the International Parkinson’s and Movement Disorder Society (C Marras: Mov Disord 31:436, 2016).
Etiology
Oxidative stress
Mitochondrial
dysfunction
Cell death
Protein aggregation
Excitotoxicity
Inflammation
FIGURE 427-4  Schematic representation of how pathogenetic factors implicated 
in Parkinson’s disease interact in a network manner, ultimately leading to cell 
death. This figure illustrates how interference with any one of these factors may 
not necessarily stop the cell death cascade. (Adapted from CW Olanow: Movement 
Disorders 22:S-335, 2007.)
least in part, by way of a signal-mediated apoptotic or “suicidal” pro-
cess. Each of these mechanisms offers a potential target for putative 
neuroprotective drugs. However, it is not clear which of these factors 
is primary, if they are the same in all cases or specific to individual 
(genetic) patient subgroups, if they act by way of a network such that 
multiple insults are required for neurodegeneration to ensue, or if the 
findings to date merely represent an epiphenomenon unrelated to the 
true cause of cell death that still remains undiscovered (Fig. 427-4).
Although gene mutations cause only a minority of cases of PD, they 
may be helpful in pointing to specific pathogenic pathways and molec-
ular mechanisms that are central to a neurodegenerative process that 
might be relevant to all forms of the disease. To date, most interest has 
focused on pathways implicated by mutations in α-synuclein (SNCA), 
GBA, LRRK2, and PINK1/Parkin.
Although mutations in SNCA are an extremely rare cause of PD, 
SNCA was the first PD-linked and most intensely investigated PD 
gene, with respect to causative mutations but also risk variants, func-
tion of the gene and of the encoded protein. Shared clinical features of 
patients with SNCA mutations include earlier age of disease onset than 
in nongenetic PD, a faster progression of motor signs that are mostly 
levodopa-responsive, early occurrence of motor fluctuations, and pres-
ence of prominent nonmotor features. Intriguingly, SNCA constitutes 
the major component of Lewy bodies in patients with both monogenic 


--- PDF PAGE 3171 ---

CHAPTER 427 Parkinson’s Disease
3125
and sporadic forms of PD (Fig. 427-1). Duplication or triplication of the 
wild-type SNCA gene also causes PD with triplication carriers being 
more severely affected than carriers of duplications. These findings 
indicate that increased production of the normal protein alone can 
cause the disease in a dose-dependent fashion. More recently, Lewy 
pathology was discovered to have developed in healthy embryonic 
dopamine neurons that had been implanted into the striatum of PD 
patients, suggesting that the abnormal protein had transferred from 
affected cells to healthy unaffected dopamine neurons. Based on these 
findings, it has been proposed that the SNCA protein may be a prion, 
and PD a prion disorder (Chaps. 417 and 430). Like the prion pro-
tein PrPC, SNCA can misfold to form β-rich sheets, join to form toxic 
oligomers and aggregates, polymerize to form amyloid plaques (i.e., 
Lewy bodies), and cause neurodegeneration with spread to involve 
unaffected neurons. Indeed, injection of SNCA fibrils into the striatum 
of both transgenic and wild-type rodents leads to the development 
of Lewy pathology in host neurons, neurodegeneration, behavioral 
abnormalities, with spread of SNCA pathology to anatomically con-
nected sites. Further support for this hypothesis comes from the 
demonstration that inoculation of SNCA derived from human Lewy 
bodies induces dopamine cell degeneration and widespread Lewy 
pathology in mice and primates. Collectively, this evidence supports 
the possibility that neuroprotective therapies for PD might be devel-
oped based on inhibiting the accumulation or accelerating the removal 
of SNCA aggregates, knocking down levels of host SNCA, or blocking 
the templating phenomenon whereby misfolded SNCA promotes mis-
folding of the native protein in a prion-like chain reaction.
Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene represent the most 
important risk factor in terms of effect size for the development of PD, 
and experimentally there is a direct pathophysiological link between 
increased levels of SNCA and reduced levels of GBA. GBA encodes the 
enzyme glucocerebrosidase (GCase) which promotes lysosomal func-
tion and enhances the clearance of misfolded proteins. The identifica-
tion of GBA as a risk gene for PD resulted from the clinical observation 
that patients with Gaucher’s disease (GD) and their relatives commonly 
show signs of parkinsonism. This clinical observation of a link between 
GD and PD led to the discovery that several mutations in GBA, which 
cause Gaucher’s disease in an autosomal recessive manner, confer risk 
for the development of PD, also in a heterozygous state. Further, reduced 
GCase activity due to GBA mutations impairs lysosomal function which 
results in the accumulation of SNCA. Accumulation of SNCA can also 
lead to inhibition of lysosomal function and a further reduction in levels 
of wild-type GBA by interfering with endoplasmic reticulum-to-Golgi 
trafficking. This in turn, leads to decreased GBA activity and a further 
increase in the accumulation of SNCA. In this regard, it is noteworthy 
that lysosomal function is impaired and levels of GCase are reduced in 
patients with sporadic PD. These findings suggest that this molecular 
pathway may apply not only to patients with GD or with a GBA muta-
tion, but also to patients with sporadic PD or other synucleinopathies 
who have two wild-type GBA alleles. These bidirectional effects of 
SNCA and GBA form a positive feedback loop that, after surpassing a 
theoretical threshold, could lead to self-propagating disease. Studies of 
drugs that enhance GCase activity are currently underway.
Seven different LRRK2 mutations have now been clearly linked to 
PD, with p.G2019S being the most common due to a founder effect 
in the Ashkenazi Jewish and North African Arab populations. Muta-
tions in LRRK2 account for 3–41% of familial PD cases (depending on 
specific population) and are also found in apparently sporadic cases, 
albeit at a lower rate. The phenotype of LRRK2 p.G2019S mutations is 
indistinguishable from that of sporadic PD, although tremor appears to 
be more common, and leg tremor may be a useful diagnostic clue. The 
mechanism responsible for cell death with this mutation is not conclu-
sively known but is thought to involve changes in kinase activity with 
altered phosphorylation of target proteins (including autophosphory-
lation) with possible impairment of lysosomal function. Kinase inhibi-
tors can block toxicity associated with LRRK2 mutations in laboratory 
models, and there has been much interest in developing drugs directed 
at this target. However, kinase inhibitors are potentially toxic, and the 
majority of PD patients do not carry a LRRK2 mutation.
Mutations in Parkin and PINK1 have also been identified as a cause 
of PD. Parkin mutations are the more common, and the major cause 
of autosomal recessive and early-onset PD, accounting for up to 77% of 
cases of juvenile PD with an age of onset <20 years, and for 10–20% of 
early-onset PD patients in general. The disease is slowly progressive, 
responds well to antiparkinsonian treatment, and is commonly com-
plicated by dystonia, but very rarely by dementia. At pathology, neu-
rodegeneration tends to be restricted to the SNc and LC in patients with 
Parkin mutations, and Lewy bodies are typically absent. The reason 
for these differences from classic PD are not known, but may related 
to impaired ubiquitination of damaged proteins (parkin is a ubiquitin 
ligase). The clinical phenotypes of Parkin- and PINK1-linked PD are 
similar. Recent studies suggest a role for Parkin and PINK1 proteins 
in the turnover and clearance of damaged mitochondria (mitophagy), 
and mutations in Parkin and PINK1 cause mitochondrial dysfunction 
in transgenic animals that can be corrected with overexpression of Par-
kin or with drugs acting on the mitochondrial electron transfer chain, 
such as Vitamin K2. Improving mitochondrial function is a particularly 
attractive potential therapeutic target because postmortem studies in 
PD patients show a defect in complex I of the respiratory chain in SNc 
neurons.
Thus, evidence is accumulating that genetics plays an important role 
in both familial and “sporadic” forms of PD. It is anticipated that better 
understanding of the pathways responsible for cell death caused by 
these mutations will permit the development of more relevant animal 
models of PD and targets for the development of gene-specific neuro-
protective drugs.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF PD
The classic model of the organization of the basal ganglia in the normal 
and PD states is provided in Fig. 427-5. With respect to motor function, 
a series of neuronal circuits or loops link the basal ganglia nuclei with 
corresponding cortical motor regions in a somatotopic manner. The 
striatum is the major input region of the basal ganglia, while the GPi 
and SNr are the major output regions. The input and output regions 
are connected via direct and indirect pathways that have reciprocal 
effects on the activity of the basal ganglia output pathway. The output 
of the basal ganglia provides inhibitory (GABAergic) tone to thalamic 
and brainstem neurons that in turn connect to motor systems in the 
cerebral cortex and spinal cord that control motor function. An increase 
in neuronal activity in the output regions of the basal ganglia (GPi/
SNr) is associated with poverty of movement or parkinsonism, while 
decreased output results in movement facilitation and involuntary 
movements. Dopaminergic projections from SNc neurons serve to 
modulate neuronal firing and to stabilize the basal ganglia network. 
Normal dopamine innervation thus serves to facilitate the selection 
of the desired movement and reject unwanted movements. Cortical 
loops integrating the cortex and the basal ganglia are now thought to 
also play an important role in regulating behavioral, emotional, and 
cognitive functions.
In PD, dopamine denervation with loss of dopaminergic tone leads 
to increased firing of neurons in the STN and GPi, excessive inhibition 
of the thalamus, reduced activation of cortical motor systems, and the 
development of parkinsonian features (Fig. 427-5). The current role of 
surgery in the treatment of PD is based on this model, which predicted 
that lesions or high-frequency stimulation of the STN or GPi might 
reduce this neuronal overactivity and improve PD features.
TREATMENT
Parkinson’s Disease
LEVODOPA
Since its introduction in the late 1960s, levodopa has been the main-
stay of therapy for PD. Experiments in the late 1950s by Carlsson 
and colleagues demonstrated that blocking dopamine uptake with 
reserpine caused rabbits to become parkinsonian; this could be 
reversed with the dopamine precursor, levodopa. Subsequently, 
Hornykiewicz demonstrated a dopamine deficiency in the striatum 


--- PDF PAGE 3172 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3126
Cortex
Putamen
GPe
STN
GPi
SNr
PPN
VL
SNc
GPi
SNr
PPN
GPe
STN
VL
Putamen
SNc
Cortex
SNc
Cortex
GPi
SNr
PPN
GPe
STN
VL
Putamen
Cortex
DA
DA
A
B
C
Normal
PD
Dyskinesia
FIGURE 427-5  Basal ganglia organization. Classic model of the organization of the basal ganglia in the normal (A), Parkinson’s disease (PD) (B), and levodopa-induced 
dyskinesia (C) state. Inhibitory connections are shown as blue arrows and excitatory connections as red arrows. The striatum is the major input region and receives 
its major input from the cortex. The GPi and SNr are the major output regions, and they project to the thalamocortical and brainstem motor regions. The striatum and 
GPi/SNr are connected by direct and indirect pathways. This model predicts that parkinsonism results from increased neuronal firing in the STN and GPi and that 
lesions or DBS of these targets might provide benefit. This concept led to the rationale for surgical therapies for PD. The model also predicts that dyskinesia results 
from decreased firing of the output regions, resulting in excessive cortical activation by the thalamus. This component of the model is not completely correct because 
lesions of the GPi ameliorate rather than increase dyskinesia in PD, suggesting that firing frequency is just one of the components that lead to the development of 
dyskinesia. DBS, deep brain stimulation; GPe, external segment of the globus pallidus; GPi, internal segment of the globus pallidus; PPN, pedunculopontine nucleus; 
SNc, substantia nigra, pars compacta; SNr, substantia nigra, pars reticulata; STN, subthalamic nucleus; VL, ventrolateral thalamus. (Derived from JA Obeso et al: Trends 
Neurosci 23:S8, 2000.)
of PD patients, and suggested the potential benefit of dopamine 
replacement therapy. Dopamine does not cross the blood-brain 
barrier (BBB), so clinical trials were initiated with levodopa, the 
precursor of dopamine. Studies over the course of the next decade 
confirmed the value of levodopa and revolutionized the treatment 
of PD.
Levodopa is routinely administered in combination with a periph-
eral decarboxylase inhibitor to prevent its peripheral metabolism to 
dopamine and the development of nausea, vomiting, and orthostatic 
hypotension due to activation of dopamine receptors in the area 
postrema that are not protected by the BBB. In the United States, 
levodopa is combined with the decarboxylase inhibitor carbidopa 
(Sinemet®), whereas in many other countries it is combined with 
benserazide (Madopar®). Levodopa plus a decarboxylase inhibitor 
is also available in a methylated formulation, a controlled-release 
formulation (Sinemet CR® or Madopar HP®) and in combination 
with a catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor (Stalevo®). 
A long-acting formulation of levodopa (Rytary®) has also recently 
been approved. An inhaled form of levodopa that is rapidly and 
reliably absorbed is currently in late stage investigation as a rescue 
therapy for the treatment of individual “off” episodes (see below).
Levodopa remains the most effective symptomatic treatment for 
PD and the gold standard against which new therapies are com-
pared. No current medical or surgical treatment provides antipar-
kinsonian benefits superior to what can be achieved with levodopa. 
Levodopa benefits the classic motor features of PD, prolongs inde-
pendence and employability, improves quality of life, and increases 
life span. Almost all PD patients experience improvement, and 
failure to respond to an adequate trial of levodopa should cause the 
diagnosis to be questioned.
There are, however, important limitations of levodopa therapy. 
Acute dopaminergic side effects include nausea, vomiting, and 
orthostatic hypotension as indicated above. These are usually tran-
sient and can generally be avoided by starting with low doses and 
gradual titration. If they persist, they can be treated with additional 
doses of a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor (e.g., carbidopa), 
administering with food, or adding a peripheral dopamine-blocking 
agent such as domperidone (not available in the United States). 
More important are motor complications (see below) that develop 
in the majority of patients treated long-term with levodopa. In addi-
tion, the disease continues to progress, and features such as neu-
ropsychiatric problems, falling, freezing, autonomic dysfunction, 
sleep disorders, and dementia may emerge that are not adequately 
controlled by levodopa. Indeed, these nondopaminergic features 
(especially falling and dementia) are the primary source of disability 
and the main reason in the present era for nursing home placement 
for patients with advanced PD.
Levodopa-induced motor complications consist of fluctuations 
in motor response (“on” episodes when the drug is working and 
“off” episodes when parkinsonian features return) and involuntary 
movements known as dyskinesias which typically complicate “on” 
periods (Fig. 427-6). When patients initially take levodopa, benefits 
are long-lasting (many hours) even though the drug has a relatively 
short half-life (60–90 min). With continued treatment, however, the 
duration of benefit following an individual dose becomes progres-
sively shorter until it approaches the half-life of the drug. This loss 
of benefit is known as the wearing-off effect. In more severe cases, the 
response to a given dose may be variable with patients potentially 
experiencing a delay in turning on (delayed-on) or no response at all 
(no-on). Peak-dose dyskinesias occur at the time of levodopa peak 
plasma concentration and maximal clinical benefit. They are usually 
choreiform, but can manifest as dystonic movements, myoclonus, 
or other movement disorders. They are not troublesome when mild, 
but can be disabling when severe, and can limit the ability to use 
higher doses of levodopa to better control PD motor features. In 
more advanced states, patients may cycle between “on” periods 
complicated by disabling dyskinesias and “off” periods in which 
they suffer from severe parkinsonism and painful dystonic postures. 
Patients may also experience “diphasic dyskinesias,” which occur 
as the levodopa dose begins to take effect and again as it wears off. 
These dyskinesias typically consist of transient, stereotypic, rhyth-
mic movements that predominantly involve the lower extremities 
and are frequently associated with parkinsonism in other body 
regions. They can be relieved by increasing the dose of levodopa, 


--- PDF PAGE 3173 ---

CHAPTER 427 Parkinson’s Disease
3127
Clinical effect
Dyskinesia
threshold
Response
threshold
2
4
6
Time (h)
↑Levodopa
• Long-duration motor response
• Low incidence of dyskinesias
Early PD
Response
threshold
Dyskinesia
threshold
2
4
6
Time (h)
↑Levodopa
Clinical effect
• Short-duration motor response
• “On” time may be associated
 with dyskinesias
Moderate PD
Response
threshold
Dyskinesia
threshold
2
4
6
Time (h)
↑Levodopa
Clinical effect
• Short-duration motor response
• “On” time consistently associated
 with dyskinesias
Advanced PD
FIGURE 427-6  Changes in motor response associated with chronic levodopa treatment. Levodopa-induced motor complications. Schematic illustration of the gradual 
shortening of the duration of a beneficial motor response to levodopa (wearing off) and the appearance of dyskinesias complicating “on” time. PD, Parkinson’s disease.
although higher doses may induce more severe peak-dose dyskine-
sia. Long-term double blind studies show that motor complications 
are dose related, and can be minimized by using the lowest dose of 
levodopa that provides satisfactory benefit and through the use of 
polypharmacy to avoid raising the dose of levodopa.
The cause of levodopa-induced motor complications is not pre-
cisely known. They are more likely to occur in females, younger 
individuals with more severe disease, and with the use of higher 
doses of levodopa. The classic model of the basal ganglia has been 
useful for understanding the origin of motor features in PD, but has 
proved less valuable for understanding levodopa-induced dyski-
nesias (Fig. 427-5). The model predicts that dopamine replacement 
might excessively inhibit the pallidal output system, thereby leading 
to increased thalamocortical activity, enhanced stimulation of cor-
tical motor regions, and the development of dyskinesia. However, 
lesions of the pallidum are associated with amelioration rather 
than induction of dyskinesia as would be suggested by the classic 
model. It is now thought that dyskinesia results from alterations 
in the GPi/SNr neuronal firing pattern (pauses, bursts, synchrony, 
etc.) and not simply the firing frequency alone. This in turn leads to 
the transmission of “misinformation” from pallidum to thalamus/
cortex, resulting in dyskinesia. Surgical lesions or high-frequency 
stimulation targeted at the GPi or STN can ameliorate dyskinesia by 
interfering with (blocking or masking) this abnormal neuronal activ-
ity and preventing the transfer of misinformation to motor systems. 
There has also been recent interest in the use of ultrasound to lesion 
these target regions in a relatively noninvasive manner.
Current information suggests that altered neuronal firing pat-
terns and motor complications develop in response to nonphysio-
logic levodopa replacement. Striatal dopamine levels are normally 
maintained at a relatively constant level. In PD, dopamine neurons 
degenerate and striatal dopamine is dependent on the peripheral 
availability of levodopa. Intermittent oral doses of levodopa result 
in fluctuating plasma levels because of variability in the transit of 
the drug from the stomach to the duodenum where it is absorbed 
and the short half-life of the drug. This variability is translated to 
the brain and results in exposure of striatal dopamine receptors to 
alternating high and low concentrations of dopamine. It has been 
hypothesized that more continuous delivery of levodopa might 
prevent the development of motor complications. Indeed, a recent 
double-blind, double-dummy, double titration study demonstrated 
that continuous intraintestinal infusion of levodopa/carbidopa is 
associated with significant improvement in “off” time and in “on” 
time without dyskinesia in advanced PD patients compared with 
optimized standard oral levodopa. These benefits are superior to 
what has been observed in double blind controlled studies with 
other dopaminergic agents, and this therapy is now approved in the 
United States and Europe (Duodopa®, Duopa®). The treatment is, 
however, complicated by potentially serious adverse events related 
to the surgical procedure and the tubing, and the inconvenience 
of the infusion system. New approaches are currently being tested 
in which levodopa is continuously administered by subcutaneous 
infusion or by long-acting oral levodopa formulations in an effort to 
avoid the need for a surgical procedure. An inhaled formulation of 
levodopa is in late stage development as an acute rescue therapy for 
individual off episodes.
Behavioral complications can also be encountered in levodo-
pa-treated patients. A dopamine dysregulation syndrome has been 
described where patients have a craving for levodopa and take 
frequent and unnecessary doses of the drug in an addictive man-
ner. PD patients taking high doses of levodopa can also develop 
purposeless, stereotyped behaviors such as the assembly and disas-
sembly or collection and sorting of objects. This is known as pund-
ing, a term taken from the Swedish description of the meaningless 
behaviors seen in chronic amphetamine users. Hypersexuality and 
other impulse-control disorders are occasionally encountered with 
levodopa, although these are more commonly seen with dopamine 
agonists.
DOPAMINE AGONISTS
Dopamine agonists are a diverse group of drugs that act directly 
on dopamine receptors. Unlike levodopa, they do not require meta-
bolic conversion to an active product and do not undergo oxidative 
metabolism. Initial dopamine agonists were ergot derivatives (e.g., 
bromocriptine, pergolide, cabergoline) and were associated with 
potentially serious ergot-related side effects such as cardiac valvular 
damage and pulmonary fibrosis. They have largely been replaced by 
a second generation of nonergot dopamine agonists (e.g., pramipex-
ole, ropinirole, rotigotine). In general, dopamine agonists do not 
have comparable efficacy to levodopa. They were initially intro-
duced as adjuncts to levodopa to enhance motor function and 
reduce “off” time in fluctuating patients. Subsequently, it was shown 
that dopamine agonists are less prone than levodopa to induce 
dyskinesia, possibly because they are relatively long-acting. For this 
reason, many physicians initiate therapy with a dopamine agonist 
particularly in younger patients, although supplemental levodopa 
is eventually required in virtually all patients. This view has been 
tempered by the recognition that dopamine agonists are associated 
with potentially serious adverse effects such as unwanted sleep epi-
sodes and impulse control disorders (see below). Both ropinirole and 
pramipexole are available as orally administered immediate (tid) 
and extended-release (qd) formulations. Rotigotine is administered 
as a once-daily transdermal patch, and may be useful in managing 
surgical patients who are NPO. Apomorphine is a dopamine agonist 
with efficacy comparable to levodopa, but it must be administered 
parenterally as it is rapidly and extensively metabolized if taken 
orally. It has a short half-life and duration of activity (45 min). It can 
be administered by subcutaneous injection as a rescue agent for the 
treatment of severe “off” episodes, but can also be administered by 
continuous subcutaneous infusion where it has been demonstrated 


--- PDF PAGE 3174 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3128
to reduce both “off” time and dyskinesia in advanced patients. This 
latter approach has not been approved in the United States. A sub-
lingual bilayer formulation of apomorphine is in late stage develop-
ment as a rapid and reliable therapy for individual “off” periods that 
avoids the need for a subcutaneous (SC) injection.
Dopamine agonist use is associated with a variety of side effects. 
Acute side effects are primarily dopaminergic and include nausea, 
vomiting, and orthostatic hypotension. As with levodopa, these 
can usually be avoided by starting with low doses and using slow 
titration. Side effects associated with chronic use include hallucina-
tions and cognitive impairment. Sedation with sudden unintended 
episodes of falling asleep that can occur in dangerous situations 
such as while driving a motor vehicle have been reported. Patients 
should be informed about this potential problem and should not 
drive when tired. Dopamine agonists can also be associated with 
impulse-control disorders, including pathologic gambling, hyper-
sexuality, and compulsive eating and shopping. Patients should also 
be advised of these risks and specifically questioned for their occur-
rence at follow-up examinations. The precise cause of these prob-
lems, and why they appear to occur more frequently with dopamine 
agonists than levodopa, remains to be resolved, but reward systems 
associated with dopamine and alterations in the ventral striatum 
and orbitofrontal regions have been implicated. In general, chronic 
side effects are dose-related and can be avoided or minimized with 
lower doses. Injections of apomorphine can be complicated by skin 
lesions at sites of administration, but this has not been a problem 
with the sublingual bilayer formulation.
MAO-B INHIBITORS
Inhibitors of monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) block central 
dopamine metabolism and increase synaptic concentrations of the 
neurotransmitter. Selegiline and rasagiline are relatively selective 
suicide inhibitors of the MAO-B isoform of the enzyme. Clinically, 
these agents provide antiparkinsonian benefits when used as mono-
therapy in early disease stages and reduced “off” time when used as 
an adjunct to levodopa in patients with motor fluctuations. MAO-B 
inhibitors are generally safe and well tolerated. They may increase 
dyskinesia in levodopa-treated patients, but this can usually be 
controlled by down-titrating the dose of levodopa. Inhibition of the 
MAO-A isoform prevents metabolism of tyramine in the gut, lead-
ing to a potentially fatal hypertensive reaction known as a “cheese 
effect” because it can be precipitated by foods rich in tyramine such 
as some cheeses, aged meats, and red wine. Selegiline and rasagiline 
do not functionally inhibit MAO-A and are not associated with a 
cheese effect with doses used in clinical practice. There are theoret-
ical risks of a serotonin reaction in patients receiving concomitant 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants, but 
these are rarely encountered. Safinamide (Xadago®) is a reversible 
MAO-B inhibitor that has recently been approved as an adjunct 
to levodopa in advanced PD patients with motor fluctuations. 
The drug also acts to block activated sodium channels and inhibit 
glutamate release, and is currently being studied as a possible anti-
dyskinetic agent.
Interest in MAO-B inhibitors has also focused on their potential 
to have disease-modifying effects. MPTP toxicity can be prevented 
experimentally by coadministration of an MAO-B inhibitor that 
blocks its conversion to the toxic pyridinium ion MPP+ that selec-
tively damages dopamine neurons. MAO-B inhibitors also have 
the potential to block the oxidative metabolism of dopamine and 
prevent oxidative stress. In addition, both selegiline and rasagiline 
incorporate a propargyl ring within their molecular structure that 
provides antiapoptotic effects in laboratory models. The DATATOP 
study showed that selegiline significantly delayed the time until the 
emergence of disability necessitating the introduction of levodopa 
in untreated PD patients. However, it could not be definitively 
determined whether this was due to a neuroprotective effect that 
slowed disease progression or a symptomatic effect that masked 
ongoing neurodegeneration. More recently, the ADAGIO study 
used a two-period delayed-start design and demonstrated that early 
treatment with rasagiline 1 mg/d, but not 2 mg/d, provided benefits 
that could not be achieved when treatment with the same drug was 
initiated at a later time point. This benefit is consistent with a dis-
ease-modifying effect; however, the long-term significance of these 
findings is uncertain.
COMT INHIBITORS
When levodopa is administered with a decarboxylase inhibitor, it 
is primarily metabolized in the periphery by the catechol-O-methyl 
transferase (COMT) enzyme. Inhibitors of COMT increase the elim-
ination half-life of levodopa and enhance its brain availability. 
Combining levodopa with a COMT inhibitor reduces “off” time and 
prolongs “on” time in fluctuating patients while enhancing motor 
scores. Two COMT inhibitors, tolcapone and entacapone, have 
been approved for use. More recently, opicapone (a long-acting, 
once daily COMT inhibitor) has been approved in Europe. There is 
also a combination tablet of levodopa, carbidopa, and entacapone 
(Stalevo®).
Side effects of COMT inhibitors are primarily dopaminergic (nau-
sea, vomiting, increased dyskinesia) and can usually be controlled 
by down-titrating the dose of levodopa by 20–30%. Severe diarrhea 
has been described with tolcapone, and to a lesser degree with 
entacapone, and necessitates stopping the medication in 5–10% of 
individuals. Cases of fatal hepatic toxicity have been reported with 
tolcapone. It is still used because it is the most effective of the COMT 
inhibitors, but periodic monitoring of liver function is required. This 
problem has not been encountered with entacapone. Discoloration 
of urine can be seen with COMT inhibitors due to accumulation of a 
metabolite, but it is of no clinical concern.
It has been proposed that initiating levodopa in combination with 
a COMT inhibitor to enhance its elimination half-life could provide 
more continuous levodopa delivery and reduce the risk of motor 
complications if administered at frequent intervals. While this result 
has been demonstrated in a preclinical MPTP model, and continu-
ous infusion reduces both “off” time and dyskinesia in advanced PD 
patients, no benefit of initiating levodopa with a COMT inhibitor 
compared to levodopa alone was detected in early PD patients in the 
STRIDE-PD study. This may have been because the combination was 
not administered at frequent enough intervals to provide continuous 
levodopa availability. For now, the main value of COMT inhibitors 
continues to be in patients who experience motor fluctuations.
OTHER MEDICAL THERAPIES
Centrally acting anticholinergic drugs such as trihexyphenidyl and 
benztropine were used historically for the treatment of PD, but they 
lost favor with the introduction of dopaminergic agents. Their major 
clinical effect is on tremor, although it is not certain that this benefit 
is superior to what can be obtained with agents such as levodopa 
and dopamine agonists. Still, they can be helpful in individual 
patients with severe tremor. Their use is limited particularly in the 
elderly, due to their propensity to induce a variety of side effects 
including urinary dysfunction, glaucoma, and particularly cognitive 
impairment.
Amantadine was originally introduced as an antiviral agent, 
but was appreciated to also have antiparkinsonian effects that are 
thought to be due to N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antag-
onism. While some physicians use amantadine in patients with early 
disease for its mild symptomatic effects, it is most widely used as 
an antidyskinesia agent in patients with advanced PD. Indeed, it is 
the only oral agent that has been demonstrated in controlled stud-
ies to reduce dyskinesia without worsening parkinsonian features, 
although benefits may be relatively transient. Cognitive impairment 
is a major concern. Other side effects include livedo reticularis and 
weight gain. Amantadine should always be discontinued gradu-
ally because patients can experience withdrawal-like symptoms. 
An extended release formulation of amantadine has recently been 
approved in the United States.
The anticonvulsant zonisamide has also been shown to have anti-
parkinsonian effects and is approved for use in Japan. Its mechanism 
of action is unknown.


--- PDF PAGE 3175 ---

CHAPTER 427 Parkinson’s Disease
3129
Several new classes of drugs are currently being investigated in 
an attempt to enhance antiparkinsonian effects, reduce off time, and 
treat or prevent dyskinesia. These include adenosine A2A antago-
nists, nicotinic agonists, glutamate antagonists, and 5-HT1A agonists. 
The A2A antagonist Istradefylline is approved in Japan.
A list of the major drugs and available dosage strengths currently 
available to treat PD is provided in Table 427-5.
NEUROPROTECTION
Despite the many therapeutic agents available for the treatment 
of PD, patients continue to progress and to develop intolerable 
disability. A neuroprotective therapy that slows or stops disease 
progression remains the major unmet therapeutic need. Numer-
ous trials have shown positive results (e.g., selegiline, rasagiline, 
pramipexole, ropinirole) consistent with a disease-modifying effect. 
However, it has not been possible to determine with certainty if the 
positive results were due to neuroprotection with slowing of disease 
progression or confounding symptomatic or pharmacologic effects 
that mask disease progression. There is a flurry of clinical activity 
testing interventions targeting etiopathogenic factors; these include 
calcium channel blockers, urate, and agents that enhance glucocere-
brocidase (GCase) or interfere with SNCA or LRRK2 in the hope that 
they might provide disease-modifying effects. A major limitation is 
the uncertainty as to a specific clinical development plan and trial 
design that will prove acceptable to both clinicians and regulatory 
authorities.
SURGICAL TREATMENT
Surgical treatments for PD have been used for more than a century. 
Lesions were initially placed in the motor cortex and improved 
tremor but were associated with motor deficits, and this approach 
was abandoned. Subsequently, it was appreciated that lesions placed 
into the ventral intermediate (VIM) nucleus of the thalamus reduced 
contralateral tremor without inducing hemiparesis, but these lesions 
did not meaningfully help other more disabling features of PD. In 
the 1990s, it was shown that lesions placed in the posteroventral por-
tion of the GPi (motor territory) improved rigidity and bradykinesia 
as well as tremor. Importantly, pallidotomy was also associated with 
marked improvement in contralateral dyskinesia. This procedure 
gained favor with greater understanding of the pathophysiology 
of PD (see above). However, this procedure is not optimal, because 
bilateral lesions are associated with side effects such as dysphagia, 
dysarthria, and impaired cognition. Lesions of the STN are associ-
ated with antiparkinsonian benefit and reduced levodopa require-
ment, but there is a concern about the risk of hemiballismus, and this 
procedure is not commonly performed.
Most surgical procedures for PD performed today use deep brain 
stimulation (DBS). Here, an electrode is placed into the target area 
and connected to a stimulator inserted subcutaneously over the 
chest wall. DBS simulates the effects of a lesion without necessitating 
making a brain lesion. The precise mechanism whereby DBS works 
is not fully resolved but may act by disrupting the abnormal neuro-
physiological signals associated with PD and motor complications. 
The stimulation variables can be adjusted with respect to electrode 
configuration, voltage, frequency, and pulse duration in order to 
maximize benefit and minimize adverse side effects. The procedure 
does not require making a lesion in the brain and is thus suitable for 
performing bilateral procedures with relative safety. In cases with 
intolerable side effects, stimulation can be stopped and the system 
removed.
DBS for PD primarily targets the STN or the GPi. It provides dra-
matic results, particularly with respect to tremor and reducing both 
“off” time and dyskinesias, but does not provide superior clinical 
benefits or improve features that do not respond to levodopa such 
as freezing, falling, and dementia. The procedure is thus primarily 
indicated for patients who suffer disability resulting from severe 
tremor, or levodopa-induced motor complications that cannot be sat-
isfactorily controlled with drug manipulation. In such patients, DBS 
has been shown to provide benefits in comparison to best medical 
therapy. Side effects can be seen with respect to the surgical proce-
dure (hemorrhage, infarction, infection), the DBS system (infection, 
lead break, lead displacement, skin ulceration), or the stimulation 
(ocular and speech abnormalities, muscle twitches, paresthesias, 
depression, and rarely suicide). Recent studies indicate that benefits 
following DBS of the STN and GPi are comparable, but that GPi 
stimulation may be associated with a reduced frequency of depres-
sion. Although not all PD patients are candidates, the procedure can 
be profoundly beneficial for many. Long-term studies demonstrate 
continued benefits with respect to the classic motor features of PD, 
but DBS does not prevent the development of nondopaminergic 
features, which continue to evolve and to be a source of disability. 
Studies continue to evaluate the optimal way to use DBS (low- vs 
high-frequency stimulation, closed loop systems, etc.). Studies of 
DBS in early PD patients show benefits in comparison to medical 
therapy, but this must be weighed against the cost of the procedure 
and the risk of side effects in patients who might otherwise be well 
controlled with medical therapies. Controlled studies comparing 
DBS to other therapies aimed at improving motor function without 
causing dyskinesia, such as Duodopa® and apomorphine infusions, 
remain to be performed. The utility of DBS may also be reduced in 
future years if new medical therapies are developed that provide the 
benefits of levodopa without motor complications. New targets for 
TABLE 427-5  Drugs Commonly Used for Treatment of  
Parkinson’s Diseasea
AGENT
AVAILABLE DOSAGES
TYPICAL DOSING
Levodopaa
  Carbidopa/levodopa
10/100, 25/100, 
25/250 mg
200–1000 mg 
levodopa/day
  Benserazide/levodopa
25/100, 50/200 mg
  Carbidopa/levodopa 
CR
25/100, 50/200 mg
  Benserazide/levodopa 
MDS
25/200, 25/250 mg
  Parcopa
10/100, 25/100, 
25/250
  Rytary (carbidopa/
levodopa)
  Carbidopa/levodopa/
entacapone
23.75/95, 36.25/145, 
48.75/195, 61.25/245
12.5/50/200, 
18.75/75/200, 
25/100/200, 
31.25/125/200, 
37.5/150/200, 
50/200/200 mg
See conversion tables
Dopamine agonists
  Pramipexole
0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 
1.5 mg
0.25–1.0 mg tid
  Pramipexole ER
0.375, 0.75, 1.5. 3.0, 
4.5 mg
1–3 mg/d
  Ropinirole
0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 3.0 mg
6–24 mg/d
  Ropinirole XL
2, 4, 6, 8 mg
6–24 mg/d
  Rotigotine patch
2-, 4-, 6-, 8-mg patches
4–24 mg/d
  Apomorphine SC
2-8 mg
2–8 mg
COMT inhibitors
  Entacapone
200 mg
200 mg with each 
levodopa dose
  Tolcapone
  Opicapone
100, 200 mg
50 mg
100–200 mg tid
50 mg HS
MAO-B inhibitors
  Selegiline
5 mg
5 mg bid
  Rasagiline
  Safinamide
0.5, 1.0 mg
100 mg
mg QAM
100 mg QAM
aTreatment should be individualized. Generally, drugs should be started in low 
doses and titrated to optimal dose.
Note: Drugs should not be withdrawn abruptly but should be gradually lowered or 
removed as appropriate.
Abbreviations: COMT, catechol-O-methyltransferase; MAO-B, monoamine oxidase 
type B; QAM, every morning.


--- PDF PAGE 3176 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3130
DBS that might benefit gait dysfunction, depression, and cognitive 
impairment are being actively explored (Chap. 477).
MRI-guided ultrasound is also now being used as a means of 
damaging critical target regions such as the GPi in PD patients with 
motor complications in a noninvasive manner that avoids the needs 
for a surgical procedure. Preliminary results suggest good target 
localization and safety.
EXPERIMENTAL THERAPIES FOR PD
There has been considerable scientific and public interest in a 
number of novel interventions that are being investigated as pos-
sible treatments for PD. These include cell-based therapies (such as 
transplantation of fetal nigral dopamine cells or dopamine neurons 
derived from stem cells), gene therapies, trophic factors, and thera-
pies directed against gene-specific targets. Transplant strategies are 
based on the concept of implanting dopaminergic cells into the stria-
tum to replace degenerating SNc dopamine neurons. Fetal nigral 
mesencephalic cells have been demonstrated to survive implanta-
tion, re-innervate the striatum in an organotypic manner, and restore 
motor function in PD models. However, two double-blind studies 
failed to show significant benefit of fetal nigral transplantation 
in comparison to a sham operation with respect to their primary 
endpoints. Additionally, grafting of fetal nigral cells is associated 
with a previously unrecognized form of dyskinesia (graft-induced 
dyskinesia) that persists after lowering or even stopping levodopa. 
This has been postulated to be related to suboptimal release of 
dopamine from grafted cells leading to a sustained form of diphasic 
dyskinesia. In addition, there is evidence that after many years, 
transplanted healthy embryonic dopamine neurons from unrelated 
donors develop PD pathology and become dysfunctional, suggest-
ing transfer of α-synuclein from affected to unaffected neurons in a 
prion-like manner (see discussion above). Perhaps most importantly, 
it is not clear how replacing dopamine cells alone will improve non-
dopaminergic features such as falling and dementia, which are the 
major sources of disability for patients with advanced disease. While 
stem cells, and specifically induced pluripotent stem cells derived 
from the recipient, may overcome problems related to immunity, 
type and number of cells, and physiologic integration, many of these 
same concerns still apply. To date, stem cells have not yet been prop-
erly tested in PD patients and bear the additional concern of tumors 
and other unanticipated side effects. While there remains a need for 
scientifically based studies attempting to evaluate the potential role 
of cell-based therapies in PD, there is no scientific basis to warrant 
routine treatment of PD patients with stem cells as is being marketed 
in some countries.
Trophic factors are a series of proteins that enhance neuronal 
growth and restore function to damaged neurons. There are several 
different trophic factors that have been demonstrated to have benefi-
cial effects on dopamine neurons in laboratory studies. Glial-derived 
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and neurturin have attracted particular 
attention as possible therapies for PD. However, double-blind trials 
of intraventricular and intraputaminal infusions of GDNF failed to 
show benefits compared to placebo in PD patients, possibly because 
of inadequate delivery of the trophic molecule to the target region.
Gene therapy offers the potential of providing long-term expres-
sion of a therapeutic protein with a single procedure. Gene therapy 
involves placing the DNA of a therapeutic protein into a viral vector 
that can then be taken up and incorporated into the genome of 
host cells and then synthesized and released on a continual basis. 
The AAV2 virus has been most often used as the vector because it 
does not promote an inflammatory response, is not incorporated 
into the host genome, and is associated with long-lasting transgene 
expression. Clinical trials of AAV2 delivery of the trophic factor 
neurturin showed promising results in open label trials but failed in 
double-blind trials, even when injected into both the putamen and 
the SNc. This likely reflects α-synuclein-mediated downregulation 
of Nurr1 and RET receptors, thereby limiting the potential of the 
trophic factor to interact with its receptor and induce upregulation 
of repair genes. Gene delivery is also being explored as a means 
of delivering aromatic amino acid decarboxylase with or without 
tyrosine hydroxylase to the striatum to facilitate the conversion of 
orally administered levodopa to dopamine. Animal studies sug-
gest that this approach can provide antiparkinsonian benefits with 
reduced motor complications, and clinical trials in PD patients are 
underway. Although gene delivery technology has great potential 
and will likely be used to deliver novel therapies in the future (e.g. 
Parkin), current approaches carry the risk of unanticipated side 
effects and do not address the nondopaminergic features of the 
illness.
MANAGEMENT OF THE NONMOTOR AND NONDOPAMINERGIC 
FEATURES OF PD
Although PD management has primarily focused on dopaminergic 
features, management of the nondopaminergic features should not 
be ignored. Some nonmotor features, although not thought to reflect 
dopaminergic pathology, nonetheless benefit from dopaminergic 
drugs. For example, problems such as anxiety, panic attacks, depres-
sion, pain, sweating, sensory problems, freezing, and constipation 
all tend to be worse during “off” periods and have been reported to 
improve with better dopaminergic control. Approximately 50% of 
PD patients suffer depression during the course of the disease, and 
depression is frequently underdiagnosed and undertreated. Anti-
depressants should not be withheld, particularly for patients with 
major depression, although dopaminergic agents such as pramipex-
ole may prove helpful for both depression and PD motor features. 
Serotonin syndromes have been a theoretical concern with the 
combined use of SSRIs and MAO-B inhibitors but these problems 
are rarely encountered. Anxiety is also a common problem, and if 
not adequately controlled with better antiparkinsonian drugs can be 
treated with short-acting benzodiazepines.
Psychosis can be a problem for some PD patients, and is often a 
harbinger of developing dementia. In contrast to AD, hallucinations 
are typically visual, formed, and nonthreatening. Importantly, they 
can limit the use of dopaminergic agents necessary to obtain satis-
factory motor control. They can be associated with dopaminergic 
drugs, and the first approach is typically to withdraw agents that are 
less effective than levodopa such as anticholinergics, amantadine, 
and dopamine agonists followed by lowering the dose of levodopa 
if possible. Psychosis in PD often responds to low doses of atypical 
neuroleptics and may permit higher doses of levodopa to be toler-
ated. Clozapine is an effective drug, but it can be associated with 
agranulocytosis, and regular monitoring is required. Quetiapine 
avoids these problems but it has not been established to be effective 
in placebo-controlled trials. Pimavanserin (Nuplazid®) differs from 
other atypical neuroleptics in that it is also an inverse agonist of 
the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. It has been shown to be effective in  
double-blind trials with a relatively good safety profile. It was 
recently approved for use in the United States.
Dementia in PD (PDD) is common, ultimately affecting as many 
as 80% of patients. Its frequency increases with aging and, in con-
trast to AD, primarily affects executive functions and attention, with 
relative sparing of language, memory, and calculation domains. 
When dementia precedes or develops within 1 year after the onset of 
motor dysfunction, it is by convention referred to as dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB; Chap. 426). These patients are particularly prone 
to have hallucinations and diurnal fluctuations. Pathologically, DLB 
is characterized by Lewy bodies distributed throughout the cerebral 
cortex (especially the hippocampus and amygdala) and is often also 
associated with AD pathology. It is likely that DLB and PD with 
dementia represent a spectrum of PD rather than separate disease 
entities. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) frequently precedes the 
onset of dementia and is a more reliable index of impending PDD 
than in the general population. Dopaminergic drugs can worsen 
cognitive function in demented patients and should be stopped or 
reduced to try and provide a compromise between antiparkinso-
nian benefit and preserved cognitive function. Drugs are usually 
discontinued in the following sequence: anticholinergics, amanta-
dine, dopamine agonists, COMT inhibitors, and MAO-B inhibitors. 


--- PDF PAGE 3177 ---

CHAPTER 427 Parkinson’s Disease
3131
Eventually, patients with cognitive impairment should be managed 
with the lowest dose of standard levodopa that provides meaning-
ful antiparkinsonian effects and does not worsen mental function. 
Anticholinesterase agents such as memantine, rivastigmine, and 
donepezil reduce the rate of deterioration of measures of cognitive 
function and can improve attention in PD, but do not typically 
improve cognitive function in any meaningful way. More effective 
therapies that treat or prevent dementia are a critical unmet need in 
the therapy of PD.
Autonomic disturbances are common and frequently require 
attention. Orthostatic hypotension can be problematic and con-
tribute to falling. Initial treatment should include adding salt to 
the diet and elevating the head of the bed to prevent overnight 
sodium natriuresis. Low doses of fludrocortisone (Florinef) or mido-
drine provide control for most cases. The norepinephrine precursor 
3-0-methylDOPS (Droxidopa®) has been shown to provide mild and 
transient benefits for patients with orthostatic hypotension, and was 
recently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Vaso-
pressin and erythropoietin can be used in more severe or refractory 
cases. If orthostatic hypotension is prominent in early parkinsonian 
cases, a diagnosis of MSA should be considered (Chap. 432). Sexual 
dysfunction can be helped with sildenafil or tadalafil. Urinary prob-
lems, especially in males, should be treated in consultation with a 
urologist to exclude prostate problems. Anticholinergic agents, such 
as oxybutynin (Ditropan), may be helpful. Constipation can be a 
very important problem for PD patients. Mild laxatives or enemas 
can be useful, but physicians should first ensure that patients are 
drinking adequate amounts of fluid and consuming a diet rich in 
bulk with green leafy vegetables and bran. Agents that promote 
gastrointestinal (GI) motility can also be helpful.
Sleep disturbances are common in PD patients, with many expe-
riencing fragmented sleep with excess daytime sleepiness. Restless 
leg syndrome, sleep apnea, and other sleep disorders should be 
treated as appropriate. REM behavior disorder (RBD) is a syndrome 
composed of violent movements and vocalizations during REM 
sleep, possibly representing acting out of dreams due to a failure of 
motor inhibition that typically accompanies REM sleep (Chap. 27). 
Low doses of clonazepam (0.5–1 mg at bedtime) are usually effective 
in controlling this problem. Consultation with a sleep specialist and 
polysomnography may be necessary to identify and optimally treat 
sleep problems. Many PD patients have a history of RBD preceding 
the onset of the classic motor features of PD, and most cases of RBD 
go on to develop an α-synucleinopathy (PD or MSA).
NONPHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY
Gait dysfunction with falling is an important cause of disability in 
PD. Dopaminergic therapies can help patients whose gait is worse 
in “off” time, but there are currently no specific therapies for gait 
dysfunction. Canes and walkers may become necessary to increase 
stability and reduce the risk of falling. An effective therapy for gait 
impairment is an important unmet need in PD.
Freezing, where patients suddenly become stuck in place for sec-
onds to minutes as if their feet were glued to the ground, is a major 
cause of falling. Freezing may occur during “on” or “off” periods. 
Freezing during “off” periods may respond to dopaminergic ther-
apies, but there are no specific treatments for “on” period freezing. 
Some patients will respond to sensory cues such as marching in 
place, singing a song, or stepping over an imaginary line.
Speech impairment is another source of disability for many 
advanced PD patients. Speech therapy programs may be helpful, 
but benefits are generally transient.
Exercise has been shown to maintain and even improve function 
for PD patients, and active and passive exercises with full range of 
motion reduce the risk of arthritis and frozen joints. Some laboratory 
studies suggest the possibility that exercise might also have neuro-
protective effects, but this has not been confirmed in PD. Exercise is 
generally recommended for all PD patients. It is less clear that physi-
cal therapy or specific exercise programs such as tai chi or dance offer 
any specific advantage. It is important for patients to maintain social 
and intellectual activities to the extent possible. Education, assis-
tance with financial planning, social services, and attention to home 
safety are important elements of the overall care plan. Information 
is available through numerous PD foundations and on the web, but 
should be reviewed with physicians to ensure accuracy. The needs of 
the caregiver should not be neglected. Caring for a person with PD 
involves a substantial work effort and there is an increased incidence 
of depression among caregivers. Support groups for patients and 
caregivers may be useful.
CURRENT MANAGEMENT OF PD
The management of PD should be tailored to the needs of the 
individual patient, and there is no single treatment approach that 
is universally accepted and applicable to all individuals. Clearly, if 
an agent could be demonstrated to have disease-modifying effects, 
it should be initiated at the time of diagnosis. Indeed, recent studies 
suggest that dopamine terminal degeneration may be complete 
within 4 years of diagnosis. Epidemiologic and pathologic studies 
suggest that constipation, RBD, and anosmia may represent premo-
tor features of PD and could permit diagnosis and the initiation of 
a disease-modifying therapy even prior to the onset of the classical 
motor features of the disease. However, no therapy has yet been 
conclusively proven to be a disease-modifying agent. For now, 
physicians must use their judgment in deciding whether or not 
to introduce a drug such as rasagiline (see above) for its possible 
disease-modifying effects based on available preclinical and clinical 
information.
The next important issue to address is when to initiate symp-
tomatic therapy. Several studies suggest that it may be best to start 
therapy at the time of diagnosis in order to preserve beneficial 
compensatory mechanisms and possibly provide functional ben-
efits even in the early stage of the disease. Levodopa remains the 
most effective symptomatic therapy for PD, and some recommend 
starting it immediately using low doses (≤400 mg/d), as motor 
complications have now clearly been shown to be dose-related. 
Others, however, prefer to delay levodopa treatment, particularly 
in younger patients, in order to reduce the risk of inducing motor 
complications entirely. An alternate approach is to begin with a 
MAO-B inhibitor and/or a dopamine agonist, and reserve levodopa 
for later stages when these drugs no longer provide satisfactory 
control. In making this decision, the age, degree of disability, and 
side effect profile of the drug must all be considered. In patients with 
more severe disability, the elderly, those with cognitive impairment, 
those with significant comorbidities, or those in whom the diagnosis 
is uncertain, most physicians would initiate therapy with levo-
dopa. Regardless of initial choice, most patients ultimately require 
polypharmacy (combination of levodopa, an MAO-B inhibitor, and 
a dopamine agonist). While it is important to use low doses of each 
agent in order to reduce the risk of side effects, it is important not to 
deny patients levodopa when they cannot be adequately controlled 
with alternative medications.
If motor complications develop, patients can initially be treated 
by manipulating the frequency and dose of levodopa or by com-
bining lower doses of levodopa with a dopamine agonist, a COMT 
inhibitor, or a MAO-B inhibitor. Amantadine is the only drug that 
has been demonstrated to treat dyskinesia without worsening par-
kinsonism, but benefits may be short-lasting, and there are impor-
tant side effects related to cognitive function. In advanced cases, 
it may be necessary to consider a surgical therapy such as DBS or 
Duodopa® if the patient is a suitable candidate, but as described 
above, these procedures have their own set of complications. The 
use of DBS in early PD patients has been advocated by some, but 
there is considerable skepticism about this approach considering the 
costs and potential side effects, when inexpensive, well tolerated, 
and effective medical alternatives are available. Continuous intrain-
testinal infusion of levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel (Duodopa) 
appears to offer similar benefits to DBS, but also requires a surgical 
intervention with potentially serious complications. Continuous 
infusion of apomorphine is a treatment option that does not require 


================================================================================
Ch428 Tremor Chorea and Other Movement Disorders
Pages 3178-3186
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3178 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3132
Functional disability
Parkinson’s disease
Surgery/CDS
Combination therapy
Levodopa/dopamine
agonist/COMT
Inhibitor/MAO-B Inhibitor
Nonpharmacologic intervention
Pharmacologic intervention
Neuroprotection —? Rasagiline
Yes
Levodopa
No
Dopamine agonists
MAO-B inhibitor
TREATMENT ALGORITHM FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
FIGURE 427-7  Treatment options for the management of Parkinson’s disease 
(PD). Decision points include: (1) Introduction of a neuroprotective therapy: no 
drug has been established to have or is currently approved for neuroprotection or 
disease modification, but there are several agents that have this potential based 
on laboratory and preliminary clinical studies (e.g., rasagiline 1 mg/d, coenzyme 
Q10 1200 mg/d, the dopamine agonists ropinirole, and pramipexole). (2) When 
to initiate symptomatic therapy: There is a trend toward initiating therapy at the 
time of diagnosis or early in the course of the disease because patients may 
have some disability even at an early stage, and there is the possibility that 
early treatment may preserve beneficial compensatory mechanisms; however, 
some experts recommend waiting until there is functional disability before 
initiating therapy. (3) What therapy to initiate: many experts favor starting with a 
monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitor in mildly affected patients because 
of the good safety profile of the drug and the potential for a disease-modifying 
effect; dopamine agonists for younger patients with functionally significant 
disability to reduce the risk of motor complications; and levodopa for patients 
with more advanced disease, the elderly, or those with cognitive impairment. 
Recent studies suggest the early employment of polypharmacy using low doses 
of multiple drugs to avoid side effects associated with high doses of any one 
agent. (4) Management of motor complications: motor complications are 
typically approached with combination therapy to try and reduce dyskinesia and 
enhance the “on” time. When medical therapies cannot provide satisfactory 
control, surgical therapies such as DBS or continuous infusion of levodopa/
carbidopa intestinal gel can be considered. (5) Nonpharmacologic approaches: 
interventions such as exercise, education, and support should be considered 
throughout the course of the disease. CDS, continuous dopaminergic stimulation; 
COMT, catechol-O-methyltransferase. (Adapted from CW Olanow et al: Neurology 
72:S1, 2009.)
surgery but is associated with potentially troublesome skin nod-
ules. Comparative studies of these approaches in more advanced 
patients are awaited. There are ongoing efforts aimed at developing 
a long-acting oral or subcutaneous formulation of levodopa that 
mirrors the pharmacokinetic properties of a levodopa infusion. Such 
a formulation might provide all of the benefits of levodopa without 
motor complications and avoid the need for polypharmacy and 
surgical intervention.
A decision tree that considers the various treatment options and 
decision points for the management of PD is provided in Fig. 427-7.
■
■FURTHER READING
Ascherio A, Schwarzschild MA: The epidemiology of Parkinson’s 
disease: Risk factors and prevention. Lancet Neurol 15:1257, 2016.
Berg D et al: MDS research criteria for prodromal Parkinson’s disease. 
Mov Disord 12:1600, 2015.
Dorsey ER et al: Projected number of people with Parkinson disease 
in the most populous nations, 2005 through 2030. Neurology 68:384, 
2007.
Hernandez DG et al: Genetics in Parkinson disease: Mendelian versus 
non-Mendelian inheritance. J Neurochem 139 Suppl 1:59, 2016.
Höglinger GU et al: Clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear 
palsy: The movement disorder society criteria. Movement Disorder 
Society-endorsed PSP Study Group. Mov Disord 32:853, 2017.
Marras C et al: Nomenclature of genetic movement disorders: Recom-
mendations of the International Parkinson and Movement Disorder 
Society task force. Mov Disord 32:724, 2017.
Obeso JA et al: Past, present and future of Parkinson’s disease: A spe-
cial essay on the 200th Anniversary of the Shaking Palsy. Mov Disord 
32:1264, 2017.
Olanow CW et al: Scientific and clinical basis for the treatment of 
PD—2009. Neurology 72:S1, 2009.
Postuma RB et al: MDS clinical diagnostic criteria for Parkinson’s 
disease. Mov Disord 12:1591, 2015.
Schapira AH et al: Slowing of neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s 
disease and Huntington’s disease: Future therapeutic perspectives. 
Lancet 384:545, 2014.
Schapira AHV et al: Non-motor features of Parkinson disease. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 18:435, 2017.
HYPERKINETIC MOVEMENT DISORDERS
Hyperkinetic movement disorders are characterized by involuntary 
movements unaccompanied by weakness (Table 428-1). This term is 
somewhat arbitrary and potentially misleading as hypokinetic disor-
ders such as Parkinson’s disease (PD) are often accompanied by tremor 
which is a hyperkinetic feature, and hyperkinetic disorders such as 
dystonia may manifest slow movements because of the severe mus-
cle contractions. Nonetheless, the terms continue to be used because 
of convention. The major hyperkinetic movement disorders and the 
diseases with which they are associated are considered in this section.
TREMOR
■
■CLINICAL FEATURES
Tremor consists of alternating contractions of agonist and antagonist 
muscles in an oscillating, rhythmic manner. It can be most prominent at 
rest (rest tremor), on assuming a posture (postural tremor), on actively 
reaching for a target (kinetic tremor), or on carrying out a movement 
(action tremor). Tremor may also be characterized based on distribu-
tion, frequency, amplitude, and related neurologic dysfunction.
PD (Chap. 427) is characterized by a resting tremor, essential tremor 
(ET) by a tremor that typically occurs while trying to sustain a posture 
coupled with an action tremor, and cerebellar dysfunction by a kinetic 
tremor and is usually associated with hypotonia and past pointing. 
Normal individuals can have a physiologic tremor that typically 
manifests as a mild, high-frequency (10–12 Hz), postural or action 
tremor typically affecting the upper extremities. This tremor is usu-
ally of no clinical consequence and often is only appreciated with an 
428 Tremor, Chorea, and Other 
Movement Disorders
C. Warren Olanow, Christine Klein,  
Jose A. Obeso 


--- PDF PAGE 3179 ---

CHAPTER 428 Tremor, Chorea, and Other Movement Disorders
3133
family members with a similar clinical syndrome, but not carrying 
the causative mutation). The cerebellum and inferior olives have been 
implicated as possible sites of a “tremor pacemaker” based on the pres-
ence of cerebellar signs in about 10% of ET patients, and increased met-
abolic activity and blood flow in these regions in some patients. Some 
pathologic studies have described cerebellar pathology with a loss of 
Purkinje cells and axonal torpedoes, but these findings are controver-
sial, and the precise pathologic correlate of ET remains to be defined. It 
is likely that multiple causes of ET will ultimately be identified.
■
■TREATMENT
Many cases are mild and require no treatment other than reassurance. 
Occasionally, tremor can be severe and interfere with eating, writing, 
and activities of daily living. This is more likely to occur as the patient 
ages and is often associated with a reduction in tremor frequency. Beta 
blockers and primidone are the standard drug therapies for ET and 
help in about 50% of cases. Propranolol (20–120 mg daily, given in 
divided doses) is usually effective at relatively low doses, but higher 
doses may be needed in some patients. The drug is contraindicated in 
patients with bradycardia or asthma. Hand tremor tends to be most 
improved, while head tremor is often refractory. Primidone can be 
helpful but should be started at low doses (12.5 mg) and gradually 
increased (125–250 mg tid) to avoid sedation, nausea, and dizziness. 
Benefits have also been reported with gabapentin and topiramate, 
but these drugs have not been widely employed. Botulinum toxin 
injections may be helpful for limb or voice tremor, but treatment can 
be associated with muscle weakness. Surgical therapies targeting the 
ventro-intermediate (VIM) nucleus of the thalamus can be very effec-
tive for severe and drug-resistant cases. Recently, focal ultrasound 
(which is a procedure that does not require surgery) has also been 
shown to be an effective therapy against tremor in ET.
DYSTONIA
■
■CLINICAL FEATURES
Dystonia is a movement disorder characterized by sustained or 
intermittent muscle contractions of antagonist muscles causing abnor-
mal often repetitive movements and postures. Dystonic movements 
are typically patterned and twisting and may be associated with a 
“dystonic tremor”. Dystonia is often initiated or worsened by volun-
tary action and associated with overflow muscle activation. Dystonia 
can range from focal minor contractions affecting only an individual 
muscle group to severe and disabling involvement of multiple muscle 
groups. The frequency is estimated to be 16 per 100,000 (~50,000 cases 
in the United States) but is likely to be much higher because many cases 
are not recognized. Dystonia is often brought out by voluntary move-
ments (action dystonia) and can extend to involve other muscle groups 
and body regions not required for a given action (overflow). It can be 
aggravated by stress and fatigue and attenuated by relaxation and sen-
sory tricks such as touching the affected body part (geste antagoniste).
Historically, dystonia has been described as primary or secondary. 
However, because of a confusing and not always congruent combina-
tion of phenotypic and etiologic features, the older terms are no longer 
recommended. A Movement Disorder Society Task Force charged with 
redefining dystonia recommends classifying dystonia along two main 
axes: clinical and etiologic. On clinical grounds, dystonia can be cate-
gorized by age of onset (infancy, childhood, adolescence, early and late 
adulthood), body distribution (focal, segmental, multifocal, and gener-
alized), temporal pattern (static or progressive, action-specific [diurnal 
and paroxysmal]), and association with additional features. Clinical 
description along these lines enables formulating specific dystonia 
syndromes (e.g., early-onset generalized isolated dystonia).
Etiology of dystonia primarily reflects genetic abnormalities, 
although occasionally there may be other causes such as trauma and 
stroke. Genetic features used for classification include mode of inher-
itance or identification of a specific genetic defect. In the past three 
decades, more than 200 genes have been linked to different, mainly 
childhood-onset and generalized forms of dystonia. These include 
TABLE 428-1  Hyperkinetic Movement Disorders
Tremor
Rhythmic oscillation of a body part due to intermittent muscle 
contractions
Dystonia
Involuntary, patterned, sustained, or repeated muscle 
contractions often associated with twisting movements and 
abnormal posture
Athetosis
Slow, distal, writhing, involuntary movements with a propensity 
to affect the arms and hands (this represents a form of 
dystonia with increased mobility)
Chorea
Rapid, semi-purposeful, graceful, dance-like nonpatterned 
involuntary movements involving distal or proximal muscle 
groups. When the movements are of large amplitude and 
predominant proximal distribution, the term ballism is used.
Myoclonus
Sudden, brief (<100 ms), jerk-like, arrhythmic muscle twitches
Tic
Brief, repeated, stereotyped muscle contractions that can 
often be suppressed for a short time. These can be simple 
and involve a single muscle group or complex and affect a 
range of motor activities.
accelerometer or under stress. An enhanced physiologic tremor (EPT) 
can be seen in up to 10% of the population, and tends to occur in asso-
ciation with anxiety, fatigue, a metabolic disturbance (e.g., hyperthy-
roidism, electrolyte abnormalities), drugs (e.g., valproate, lithium), or 
toxins (e.g., caffeine, smoking, alcohol). Treatment is initially directed 
at control of any underlying disorder and, if necessary, can often be 
improved with a beta blocker.
■
■ESSENTIAL TREMOR
ET is the most common movement disorder, affecting ~5% of the 
population (an estimated 5–10 million persons in the United States or 
Western Europe). It can present in childhood but dramatically increases 
in prevalence in those aged >70 years. ET is characterized by a high-
frequency tremor (6–10 Hz) that predominantly affects the upper 
extremities. The tremor is most often manifest as a postural or action 
tremor and, in severe cases, can interfere with functions such as eating 
and drinking. It is typically bilateral and symmetric but may begin on 
one side and remain asymmetric. Patients with severe ET can have an 
intention tremor with overshoot and slowness of movement suggesting 
the possibility of a cerebellar origin. Tremor involves the head in ~30% 
of cases, voice in ~20%, tongue in ~20%, face/jaw in ~10%, and lower 
limbs in ~10%. Multiple body parts are involved in at least 50% of 
cases. The tremor is characteristically improved by alcohol and wors-
ened by stress. Subtle impairment of coordination or tandem walking 
may be present, and disturbances of hearing, cognition, personality, 
mood, and olfaction have been described, but usually the neurologic 
examination is normal aside from tremor. The differential diagnosis 
includes dystonic tremor (see below) or PD. PD can usually be differ-
entiated from ET because the former stops at the onset of a voluntary 
action and is typically associated with bradykinesia with progressive 
slowing of sequential movements (sequence effect), rigidity, gait and 
postural instability, and other parkinsonian features. However, the 
examiner should be aware that PD patients may have a postural tremor 
and ET patients may develop a rest tremor, and that these typically 
begin after a latency of a few seconds (emergent tremor). In contrast to 
the micrographia of PD, ET patients have relatively large handwriting 
with evidence of the effect of tremor. The examiner must also differen-
tiate the effect of tremor when assessing tone in ET to distinguish this 
from the cogwheel rigidity found in PD.
■
■ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The etiology and pathophysiology of ET are not known. Approxi-
mately 50% of cases have a positive family history with an autosomal 
dominant pattern of inheritance. Linkage studies have detected possi-
bly linked loci in large ET families, but no independently confirmed 
causative genes have been identified to date. It is likely, however, that 
there are undiscovered genes for ET that have escaped detection to date 
because of the heterogeneity of the syndrome and the high population 
frequency of ET likely resulting in a large number of phenocopies, (i.e., 


--- PDF PAGE 3180 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3134 forms in which dystonia is the only disease manifestation with the 
exception of tremor (“isolated dystonia”), forms in which dystonia 
co-occurs with another movement disorder such as parkinsonism or 
myoclonus (“combined dystonia”) and disorders in which dystonia is 
only one of several clinical manifestations and may be a less prominent 
or even inconsistent feature (“complex dystonia”). Most of the genetic 
forms belong to the latter phenotypic group, which also represents the 
most heterogeneous class in terms of clinical expression.
■
■ISOLATED DYSTONIAS
Focal (Multifocal, Segmental) Dystonia  Adult-onset, focal 
dystonia is by far the most frequent form of isolated dystonia, with 
women being affected about twice as often as men. Focal dystonia typ-
ically presents in the fourth to sixth decade and can be focal, multifocal, 
or segmental. The major clinical phenotypes are as follows: (1) Cervical 
dystonia—dystonic contractions of neck muscles causing the head to 
deviate to one side (laterocollis), twist (torticollis), move in a forward 
direction (anterocollis), or move in a backward direction (retrocollis). 
Muscle contractions can be painful and occasionally can be complicated 
with a secondary cervical radiculopathy. (2) Blepharospasm—dystonic 
contractions of the eyelids with increased blinking that can interfere 
with reading, watching television, working on a computer, and driv-
ing. This can sometimes be so severe as to cause functional blindness. 
(3) Oromandibular dystonia (OMD)—contractions of muscles of the lower 
face, lips, tongue, and jaw (opening or closing). Meige’s syndrome is a 
combination of OMD and blepharospasm that predominantly affects 
women aged >60 years. (4) Spasmodic dysphonia—dystonic contractions 
of the vocal cords during phonation, causing impaired speech. Most 
cases affect the adductor muscles and cause speech to have a choking 
or strained quality. Less commonly, the abductors are affected, leading 
to speech with a breathy or whispering quality. (5) Limb dystonias—
these can be present in either arms or legs and are often brought out by 
task-specific activities such as handwriting (writer’s cramp), playing 
a musical instrument (musician’s cramp), or putting in golf (the yips). 
The vast majority of patients have dystonia of the neck (cervical dysto-
nia; ~50%) or the eye lid (blepharospasm; ~20%). Focal hand or leg dys-
tonia (~5%), spasmodic dysphonia (~2%), musician’s dystonia (~3%), 
or OMD (~1%) are much less common. Focal dystonias can extend to 
involve other body regions (about 30% of cases) and are frequently 
misdiagnosed as psychiatric or orthopedic in origin. Their cause is 
usually not known, but genetic factors, autoimmunity, and trauma 
have been suggested. Focal dystonias are often associated with a high-
frequency tremor that can resemble ET. Dystonic tremor can usually 
be distinguished from ET because it tends to occur in conjunction with 
the dystonic contraction and disappears when the dystonia is relieved 
(e.g., turning the head in the opposite direction of the dystonia).
■
■GENERALIZED DYSTONIA
Generalized dystonia is often hereditary in nature and, unlike focal 
dystonia, generally has an age of onset in childhood or adolescence. 
There are currently at least four well established genes for isolated 
dystonia; TOR1A, THAP1, ANO3, and GNAL. According to the recom-
mendations of the International Parkinson’s Disease and Movement 
Disorder Society, confirmed monogenic forms are classified according 
to absence or presence of accompanying clinical features and pre-
ceded by a “DYT” prefix, e.g., DYT-TOR1A. These genetic forms are 
all inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and found in <5% of 
dystonia patients. Not all mutation carriers develop generalized dys-
tonia; about 35% remain unaffected despite harboring a pathogenic 
mutation (reduced penetrance), and rarely they present with dystonia 
that remains focal or segmental in nature.
Mutations in the TOR1A gene (torsin family 1 member A—formerly 
known as the DYT1 gene) are the most common cause of early-onset gen-
eralized dystonia. The first, and currently the only clearly established 
mutation, is a 3-base pair deletion in the TOR1A gene. The mutation is 
frequently found among Ashkenazi Jewish patients due to a founder 
effect. Mutation carriers usually present with dystonia in an extremity 
in childhood that later progress to other body parts, but typically spare 
the face and neck.
THAP1 gene (THAP domain containing, apoptosis associated protein 1) 
mutations have been linked to adolescent-onset dystonia with mixed 
phenotype. About 100 different mutations have been reported in 
THAP1. Mutations typically manifest with dysphonia or writer’s 
cramp beginning in late childhood or adolescence. Over the course 
of the disease, dystonia spreads to other body parts with prominent 
craniocervical involvement.
Mutations in the ANO3 gene (anoctamin 3) were first reported in 
patients with predominantly craniocervical dystonia with a broad 
range of ages of onset. While a large number of missense variants can 
be found in healthy individuals, a pathogenic role of ANO3 mutations 
has recently been supported by the description of additional families 
with dystonia and myoclonic jerks.
Mutations in the GNAL gene (guanine nucleotide-binding protein sub-
unit alpha L) are a rare cause of cervical or cranial dystonia with a mean 
age of onset in the thirties. About 30 different GNAL mutations have 
been reported in dystonia patients.
In addition to the above, missense mutations in KMT2B (lysine 
methyltransferase 2B) have recently been identified, and confirmed to be 
a cause of an early-onset generalized dystonia which may be accom-
panied by other syndromic features including intellectual disability, 
microcephaly, psychiatric features, dysmorphia, or skin lesions. The 
majority of the mutations occurred de novo. KMT2B mutations may 
account for up to 10% of early-onset generalized dystonia but further 
validation is warranted and placement into the group of isolated vs 
complex dystonias is currently under debate.
Combined Dystonia  A number of other well-established genes 
have been described for combined forms of dystonia in which dysto-
nia occurs in conjunction with a different movement disorder, such as 
parkinsonism or myoclonus.
Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD; also known as Segawa syndrome) 
is caused by mutations in the GCH1 gene (GTP cyclohydrolase-1) that 
encodes for the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of dopamine 
via the biopterin pathway. It is manifest as a childhood-onset form of 
dystonia with diurnal fluctuations and is important to recognize as the 
condition dramatically responds to low doses of levodopa. Parkinson-
ism can be a major, or even the only finding, and there may be a pre-
synaptic dopaminergic deficit as evidenced by SPECT. To date, more 
than 100 different mutations have been reported with a penetrance of 
around 50% which is considerably higher in women compared to men. 
Recessively inherited (biallelic) mutations in GCH1 result in a much 
more severe clinical phenotype with developmental delay and infan-
tile onset. Due to the enzymatic defect in the levodopa biosynthesis, 
there is a lifelong and dramatic response to levodopa therapy. Indeed, 
all young onset forms of dystonia should be tested with levodopa to 
exclude the possibility of DRD.
X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (Lubag) is a combined form of dys-
tonia and parkinsonism that is found exclusively in patients of Filipino 
origin due to a founder effect and seems to be fully penetrant. Patients 
usually develop focal (cranial) dystonia first that rapidly generalizes 
and, after 5–10 years, is gradually replaced by a form of L-dopa- 
unresponsive parkinsonism. The exact mutation causing X-linked 
dystonia-parkinsonism (Lubag) is not yet known but several variants 
in a disease haplotype segregate with the disease and a retrotransposon 
insertion in the TAF1 (TATA-Box Binding Protein Associated Factor 1) 
gene has been suggested as the most likely disease cause.
Biallelic mutations in the PRKRA (protein activator of interferon-induced 
protein kinase EIF2AK2) gene are linked to a dystonia-parkinsonism 
syndrome and mostly due to the same missense mutation that seems 
to result from a shared founder. The phenotype includes early-onset 
generalized dystonia, often with laryngeal dystonia, tongue protrusion, 
prominent oromandibular involvement, dysphagia, and retrocollis. 
Parkinsonian features are mild (or even absent) and do not respond to 
levodopa therapy.
Mutations in the ATP1A3 (ATPase Na+/K+ transporting subunit alpha 3) 
gene present with a characteristic, sudden onset usually in adolescence 
or young adulthood, often triggered by high fever, physical exertion, or 
emotional stress. Dystonic symptoms frequently show a rostrocaudal 


--- PDF PAGE 3181 ---

CHAPTER 428 Tremor, Chorea, and Other Movement Disorders
3135
gradient with a strong involvement of the bulbar region and are often 
accompanied by bradykinesia as a parkinsonian feature. In addition, 
mutations in ATP1A3 have also been linked to a variety of clinical syn-
dromes (pleiotropy) including epileptic or hemiplegic attacks, ataxia, 
cognitive decline, and other neurological disorders, often with a more 
severe course and an earlier age at onset.
Myoclonic-dystonia is characterized by action-induced, alcohol- 
responsive myoclonic jerks predominantly involving the upper body 
half. Onset is usually in childhood or adolescence. Additionally, 
many individuals develop psychiatric features such as depression, 
anxiety-related disorders, and alcohol dependence. The disorder is 
primarily related to mutations in the SGCE gene (sarcoglycan epsilon) 
which codes for the ε member of the sarcoglycan family. About 80 
different mutations have been reported in SGCE including deletions of 
the entire gene. The latter type of mutation often also involves loss of 
adjacent genes leading to additional clinical features such as joint prob-
lems. SGCE mutations are incompletely penetrant and only manifest 
when inherited from the father due to the epigenetic effect of maternal 
imprinting of SGCE.
A number of additional monogenic causes have been suggested for 
isolated and combined forms of dystonia but still await independent 
confirmation. Table 428-2 provides a list of the confirmed Monogenic 
Forms of Isolated and Combined Dystonias.
■
■COMPLEX DYSTONIAS
In the complex dystonias, dystonia is one part of a syndrome with 
multiple different disease manifestations. Most frequently, they are 
hereditary such as Wilson’s disease (WD), Huntington’s disease (HD), 
Lesh Nyhan syndrome, corticobasal ganglionic disorders, and a vari-
ety of other neurologic, neurometabolic, and mitochondrial disorders. 
Complex dystonias may also develop as a consequence of drugs or 
toxins (previously referred to as secondary dystonias). Drug-induced 
dystonia may be acute or chronic, and is most commonly seen with 
neuroleptic drugs or after chronic levodopa treatment in PD patients. 
Dystonia can also be observed following discrete lesions in the stria-
tum, and occasionally in the pallidum, thalamus, cortex, and brainstem 
due to infarction, hemorrhage anoxia, trauma, tumor, infection, or 
toxins such as manganese or carbon monoxide. In these cases, dystonia 
often assumes a segmental distribution, but may be generalized when 
lesions are bilateral or widespread. More rarely, dystonia can develop 
following peripheral nerve injury and be associated with features of 
complex regional pain syndrome (Chap. 432). A psychogenic origin 
is responsible for some cases of dystonia; these typically present with 
fixed, immobile dystonic postures (see below).
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF DYSTONIA
The pathophysiologic basis of dystonia is not completely known. 
The phenomenon is characterized by co-contracting synchronous 
bursts of agonist and antagonist muscle groups with recruitment of 
muscle groups that are not required for a given movement (overflow). 
Dystonia is characterized by derangement of the basic physiological 
principle of action-selection, leading to abnormal recruitment of inap-
propriate muscles for a given action with inadequate inhibition of this 
undesired motor activity. Physiologically, loss of surround inhibition is 
observed at multiple levels of the motor system (e.g., cortex, brainstem, 
spinal cord) accompanied by increased cortical excitability and reorga-
nization. Attention has focused on the basal ganglia as the site of origin 
of at least some types of dystonia because there are alterations in blood 
flow and metabolism in these structures. Further, lesions of the basal 
ganglia (particularly the putamen) can induce dystonia, and surgical 
ablation or deep brain stimulation (DBS) of specific regions of the glo-
bus pallidus may ameliorate dystonia. The dopamine system has also 
been implicated, because dopaminergic therapies can both induce and 
treat some forms of dystonia in different circumstances. Interestingly, 
no specific pathology has been consistently identified in dystonia.
TREATMENT
Dystonia
Treatment of dystonia is for the most part symptomatic except in 
rare cases where correction of a primary underlying condition is 
possible. Wilson’s disease should be ruled out in young patients 
with dystonia. Levodopa should be tried in all cases of child-
hood-onset dystonia to test for DRD. High-dose anticholinergics 
(e.g., trihexyphenidyl 20–120 mg/d) may be beneficial in children, 
but adults can rarely tolerate high doses because of side effects 
related to cognitive impairment and hallucinations. Oral baclofen 
(20–120 mg) may also be helpful, but benefits, if present, are usually 
modest, and side effects of sedation, weakness, and memory loss can 
be problematic. Intrathecal infusion of baclofen is more likely to be 
useful, particularly for leg and trunk dystonia, but benefits are fre-
quently not sustained, and complications can be serious and include 
infection, seizures, and coma. Tetrabenazine is another consider-
ation (the usual starting dose is 12.5 mg/d and the average treating 
dose is 25–75 mg/d), but its use may be limited by sedation and the 
development of parkinsonism. Neuroleptics can improve as well as 
induce dystonia, but they are typically not recommended because 
of their potential to induce parkinsonism and other movement dis-
orders, including tardive dystonia. Clonazepam and diazepam are 
rarely effective.
Botulinum toxin has become the preferred treatment for patients 
with focal dystonia, particularly where involvement is limited to 
small muscle groups such as in blepharospasm, torticollis, and spas-
modic dysphonia. Botulinum toxin acts by blocking the release of 
acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction, leading to reduced dys-
tonic muscle contractions. However, treatment with botulinum toxin 
can be complicated by excessive weakness that can be troublesome, 
TABLE 428-2  Confirmed Monogenic Forms of Isolated and Combined Dystoniaa
FORM OF DYSTONIA
GENE
LOCUS NAME
DESIGNATION 
AND PHENOTYPIC 
SUBGROUPa
ADDITIONAL DISTINGUISHING FEATURES
MOI
Isolated
TOR1A
DYT1
DYT-TOR1A
Childhood or adolescent-onset, generalized
AD
THAP1
DYT6
DYT-THAP1
Adolescent-onset, cranial or generalized
AD
ANO3
DYT24
DYT-ANO3
Adult-onset, focal or segmental
AD
GNAL
DYT25
DYT-GNAL
Mostly adult-onset, focal or segmental
AD
KMT2Bb
DYT28
DYT-KMT2B
Early-onset, generalized, mild syndromic 
features
AD
Combined
Dystonia plus Parkinsonism
GCH1
DYT5a
DYT-GCH1
Dopa-responsive
AD
TAF1
DYT3
DYT-TAF1
Neurodegeneration
XL
PRKRA
DYT16
DYT-PRKRA
Dystonia with mild parkinsonism
AR
ATP1A3
DYT12
DYT-ATP1A3
Rapid-onset
AD
Dystonia plus Myoclonus
SGCE
DYT11
DYT-SGCE
Psychiatric disease
AD
aAccording to C Marras et al: Mov Disord 31:436, 2016. bSeveral, but not all, patients show syndromic features; DYT-KMT2B may thus be better placed with the 
complex dystonias.
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; MOI, mode of inheritance; XL, X-linked.


--- PDF PAGE 3182 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3136
particularly if it involves neck and swallowing muscles. Two sero-
types of botulinum toxin are currently available (A and B). Both are 
effective, and it is not clear that there are advantages of one over 
the other. No systemic side effects are encountered with the doses 
typically used, but benefits are transient, and repeat injections are 
required at 2–5 month intervals. Some patients fail to respond after 
having experienced an initial benefit. This has been attributed to 
antibody formation, but improper muscle selection, injection tech-
nique, and inadequate dose should be excluded.
Surgical therapy is an alternative for patients with severe dys-
tonia who are not responsive to other treatments. Peripheral pro-
cedures such as rhizotomy and myotomy were used in the past to 
treat cervical dystonia, but are now rarely employed. DBS of the pal-
lidum can provide dramatic benefits for some patients with various 
forms of hereditary and nonhereditary generalized dystonia. This 
represents a major therapeutic advance because previously there 
was no consistently effective therapy, especially for patients with 
severe disability. Benefits tend to be obtained with a lower frequency 
of stimulation and often occur after a relatively longer latency 
(weeks to months) than in PD. Better results are typically obtained 
in younger patients with shorter disease duration. Recent studies 
suggest that DBS may also be valuable for patients with focal and 
secondary dystonias, although results are less consistent. Supportive 
treatments such as physical therapy and education should be a part 
of the treatment regimen.
Physicians should be aware of dystonic storm, a rare but poten-
tially fatal condition that can occur in response to a stress situation 
such as surgery or a systemic infection in patients with preexisting 
dystonia. It consists of the acute onset of generalized and persistent 
dystonic contractions that can involve the vocal cords or laryngeal 
muscles, leading to airway obstruction. Patients may experience 
rhabdomyolysis with renal failure and should be managed in an 
intensive care unit with airway protection if required. Treatment can 
be instituted with one or a combination of anticholinergics, diphen-
hydramine, baclofen, benzodiazepines, and dopaminergic agents. 
Spasms may be difficult to control, and anesthesia with muscle 
paralysis may be required.
CHOREAS
■
■HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE
HD is a progressive, fatal, highly penetrant autosomal dominant dis-
order characterized by motor, behavioral, oculomotor, and cognitive 
dysfunction. The disease is named for George Huntington, a family 
physician who described cases on Long Island, New York, in the 
nineteenth century. Onset is typically between the ages of 25 and 45 
years (range, 3–70 years) with a prevalence of 2–8 cases per 100,000 and 
an average age at death of 60 years. It is prevalent in Europe, North 
America, South America, and Australia but is rare in African blacks and 
Asians. HD is characterized by rapid, nonpatterned, semi-purposeful, 
involuntary choreiform movements, and for this reason was for-
merly referred to as Huntington’s chorea. However, dysarthria, gait 
disturbance, oculomotor abnormalities, behavioral disturbance, and 
cognitive impairment with dementia are also common features, 
thus the condition is currently referred to as HD. In the early stages, 
chorea tends to be focal or segmental, but progresses over time to 
involve multiple body regions. With advancing disease, there tends 
to be a reduction in chorea and the emergence of dystonia, rigidity, 
bradykinesia, and myoclonus. Functional decline is often predicted 
by progressive weight loss despite adequate calorie intake. In younger 
patients (~10% of cases), HD can present as an akinetic-rigid or parkin-
sonian syndrome (Westphal variant). HD patients eventually develop 
behavioral and cognitive disturbances, and the majority progress to 
dementia. Depression with suicidal tendencies, aggressive behav-
ior, and psychosis can be prominent features. HD patients may also 
develop noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and neuroendocrine 
abnormalities (e.g., hypothalamic dysfunction). A clinical diagnosis 
of HD can be strongly suspected in cases of chorea with a positive 
family history, but genetic testing provides the ultimate confirmation 
of the diagnosis. The disease predominantly affects the striatum but 
progresses to involve the cerebral cortex and other brain regions. 
Progressive atrophy of the head of the caudate nucleus, which form 
the lateral margin of the lateral ventricle, can be visualized by MRI 
(Fig. 428-1), but the putamen can be equally or even more severely 
affected. More diffuse cortical atrophy can be seen in the middle and 
late stages of the disease. Supportive studies include reduced meta-
bolic activity in the caudate nucleus and putamen, and reduced brain 
metabolites on MR spectroscopy. Genetic testing can be used to confirm 
the diagnosis and to detect at-risk individuals in the family, but must 
be performed with caution and in conjunction with trained counselors, 
because positive results can worsen depression and generate suicidal 
reactions. The neuropathology of HD consists of prominent neuronal 
loss and gliosis in the caudate nucleus and putamen; similar changes 
are also widespread in the cerebral cortex. Intraneuronal inclusions 
containing aggregates of ubiquitin and the mutant protein huntingtin 
are found in the nuclei of affected neurons.
In anticipation of developing neuroprotective therapies, there has 
been an intensive effort to define the premanifest stage of HD. Subtle 
motor impairment, cognitive alterations, and imaging changes can be 
detected in at-risk individuals who later go on to develop the manifest 
form of the disease. Defining the rate of progression of these features is 
FIGURE 428-1  Huntington’s disease. A. Coronal fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) magnetic resonance imaging shows enlargement of the lateral ventricles 
reflecting typical atrophy (arrows). B. Axial FLAIR image demonstrates abnormal high signal in the caudate and putamen (arrows).


--- PDF PAGE 3183 ---

CHAPTER 428 Tremor, Chorea, and Other Movement Disorders
3137
paramount for future studies of putative disease-modifying therapies 
designed to slow the rate of disease progression and the development 
of cumulative disability.
■
■ETIOLOGY
HD is caused by an increase in the number of polyglutamine (CAG) 
repeats (>40) in the coding sequence of the huntingtin gene located on 
the short arm of chromosome 4. The larger the number of repeats, the 
earlier the disease is manifest. Intermediate forms of the disease with 
36–39 repeats are described in some patients, typically with less severe 
clinical involvement. Acceleration of the process tends to occur, partic-
ularly in males, with subsequent generations having larger numbers of 
repeats and earlier age of disease onset, a phenomenon referred to as 
anticipation. The gene encodes the highly conserved cytoplasmic pro-
tein huntingtin, which is widely distributed in neurons throughout the 
central nervous system (CNS), but whose function is largely unknown. 
Mitochondrial dysfunction has been demonstrated in the striatum 
and skeletal muscle of symptomatic and presymptomatic individuals. 
Fragments of the mutant huntingtin protein can be toxic, possibly by 
translocating into the nucleus and interfering with transcriptional reg-
ulation of proteins. Neuronal inclusions found in affected regions in 
HD may represent a protective mechanism aimed at segregating and 
facilitating the clearance of these toxic proteins. There is also interest in 
the possibility that protein accumulation and aggregation in HD, like 
Alzheimer’s disease (Chap. 423) and PD (Chap. 427), may be critical to 
the disease process and reflect a prion-like disorder (Chap. 430). Mod-
els of HD with striatal pathology can be induced in transgenic animals 
that express the mutant gene and by excitotoxic agents such as kainic 
acid and 3-nitropropionic acid which promote calcium entry into the 
cell and cytotoxicity.
TREATMENT
Huntington’s Disease
Although the gene for HD was identified 25 years ago, there is still 
no disease-modifying therapy for this disorder and symptomatic 
treatment is limited. Current treatment involves a multidisciplinary 
approach, with medical, neuropsychiatric, social, and genetic coun-
seling for patients and their families. Dopamine-blocking agents 
may control the choreatic movements. Tetrabenazine (a presynaptic 
dopamine depleting agent) has been approved for the treatment 
of chorea, but can cause secondary parkinsonism. More recently, 
deuterated tetrabenazine (AustedoTM) has been approved as a treat-
ment for chorea in HD. Deuteration interferes with the metabolism 
of tetrabenazine and avoids a high Cmax. In clinical trials, it has 
been shown to have fewer dose-related side effects than tetra-
benazine, and therefore can be administered in higher doses with 
potentially superior clinical benefits. Neuroleptics are generally not 
recommended because of their potential to induce other troubling 
movement disorders and because HD chorea tends to be self-limited 
and is usually not disabling. These drugs may be used however 
in patients with severe and disabling chorea. Unfortunately, no 
medications have been developed as yet that interfere with the 
nonchoreic aspects of motor dysfunction in HD, although many 
promising agents are currently in clinical trials. Depression and 
anxiety can be major problems, and patients should be treated with 
appropriate antidepressant and antianxiety drugs and monitored for 
mania and suicidal ideations. Psychosis can be treated with atypical 
antipsychotics such as clozapine (50–600 mg/d), quetiapine (50–600 
mg/d), and risperidone (2–8 mg/d). There is no adequate treatment 
for the cognitive or motor decline. A neuroprotective therapy that 
slows or stops disease progression is the major unmet medical need 
in HD. Drugs that enhance mitochondrial function and increase 
the clearance of defective mitochondria are being tested as possi-
ble disease-modifying therapies. Other investigative approaches 
include antiglutamate agents, dopamine stabilizers, caspase inhibi-
tors, neurotrophic factors, anti-inflammatory agents, transplantation 
of fetal striatal cells or stem cells, and DBS of the globus pallidus 
pars interna (GPi), but none has as yet been demonstrated to have 
a beneficial effect in HD. The potential to block/edit the mutant 
huntingtin gene with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) or CRISPR/
cas9 technology is an exciting area of research that is currently being 
investigated as a possible future therapy.
HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE-LIKE DISORDERS
A group of rare inherited conditions that can mimic HD, designated 
HD-like (HDL) disorders, have also been identified. HDL-1, 2, and 4 
are autosomal dominant conditions that typically present in adulthood. 
HDL-1 is due to expansion of an octapeptide repeat in PRNP, the gene 
encoding the prion protein (Chap. 430). Thus HDL-1 is properly con-
sidered a prion disease. Patients exhibit onset of personality change 
in the third or fourth decade, followed by chorea, rigidity, myoclonus, 
ataxia, and epilepsy. HDL-2 manifests in the third or fourth decade 
with a variety of movement disorders, including chorea, dystonia, 
or parkinsonism and dementia. Most patients are of African descent. 
Acanthocytosis can sometimes be seen in these patients, and this condi-
tion must be distinguished from neuroacanthocytosis (below). HDL-2 
is caused by an abnormally expanded CTG/CAG trinucleotide repeat 
expansion in the junctophilin-3 (JPH3) gene. The pathology of HDL-2 
consists of intranuclear inclusions immunoreactive for ubiquitin and 
expanded polyglutamine repeats. HDL-4, the most common condition 
in this group, is caused by expansion of trinucleotide repeats in TBP, 
the gene that encodes the TATA box-binding protein involved in regu-
lating transcription; this condition is identical to spinocerebellar ataxia 
(SCA) 17 (Chap. S10), and most patients present primarily with ataxia 
rather than chorea. Mutations of the C9Orf72 gene associated with 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Chap. 429) have also been reported in 
some individuals with an HDL phenotype.
■
■OTHER CHOREAS
Chorea can be seen in a number of additional disorders related to 
genetic mutations or other disease states.
Among the hereditary forms of childhood-onset chorea, mutations 
in the ADCY5 (adenylate cyclase 5) gene are an increasingly recognized 
and probably relatively common cause of childhood-onset chorea, 
often in combination with dystonia and developmental delay in some 
cases. Characteristic perioral movements are a hallmark of the disorder.
Chorea-acanthocytosis (neuroacanthocytosis) is a progressive and 
typically fatal autosomal recessive disorder that is characterized 
by chorea coupled with red cell abnormalities on peripheral blood 
smear (acanthocytes). The chorea can be severe and associated with 
self-mutilating behavior, dystonia, tics, seizures, and a polyneuropathy. 
Mutations in the VPS13A gene encoding chorein have been described. 
A phenotypically similar X-linked form of the disorder has been 
described in older individuals who have reactivity with Kell blood 
group antigens (McLeod syndrome). A benign hereditary chorea of 
childhood (BHC1) due to mutations in the gene for thyroid transcrip-
tion factor 1 and a late-onset benign senile chorea (BHC2) have also 
been described. It is important to ensure that patients with these types 
of choreas do not have HD.
Chorea may also occur in association with a variety of infections 
and degenerative disorders as well as vascular diseases and hypo- 
and hyperglycemia. Sydenham’s chorea (originally called St. Vitus’s 
dance) is more common in females and is typically seen in childhood 
(5–15 years). It often develops in association with prior exposure to 
group A streptococcal infection (Chap. 143) and is thought to be auto-
immune in nature. It is characterized by the acute onset of choreiform 
movements and behavioral disturbances. With the reduction in the 
incidence of rheumatic fever, the incidence of Sydenham’s chorea 
has fallen, but it can still be seen in developing countries. The chorea 
generally responds to dopamine-blocking agents, valproic acid, and 
carbamazepine, but is self-limited, and treatment is generally restricted 
to those with severe chorea. Chorea may recur in later life, particularly 
in association with pregnancy (chorea gravidarum) or treatment with 
sex hormones. Several reports have documented cases of chorea asso-
ciated with N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antibody–positive 
encephalitis (Chap. 90) following herpes simplex virus encephalitis. 


--- PDF PAGE 3184 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3138 Systemic lupus erythematosus (Chap. 349) is the most common sys-
temic disorder that is associated with chorea. The chorea can last for 
days to years. Chorea can also be seen with hyperthyroidism, auto-
immune disorders including Sjögren’s syndrome, infectious disorders 
including HIV disease, metabolic alterations, and polycythemia rubra 
vera. Chorea has also been described following open-heart surgery in 
the pediatric population and in association with many medications 
(especially anticonvulsants, cocaine, CNS stimulants, estrogens, and 
lithium). Chorea is commonly seen in association with chronic lev-
odopa treatment (Parkinson’s Disease, Chap. 427). Chorea may also 
be encountered in paraneoplastic syndromes associated with anti-
CRMP-5 or anti-Hu antibodies (Chap. 90).
■
■HEMIBALLISMUS
Ballism is a violent form of choreiform movement composed of wild, 
flinging, large-amplitude movements most frequently affecting prox-
imal limb muscles on one side of the body (hemiballism). The move-
ments may only affect one limb (monoballism) or, more exceptionally, 
both upper or lower limbs (paraballism). The movements may be so 
severe as to cause exhaustion, dehydration, local injury, and, in extreme 
cases, death. Fortunately, dopamine-blocking drugs can be very help-
ful, and importantly, hemiballismus is usually self-limiting and tends 
to resolve spontaneously after weeks or months. The most common 
cause is a partial lesion (infarct or hemorrhage) in the subthalamic 
nucleus (STN), but in 30–40% of cases the lesion is found in the puta-
men, thalamus, or parietal cortex. Hemiballismus is also a common 
feature of the paroxysmal dyskinesias (see below). In extreme cases, 
pallidotomy or DBS of the GPi can be effective and abolish the involun-
tary movements. Interestingly, surgically induced lesions and DBS of 
the STN in PD patients are usually not associated with hemiballismus.
TICS
A tic is a brief, rapid, recurrent, and seemingly purposeless stereotyped 
motor contraction. Motor tics can be simple, with movement only 
affecting an individual muscle group (e.g., blinking, twitching of the 
nose, jerking of the neck), or complex, with coordinated involvement 
of multiple muscle groups (e.g., jumping, sniffing, head banging, and 
echopraxia [mimicking movements]). Phonic (or vocal) tics can also 
be simple (e.g., grunting) or complex (e.g., echolalia [repeating other 
people’s words], palilalia [repeating one’s own words], and coprolalia 
[expression of obscene words]). Patients may also experience sensory 
tics, composed of unpleasant focal sensations in the face, head, or neck. 
These can be mild and of little clinical consequence or severe and dis-
abling to the patient. Tics may present in adulthood and can be seen 
in association with a variety of disorders, including PD, HD, trauma, 
dystonia, drugs (e.g., levodopa, neuroleptics), and toxins.
■
■TOURETTE’S SYNDROME (TS)
TS is a neurobehavioral disorder named after the French neurologist 
Georges Gilles de la Tourette. It predominantly affects males, and the 
prevalence is estimated to be 0.03–1.6%, but it is likely that many mild 
cases do not come to medical attention. TS is characterized by multiple 
motor tics often accompanied by vocalizations (phonic tics). Patients 
characteristically can voluntarily suppress tics for short periods of 
time, but then experience an irresistible urge to express them. Tics 
vary in intensity and may be absent for days or weeks only to recur, 
occasionally in a different pattern. Tics tend to present between ages 
2 and 15 years (mean 7 years) and often lessen or even disappear in 
adulthood, particularly in males. Associated behavioral disturbances 
include anxiety, depression, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, 
and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Patients may experience person-
ality disorders, self-destructive behaviors, difficulties in school, and 
impaired interpersonal relationships.
Etiology and Pathophysiology  TS is thought to be a genetic 
disorder, but no specific monogenic cause has yet been identified. 
Current evidence supports a complex inheritance pattern with an 
important contribution of de-novo, likely gene-disrupting variants. 
Four likely risk genes with multiple de novo damaging variants in 
unrelated probands include WWC1, CELSR3, NIPBL, and FN1. The 
risk of a family with one affected child having a second is about 25%. 
The pathophysiology of TS is not known, but alterations in dopamine 
neurotransmission, opioids, and second-messenger systems have been 
proposed. Some cases of TS may be the consequence of an autoimmune 
response to β-hemolytic streptococcal infection (pediatric autoim-
mune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococcal infection 
[PANDAS]); however, this entity remains controversial.
TREATMENT
Tics
Patients with mild disease often only require education and coun-
seling (for themselves and family members). In a high proportion 
of patients the severity of tics wane in adult life becoming less of 
a medical problem, thus arguing for a conservative management 
when possible during the first decades of life. Drug treatment is 
indicated when the tics are disabling and interfere with quality of 
life. Therapy is individualized, and there is no singular treatment 
regimen that has been properly evaluated in double-blind trials. 
Some physicians use the α-agonist clonidine, starting at low doses 
and gradually increasing the dose and frequency until satisfactory 
control is achieved. Guanfacine (0.5–2 mg/d) is an α-agonist that is 
preferred by some because it only requires once-a-day dosing. Other 
physicians prefer to use neuroleptics. Atypical neuroleptics are 
usually used initially (risperidone, olanzapine, ziprasidone) because 
they are thought to be associated with a reduced risk of tardive dys-
kinesia. If they are not effective, low doses of classical neuroleptics 
such as haloperidol, fluphenazine, pimozide, or tiapride can be tried 
because the risk of tardive dyskinesia in young people is relatively 
low. Tetrabenazine and deuterated tetrabenazine are also currently 
being evaluated. Botulinum toxin injections can be effective in con-
trolling focal tics that involve small muscle groups. Behavioral fea-
tures, and particularly anxiety and compulsions, can be a disabling 
feature of TS and should be treated. The potential value of DBS 
targeting the anterior portion of the internal capsule, the GPi, or the 
thalamus is currently being explored.
MYOCLONUS
Myoclonus is a brief, rapid (<100 ms), shock-like, jerky movement 
consisting of single or repetitive muscle discharges. Myoclonic jerks 
can be focal, multifocal, segmental, or generalized and can occur spon-
taneously, in association with voluntary movement (action myoclonus) 
or in response to an external stimulus (reflex myoclonus). Negative 
myoclonus consists of a brief loss of muscle activity (e.g., asterixis 
in hepatic failure). Myoclonic jerks can be severe and interfere with 
normal movement or benign and of no clinical consequence as is com-
monly observed in normal people when waking up or falling asleep 
(hypnagogic jerks).
Myoclonic jerks differ from tics in that they are not typically repeti-
tive, can severely interfere with normal voluntary movement, and are 
not suppressible. They can arise in association with abnormal neuronal 
discharges in cortical, subcortical, brainstem, or spinal cord regions, 
particularly in association with hypoxemia (especially following 
cardiac arrest), encephalopathy, and neurodegeneration. Reversible 
myoclonus can be seen with metabolic disturbances (renal failure, 
electrolyte imbalance, hypocalcemia), toxins, and many medications. 
The combination of action myoclonus (cortical origin) with ataxia and 
generalized epilepsy is associated with several recognized causes. The 
most common is myoclonic epilepsy or Unverricht-Lundborg disease 
(EPM-1) which can have a variable but often progressive course. This 
is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the CSBT 
gene. Other causes are Lafora body epilepsy or progressive myoclonic 
epilepsy (PME-2) caused by mutations in in the EPM2A gene or the 
NHLRC1 gene and ceroid lipofuscinosis. In patients with less severe 
or absent epilepsy, mitochondrial disorders and neurodegenerative 
disorders affecting the cerebellum (i.e., SCAs) should be considered. 
Essential myoclonus is a relatively benign familial condition charac-
terized by multifocal, very brief, lightning-like movements that are 


--- PDF PAGE 3185 ---

CHAPTER 428 Tremor, Chorea, and Other Movement Disorders
3139
frequently alcohol-sensitive. Mutations in the epsilon-sarcoglycan gene 
have been associated with myoclonus seen in association with dystonia 
(myoclonic-dystonia).
TREATMENT
Myoclonus
Treatment primarily consists of managing the underlying condition 
or removing an offending agent. Pharmacologic therapy involves 
one or a combination of GABAergic agents such as valproic acid 
(800–3000 mg/d), piracetam (8–20 g/d), clonazepam (2–15 mg/d), 
levetiracetam (1000–3000 mg/d), or primidone (500–1000 mg/d) 
and may be associated with striking clinical improvement in chronic 
cases (e.g., postanoxic myoclonus, progressive myoclonic epilepsy) 
in which a cortical origin for the myoclonic discharges has been 
identified. The serotonin precursor 5-hydroxytryptophan (plus  
carbidopa) may be useful in some cases of postanoxic myoclonus.
DRUG-INDUCED MOVEMENT DISORDERS
This important group of movement disorders is primarily associated 
with drugs that block dopamine receptors (neuroleptics) or central 
dopaminergic transmission. These drugs are widely used in psychia-
try, but it is important to appreciate that drugs used in the treatment 
of nausea or vomiting (e.g., prochlorperazine [Compazine]) or gas-
troesophageal disorders (e.g., metoclopramide) are neuroleptic agents 
and can also cause these disorders. Hyperkinetic movement disorders 
secondary to neuroleptic drugs can be divided into those that present 
acutely, subacutely, or after prolonged exposure (tardive syndromes). 
Dopamine-blocking drugs can also be associated with a reversible par-
kinsonian syndrome for which anticholinergics are often concomitantly 
prescribed, but there is concern that this may increase the risk of devel-
oping a tardive syndrome and an underlying subclinical PD syndrome 
should be considered.
■
■ACUTE
Dystonia is the most common acute hyperkinetic drug reaction. It is 
typically generalized in children and focal in adults (e.g., blepharo-
spasm, torticollis, or OMD). The reaction can develop within minutes 
of exposure and can be successfully treated in most cases with par-
enteral administration of anticholinergics (benztropine or diphenhy-
dramine), benzodiazepines (lorazepam, clonazepam, or diazepam), or 
dopamine agonists. The abrupt onset of severe spasms may occasion-
ally be confused with a seizure; however, there is no loss of conscious-
ness, automatisms, or postictal features typical of epilepsy. The acute 
onset of chorea, stereotypic behavior, and tics may also be seen, partic-
ularly following exposure to CNS stimulants such as methylphenidate, 
cocaine, or amphetamines.
■
■SUBACUTE
Akathisia is the most common reaction in this category. It consists of 
motor restlessness with a need to move that is alleviated by movement. 
Therapy consists of removing the offending agent. When this is not 
possible, symptoms may be ameliorated with benzodiazepines, anti-
cholinergics, beta blockers, or dopamine agonists.
■
■TARDIVE SYNDROMES
These disorders develop months to years after initiation of the neuro-
leptic agent. Tardive dyskinesias (TD) are most common, and typically 
present with choreiform and/or dystonic movements involving the 
mouth, lips, and tongue. In severe cases, the trunk, limbs, and respi-
ratory muscles may also be affected. In approximately one-third of 
patients, TD remit within 3 months of stopping the drug, and most 
patients gradually improve over the course of several years. However, 
abnormal movements may also develop or worsen after stopping the 
offending agent. The movements are often mild and more upsetting 
to the family than to the patient, but they can be severe and disabling, 
particularly in the context of an underlying psychiatric disorder. Atyp-
ical antipsychotics (e.g., clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, 
ziprasidone, and aripiprazole) are associated with a lower risk of caus-
ing TD in comparison to traditional antipsychotics. Younger patients 
have a lower risk of developing neuroleptic-induced TD, whereas 
elderly, females, and those with underlying organic cerebral dysfunc-
tion have been reported to be at greater risk. Chronic use is associated 
with increased risk, and specifically, the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration has warned that use of metoclopramide for more than 12 weeks 
increases the risk of TD. Because TD can be permanent and resistant to 
treatment, antipsychotics should be used judiciously, atypical neuro-
leptics should be the preferred agent when possible, and the need for 
continued use should be regularly monitored.
Treatment primarily consists of stopping the offending agent. If the 
patient is receiving a traditional antipsychotic, and withdrawal is not 
possible, replacement with an atypical antipsychotic should be tried. 
Abrupt cessation of a neuroleptic should be avoided because acute 
withdrawal can induce worsening. TD can persist after withdrawal of 
antipsychotics and can be difficult to treat. Valbenazine (IngrezzaTM) 
is an ester of tetrabenazine that has recently been approved for the 
treatment of tardive dyskinesia based on results of efficacy in double 
blind trials, but it is associated with sleepiness and QT prolongation. It 
acts as a vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 (VMAT-2) inhibitor 
and blocks storage of dopamine. Deuterated tetrabenazine is also being 
studied for this indication. Benefits in open label studies have been 
reported with valproic acid (750–3000 mg/d), anticholinergics, or bot-
ulinum toxin injections. Other approaches that have been tried include 
baclofen (40–80 mg/d) or clonazepam (1–8 mg/d). In some cases, the 
abnormal movement is refractory to therapy.
Chronic neuroleptic exposure can also be associated with tardive 
dystonia, with preferential involvement of axial muscles and charac-
teristic rocking movements of the trunk and pelvis. Tardive dystonia 
can be more troublesome than tardive dyskinesia and frequently 
persists despite stopping medication. Valproic acid, anticholinergics, 
and botulinum toxin may occasionally be beneficial, but patients are 
frequently refractory to medical therapy. Tardive akathisia, tardive TS, 
and tardive tremor syndromes are rare but may also occur after chronic 
neuroleptic exposure.
Neuroleptic medications can also be associated with a neuroleptic 
malignant syndrome (NMS). NMS is characterized by the acute or 
subacute onset of muscle rigidity, elevated temperature, altered mental 
status, hyperthermia, tachycardia, labile blood pressure, renal failure, 
and markedly elevated creatine kinase levels. Symptoms typically 
evolve within days or weeks after initiating the drug. NMS can also be 
precipitated by the abrupt withdrawal of dopaminergic medications in 
PD patients. Treatment involves immediate cessation of the offending 
antipsychotic drug and the introduction of a dopaminergic agent (e.g., 
a dopamine agonist or levodopa), dantrolene, or a benzodiazepine. In 
very severe cases, when oral intake is not possible, a patch (delivering 
rotigotine subcutaneously) or an infusion pump (delivering apomor-
phine subcutaneously) may be the best approach to provide dopamin-
ergic treatment. Treatment may need to be undertaken in an intensive 
care setting and include supportive measures such as control of body 
temperature (antipyretics and cooling blankets), hydration, electrolyte 
replacement, and control of renal function and blood pressure.
Drugs that have serotonin-like activity (tryptophan, MDMA or 
“ecstasy,” meperidine) or that block serotonin reuptake can induce a 
rare, but potentially fatal, serotonin syndrome that is characterized by 
confusion, hyperthermia, tachycardia, and coma as well as rigidity, 
ataxia, and tremor. Myoclonus is often a prominent feature, in contrast 
to NMS, which it resembles in other respects. Patients can be managed 
with propranolol, diazepam, diphenhydramine, chlorpromazine, or 
cyproheptadine as well as supportive measures.
A variety of drugs can also be associated with parkinsonism and 
other hyperkinetic movement disorders. Some examples include phe-
nytoin (chorea, dystonia, tremor, myoclonus), carbamazepine (tics and 
dystonia), tricyclic antidepressants (dyskinesias, tremor, myoclonus), 
fluoxetine (myoclonus, chorea, dystonia), oral contraceptives (dys-
kinesia), β-adrenergics (tremor), buspirone (akathisia, dyskinesias, 
myoclonus), and digoxin, cimetidine, diazoxide, lithium, methadone, 
and fentanyl (dyskinesias).


--- PDF PAGE 3186 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3140 PAROXYSMAL DYSKINESIAS
Paroxysmal dyskinesias are a group of rare disorders characterized by 
episodic, brief involuntary movements that can manifest as various 
types of hyperkinetic movements, including chorea, dystonia, tremor, 
myoclonus, and ballism. There are three main types: (1) paroxysmal 
kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD), where the involuntary movements are trig-
gered by sudden movement, (2) paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesias 
(PNKD), where the attacks are not induced by movement, and (3) rare 
cases of exertion-induced dyskinesia (PED), where attacks are induced by 
prolonged exercise.
PKD are characterized by brief, self-limited attacks induced by 
movement onset such as running but also occasionally by unexpected 
sound or photic stimulation. Attacks may affect one side of the body, 
last seconds to minutes at a time, and recur several times a day. They 
usually manifest as a mixed hyperkinetic movement disorder with 
dystonic posturing of a limb, ballismus, and chorea, which may also 
become generalized. PKD is most commonly familial with an autoso-
mal dominant pattern of inheritance and mutations in the proline-rich 
transmembrane protein 2 (PRRT2) gene, but may also occur secondary to 
various brain disorders such as multiple sclerosis or hyperglycemia. 
PKD is more frequent in males (4:1), and the onset is typically in the 
first or second decade of life. About 70% report sensory symptoms 
such as tingling or numbness of the affected limb preceding the attack 
by a few milliseconds. The evolution is relatively benign, and there 
is a trend toward resolution of the attacks over time. Treatment with 
low-dose anticonvulsant therapy such as carbamazepine or phenytoin 
is advised when the attacks are frequent and interfere with daily life 
activities, and is effective in about 80% of patients. Some clinical fea-
tures of PKD (abrupt and short-lasting attacks preceded by an “aura”), 
the association with true seizure episodes, and its favorable response 
to anticonvulsant drugs have led to speculation that it is epileptic in 
origin, but this has not been established.
PNKD involve attacks of generalized dyskinesias precipitated by 
alcohol, caffeine, stress, or fatigue. In comparison to PKD, the epi-
sodes have a relatively longer duration (minutes to hours) and are less 
frequent (one to three per day). PNKD is inherited as an autosomal 
dominant condition with high (~80%) but incomplete penetrance. A 
missense mutation in the myofibrillogenesis regulator (PNKD) gene has 
been identified in several families. Recognition of the condition and 
elimination of the underlying precipitating factors, where possible, 
are the first priorities. Tetrabenazine, neuroleptics, dopamine-blocking 
agents, propranolol, clonazepam, and baclofen may be helpful. Treat-
ment may not be required if the condition is mild and self-limited. Most 
patients with PNKD do not benefit from anticonvulsant drugs, but 
some may respond to clonazepam or other benzodiazepines.
The SLC2A1 (solute carrier family 2 member 1) gene, previously 
linked to GLUT1 (glucose transporter of the blood brain barrier) defi-
ciency syndrome, has been identified to also cause paroxysmal PED. 
The attacks in this disorder are characterized by a combination of cho-
rea, athetosis, and dystonia in excessively exercised body regions with 
the legs being most frequently affected. A single attack lasts from a few 
minutes to an hour and occurs after prolonged physical exercise. In 
addition to the movement disorder, several patients have other disease 
manifestations such as epilepsy, hemolytic anemia, and migraine. A 
ketogenic diet is an effective therapeutic option.
RESTLESS LEGS SYNDROME (RLS)
RLS is a neurologic disorder that affects ~10% of the adult popula-
tion (it is rare in Asians) and can cause significant morbidity in some 
individuals. It was first described in the seventeenth century by the 
English physician Thomas Willis, but has only recently been recog-
nized as being a bona fide movement disorder. The four core symp-
toms required for diagnosis are as follows: an urge to move the legs 
usually caused or accompanied by an unpleasant sensation in the legs; 
symptoms that begin or worsen with rest; partial or complete relief by 
movement; and worsening during the evening or night.
Symptoms most commonly begin in the legs, but can spread to 
or even begin in the upper limbs. The unpleasant sensation is often 
described as a creepy-crawly feeling, paresthesia, or burning. In about 
80% of patients, RLS is associated with periodic leg movements (PLMs) 
during sleep and occasionally while awake. These involuntary move-
ments are usually brief, lasting no more than a few seconds, and recur 
every 5–90 s. The restlessness and PLMs are a major cause of sleep 
disturbance in patients, leading to poor-quality sleep and daytime 
sleepiness.
Primary RLS has a strong genetic component, and several loci have 
been associated with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, 
although penetrance may be variable and no specifically causative 
gene has been identified to date. The mean age of onset in familial 
forms is 27 years, although pediatric cases are recognized. The severity 
of symptoms is variable. Secondary RLS may be associated with preg-
nancy or a range of underlying disorders, including anemia, ferritin 
deficiency, renal failure, and peripheral neuropathy. The pathogene-
sis probably involves disordered dopamine function, which may be 
peripheral or central, possibly in association with an abnormality of 
iron metabolism. Diagnosis is made on clinical grounds but can be 
supported by polysomnography and the demonstration of PLMs. The 
neurologic examination is normal. Secondary causes of RLS should 
be excluded, and ferritin levels, glucose, and renal function should be 
measured.
Most RLS sufferers have mild symptoms that do not require specific 
treatment. General measures to improve sleep hygiene and quality 
should be attempted first. If symptoms remain intrusive, low doses 
of dopamine agonists, e.g., pramipexole (0.25–0.5 mg), ropinirole 
(1–2 mg), or patch rotigotine (2–3 mg), taken 1–2 h before bedtime are 
generally effective. Levodopa may also be effective but is more likely 
to be associated with augmentation (spread and worsening of restless-
ness and its appearance earlier in the day) or rebound (reappearance 
sometimes with worsening of symptoms at a time related to the drug’s 
short half-life). Augmentation can also be seen with dopamine ago-
nists, particularly if higher doses are employed. Other drugs that can 
be effective include anticonvulsants, analgesics, and opiates. Manage-
ment of secondary RLS should be directed to correcting the underlying 
disorder; for example, iron replacement for anemia.
OTHER DISORDERS THAT MAY PRESENT 
WITH A COMBINATION OF PARKINSONISM 
AND HYPERKINETIC MOVEMENTS
■
■WILSON’S DISEASE
WD is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder of copper metabolism 
that manifests with neurologic, psychiatric, and liver disorders, alone 
or in combination. It is caused by mutations in the ATP7B gene encod-
ing a P-type ATPase. The disease was first described by the English 
neurologist Kinnier Wilson at the beginning of the twentieth century, 
although at around the same time the German physicians Kayser and 
Fleischer separately noted the characteristic association of corneal pig-
mentation with hepatic and neurologic features. WD has a worldwide 
prevalence of ~1 in 30,000, with a mutation carrier frequency of 1 in 90. 
About half of WD patients (especially younger patients) manifest with 
liver abnormalities. The remainder present with neurologic disease 
(with or without underlying liver abnormalities), and a small propor-
tion have hematologic or psychiatric problems at disease onset.
Neurologic onset usually manifests in the second decade with 
tremor, rigidity, and dystonia. The tremor is usually in the upper limbs, 
bilateral, and asymmetric. Tremor can be on intention or occasionally 
at rest and, in advanced disease, can take on a wing-beating character-
istic (a flapping movement when the arms are held outstretched with 
the fingers opposed). Other features can include parkinsonism with 
bradykinesia, dystonia (particularly facial grimacing), dysarthria, and 
dysphagia. More than half of those with neurologic features have a his-
tory of psychiatric disturbances, including depression, mood swings, 
and overt psychosis. Kayser-Fleischer (KF) rings are seen virtually in 
all patients with neurologic features and 80% of those with hepatic pre-
sentations. KF rings represent the deposition of copper in Descemet’s 
membrane around the cornea. They consist of a characteristic grayish 
rim or circle at the limbus of the cornea and are best detected by slit-
lamp examination. Neuropathologic examination is characterized by 


================================================================================
Ch429 ALS and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
Pages 3187-3193
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3187 ---

CHAPTER 429 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
3141
neurodegeneration and astrogliosis in the basal ganglia, particularly 
in the striatum.
WD should always be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
a movement disorder in the first decades of life. Low levels of blood 
copper and ceruloplasmin and high levels of urinary copper may be 
present, but normal levels do not exclude the diagnosis. Brain imaging 
usually reveals generalized brain atrophy in established cases, and 
~50% have signal hypointensity in the caudate head, putamen, globus 
pallidus, substantia nigra, and red nucleus on T2-weighted MRI scans. 
However, correlation of imaging changes with clinical features is not 
good. Liver biopsy with demonstration of high copper levels and 
genetic testing remain the gold standard for the diagnosis.
In the absence of treatment, the course is progressive and leads 
to severe neurologic dysfunction and early death in the majority of 
patients, although a small proportion experience a relatively benign 
course. Treatment is directed at reducing tissue copper levels and main-
tenance therapy to prevent reaccumulation. There is no clear consensus 
on optimal treatment, and patients should be managed in a unit with 
expertise in WD. Penicillamine is frequently used to increase copper 
excretion, but may lead to a worsening of symptoms in the initial stages 
of therapy. Side effects are common and can to some degree be atten-
uated by coadministration of pyridoxine. Tetrathiomolybdate blocks 
the absorption of copper and can be used instead of penicillamine. 
Trientine and zinc are useful drugs for maintenance therapy. Effective 
treatment can reverse the neurologic features in most patients, partic-
ularly when started early. However, some patients may still progress, 
especially those with hepatocerebral disease. KF rings tend to decrease 
after 3–6 months and disappear by 2 years. Adherence to maintenance 
therapy is a major challenge in long-term care. Patients with advanced 
hepatic disease may require a liver transplant, and research is looking 
into the potential role of organ-specific chelators.
■
■NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON 
ACCUMULATION (NBIA)
NBIA represents a group of inherited disorders characterized by iron 
accumulation in the basal ganglia. Clinically, they can manifest as 
a progressive neurologic disorder with a variety of clinical features 
including parkinsonism, dystonia, neuropsychiatric abnormalities, and 
retinal degeneration. Cognitive disorders and cerebellar dysfunction 
may also be seen. Presentation is usually in childhood, but adult cases 
have been described. Multiple genes have been identified to date. 
Pantothenate kinase–associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) formerly 
known as Hallervorden-Spatz disease is caused by a mutation in the 
PANK2 gene, and is the most common form of NBIA accounting for 
about 50% of cases. Onset is usually in early childhood and is mani-
fest as a combination of dystonia, parkinsonism, and spasticity. MRI 
shows a characteristic low signal abnormality in the center of the 
globus pallidus on T2-weighted scans caused by iron accumulation 
known as the “eye of the tiger” sign. Numerous other gene mutations 
have been described associated with iron accumulation including 
mutations in PLA2G6, C19orf12, FA2H, ATP13A2, WDR45, FTL, CP, 
and DCAF17. One must be cautious, however, not to assume that all 
cases with iron accumulation in the basal ganglia represent an NBIA, 
because iron accumulation in specific basal ganglia regions is normal, 
and excess iron accumulation may occur in the basal ganglia region as 
a consequence of neurodegeneration associated with multiple causes 
unrelated to a defect in iron metabolism.
PSYCHOGENIC (FUNCTIONAL) DISORDERS
Virtually all movement disorders including tremor, tics, dystonia, 
myoclonus, chorea, ballism, and parkinsonism can be psychogenic in 
origin. Tremor affecting the upper limbs is the most common psycho-
genic movement disorder. Psychogenic movements can result from a 
somatoform or conversion disorder, malingering (e.g., seeking finan-
cial gain), or a factitious disorder (e.g., seeking psychological gain). 
Psychogenic movement disorders are relatively common (estimated to 
be 2–3% of patients seen in a movement disorder clinic), more frequent 
in women, disabling for the patient and family, and expensive for 
society. Clinical features suggesting a psychogenic movement disorder 
include an acute onset with a pattern of abnormal movement that is 
inconsistent with a known movement disorder. Diagnosis is based on 
the nonorganic quality of the movement, the absence of findings of an 
organic disease process, and positive features that specifically point to 
a psychogenic illness such as variability and distractibility. For exam-
ple, the magnitude of a psychogenic tremor is increased with attention 
and diminishes or even disappears when the patient is distracted by 
being asked to perform a different task or is unaware that he or she 
is being observed. This is the opposite of an organic tremor where the 
magnitude is increased with distraction and tends to be reduced when 
observed. Other positive features suggesting a psychogenic problem 
include a tremor frequency that is variable or that entrains with the 
frequency of a designated movement in the contralateral limb, or a 
response to placebo interventions. Associated features can include non-
anatomic sensory findings, give-way weakness, astasia-abasia (an odd, 
gyrating gait or posture); (Chap. 23), and multiple somatic complaints 
with no underlying pathology (somatoform disorder). Comorbid psy-
chiatric problems such as anxiety, depression, and emotional trauma 
may be present but are not necessary for the diagnosis of a psychogenic 
movement disorder to be made. Psychogenic movement disorders can 
occur as an isolated entity or in association with an underlying organic 
problem. The diagnosis can often be made based on clinical features 
alone, and unnecessary tests or medications can be avoided. Underly-
ing psychiatric problems may be present and should be identified and 
treated, but many patients with psychogenic movement disorders have 
no obvious psychiatric pathology. Psychotherapy and hypnosis may 
be of value for patients with conversion reaction, and cognitive behav-
ioral therapy may be helpful for patients with somatoform disorders. 
Patients with hypochondriasis, factitious disorders, and malingering 
have a poor prognosis.
■
■FURTHER READING
Albanese A et al: Therapeutic advances in dystonia. Mov Disord 
30:1547, 2015.
Albanese A et al: Phenomenology and classification of dystonia: A 
consensus update. Mov Disord 28:863, 2013.
Balint B, Bhatia KP: Dystonia: An update on phenomenology, classi-
fication, pathogenesis and treatment. Curr Opin Neurol 27:468, 2014.
Elble RJ: The essential tremor syndromes. Curr Opin Neurol 29:507, 
2016.
Espay AJ et al: Essential pitfalls in “essential” tremor. Mov Disord 
32:325, 2017.
Kieburtz K et al: Huntington’s disease: Current and future therapeutic 
prospects. Mov Disord, 2018.
Krack P et al: Current applications and limitations of surgical treat-
ments for movement disorders. Mov Disord 32:36, 2017.
Marras C et al: Nomenclature of genetic movement disorders: Recom-
mendations of the International Parkinson and Movement Disorder 
Society task force. Mov Disord 32:724, 2017.
Schapira AH et al: Slowing of neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s 
disease and Huntington’s disease: Future therapeutic perspectives. 
Lancet 384:545, 2014.
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS (ALS)
ALS is the most common progressive motor neuron disease. It is a 
prime example of a neurodegenerative disease and is arguably the 
most devastating of the neurodegenerative disorders.
Amyotrophic Lateral 
Sclerosis and Other Motor 
Neuron Diseases
Robert H. Brown, Jr. 
429


--- PDF PAGE 3188 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3142
■
■PATHOLOGY
The pathologic hallmark of motor neuron degenerative disorders is 
death of lower motor neurons (consisting of anterior horn cells in 
the spinal cord and their brainstem homologues innervating bulbar 
muscles) and upper, or corticospinal, motor neurons (originating in 
layer five of the motor cortex and descending via the pyramidal tract 
to synapse with lower motor neurons, either directly or indirectly 
via interneurons) (Chap. 21). Although at its onset ALS may involve 
selective loss of function of only upper or lower motor neurons, it 
ultimately causes progressive loss of both categories of motor neurons. 
Indeed, in the absence of clear involvement of both motor neuron 
types, the diagnosis of ALS is questionable. In a subset of cases, ALS 
arises concurrently with frontotemporal dementia (Chap. 424); in these 
instances, there is degeneration of frontotemporal cortical neurons and 
corresponding cortical atrophy.
Other motor neuron diseases involve only particular subsets of 
motor neurons (Tables 429-1 and 429-2). Thus, in bulbar palsy and 
spinal muscular atrophy (SMA; also called progressive muscular atrophy), 
the lower motor neurons of brainstem and spinal cord, respectively, 
are most severely involved. By contrast, pseudobulbar palsy, primary 
lateral sclerosis (PLS), and hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) affect 
only upper motor neurons innervating the brainstem and spinal cord.
In each of these diseases, the affected motor neurons undergo 
shrinkage, often with accumulation of the pigmented lipid (lipofuscin) 
that normally develops in these cells with advancing age. In ALS, the 
motor neuron cytoskeleton is typically affected early in the illness. 
Focal enlargements are frequent in proximal motor axons; ultrastruc-
turally, these “spheroids” are composed of accumulations of neurofil-
aments and other proteins. Commonly in both sporadic and familial 
ALS, the affected neurons demonstrate ubiquitin-positive aggregates, 
typically associated with the protein TDP43 (see below). Also seen is 
proliferation of astroglia and microglia, the inevitable accompaniment 
of all degenerative processes in the central nervous system (CNS).
The death of the peripheral motor neurons in the brainstem and 
spinal cord leads to denervation and atrophy of the corresponding 
muscle fibers. Histochemical and electrophysiologic evidence indi-
cates that in the early phases of the illness denervated muscle can be 
reinnervated by sprouting of nearby distal motor nerve terminals, 
although reinnervation in this disease is considerably less extensive 
than in most other disorders affecting motor neurons (e.g., poliomyeli-
tis, peripheral neuropathy). As denervation progresses, muscle atrophy 
is readily recognized in muscle biopsies and on clinical examination. 
This is the basis for the term amyotrophy. The loss of cortical motor 
neurons results in thinning of the corticospinal tracts that travel via 
the internal capsule (Fig. 429-1) and pyramidal tracts in the brainstem 
to the lateral and anterior white matter columns of the spinal cord. 
The loss of fibers in the lateral columns and resulting fibrillary gliosis 
impart a particular firmness (lateral sclerosis). A remarkable feature of 
the disease is the selectivity of neuronal cell death. By light micros-
copy, the entire sensory apparatus, the regulatory mechanisms for the 
control and coordination of movement, remains intact. Except in cases 
of frontotemporal dementia, the components of the brain required for 
cognitive processing are also preserved. However, immunostaining 
indicates that neurons bearing ubiquitin, a marker for degeneration, 
are also detected in nonmotor systems. Moreover, studies of glucose 
metabolism in the illness also indicate that there is neuronal dys-
function outside of the motor system. Pathological studies reveal 
proliferation of microglial cells and astrocytes in affected regions; in 
some cases, this phenomenon, designated neuroinflamation, can be 
visualized using positron emission tomography (PET) scanning for 
ligands that are recognized by activated microglia. Within the motor 
system, there is some selectivity of involvement. Thus, motor neurons 
required for ocular motility remain unaffected, as do the parasympa-
thetic neurons in the sacral spinal cord (the nucleus of Onufrowicz, 
or Onuf) that innervate the sphincters of the bowel and bladder.
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The manifestations of ALS are somewhat variable depending on 
whether corticospinal neurons or lower motor neurons in the brainstem 
TABLE 429-1  Etiology of Motor Neuron Disorders
DIAGNOSTIC CATEGORY
INVESTIGATION
Structural lesions
  Parasagittal or foramen magnum 
tumors
  Cervical spondylosis
  Chiari malformation of syrinx
  Spinal cord arteriovenous 
malformation
MRI scan of head (including foramen 
magnum and cervical spine)
Infections
  Bacterial—tetanus, Lyme
  Viral—poliomyelitis, herpes zoster
  Retroviral—myelopathy
CSF exam, culture
Lyme titer
Anti-viral antibody
HTLV-1 titers
Intoxications, physical agents
  Toxins—lead, aluminum, others
  Drugs—strychnine, phenytoin
  Electric short, x-irradiation
24-h urine for heavy metals
Serum lead level
Immunologic mechanisms
  Plasma cell dyscrasias
  Autoimmune polyradiculopathy
  Motor neuropathy with conduction 
block
  Paraneoplastic
  Paracarcinomatous
Complete blood counta
Sedimentation ratea
Total proteina
Anti-GM1 antibodiesa
Anti-Hu antibody
MRI scan, bone marrow biopsy
Metabolic
  Hypoglycemia
  Hyperparathyroidism
  Hyperthyroidism
  Deficiency of folate, vitamin B12, 
vitamin E
  Malabsorption
  Deficiency of copper, zinc
  Mitochondrial dysfunction
Fasting blood sugara
Routine chemistries including 
calciuma
PTH
Thyroid functiona
Vitamin B12, vitamin E, folatea
Serum zinc, coppera
24-h stool fat, carotene, prothrombin 
time
Fasting lactate, pyruvate, ammonia
Consider mtDNA
Hyperlipidemia
Lipid electrophoresis
Hyperglycinuria
Urine and serum amino acids
CSF amino acids
Hereditary disorders
  C9orf72
  Superoxide dismutase
  TDP43
  FUS/TLS
  Androgen receptor defect 
(Kennedy’s disease)
WBC DNA for mutational analysis
aShould be obtained in all cases.
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; FUS/TLS, fused in sarcoma/translocated 
in liposarcoma; HTLV-1, human T-cell lymphotropic virus; MRI, magnetic resonance 
imaging; PTH, parathyroid; WBC, white blood cell.
and spinal cord are more prominently involved. With lower motor neu-
ron dysfunction and early denervation, typically the first evidence of 
the disease is insidiously developing asymmetric weakness, usually 
first evident distally in one of the limbs. A detailed history often dis-
closes recent development of cramping with volitional movements, 
typically in the early hours of the morning (e.g., while stretching in 
bed). Weakness caused by denervation is associated with progressive 
wasting and atrophy of muscles and, particularly early in the illness, 
spontaneous twitching of motor units, or fasciculations. In the hands, 
a preponderance of extensor over flexor weakness is common. When 
the initial denervation involves bulbar rather than limb muscles, the 
problem at onset is difficulty with chewing, swallowing, and move-
ments of the face and tongue. Rarely, early involvement of the muscles 
of respiration may lead to death before the disease is far advanced 
elsewhere. With prominent corticospinal involvement, there is hyper-
activity of the muscle-stretch reflexes (tendon jerks) and, often, spastic 


--- PDF PAGE 3189 ---

CHAPTER 429 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
3143
stages of the illness. As noted, in some cases (particularly those that are 
familial), ALS develops concurrently with frontotemporal dementia, 
characterized by early behavioral abnormalities with prominent behav-
ioral features indicative of frontal lobe dysfunction.
A committee of the World Federation of Neurology has established 
diagnostic guidelines for ALS. Essential for the diagnosis is simulta-
neous upper and lower motor neuron involvement with progressive 
weakness and the exclusion of all alternative diagnoses. The disorder 
is ranked as “definite” ALS when three or four of the following are 
involved: bulbar, cervical, thoracic, and lumbosacral motor neurons. 
When two sites are involved, the diagnosis is “probable,” and when 
only one site is implicated, the diagnosis is “possible.” An exception is 
made for those who have progressive upper and lower motor neuron 
signs at only one site and a mutation in the gene encoding superoxide 
dismutase (SOD1; see below).
■
■EPIDEMIOLOGY
The illness is relentlessly progressive, leading to death from respiratory 
paralysis; the median survival is from 3 to 5 years. There are very rare 
reports of stabilization or even regression of ALS. In most societies, 
there is an incidence of 1–3 per 100,000 and a prevalence of 3–5 per 
100,000. It is striking that at least 1 in 1000 deaths in North America 
and Western Europe (and probably elsewhere) are due to ALS; this 
finding predicts that more than 300,000 individuals now alive in the 
United States will die of ALS. Several endemic foci of higher prevalence 
exist in the western Pacific (e.g., in specific regions of Guam or Papua 
New Guinea). In the United States and Europe, males are somewhat 
more frequently affected than females. Epidemiologic studies have 
incriminated risk factors for this disease including exposure to pesti-
cides and insecticides, smoking, and possibly service in the military. 
Although ALS is overwhelmingly a sporadic disorder, some 10% of 
cases are inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
■
■FAMILIAL ALS
Several forms of selective motor neuron disease are inheritable 
(Table 429-3). Familial ALS (FALS) involves both corticospinal and 
lower motor neurons. Apart from its inheritance as an autosomal dom-
inant trait, it is clinically indistinguishable from sporadic ALS. Genetic 
studies have identified mutations in multiple genes, including those 
encoding the protein C9orf72 (open reading frame 72 on chromosome 9), 
cytosolic enzyme SOD1 (superoxide dismutase), the RNA binding 
proteins TDP43 (encoded by the TAR DNA binding protein gene), and 
fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS), as the most 
common causes of FALS. Mutations in C9orf72 account for ~45–50% of 
FALS and perhaps 5% of sporadic ALS cases. Mutations in SOD1 explain 
another 20% of cases of FALS, whereas TDP43 and FUS/TLS each rep-
resent about 5% of familial cases. Mutations in several other genes (such 
as optineurin, TBK1 and profilin-1) each cause about ~1% of cases.
Rare mutations in other genes are also clearly implicated in ALS-like 
diseases. Thus, a familial, dominantly inherited motor disorder that 
in some individuals closely mimics the ALS phenotype arises from 
mutations in a gene that encodes a vesicle-binding protein. Mutations 
in senataxin, a helicase, cause an early adult-onset, slowly evolving 
ALS variant. Kennedy’s syndrome is an X-linked, adult-onset disorder 
that may mimic ALS, as described below. Tau gene mutations usually 
underlie frontotemporal dementia, but in some instances may be asso-
ciated with prominent motor neuron findings.
Genetic analyses are also beginning to illuminate the pathogenesis 
of some childhood-onset motor neuron diseases. For example, a slowly 
disabling degenerative, predominantly upper motor neuron disease 
that starts in the first decade is caused by mutations in a gene that 
expresses a novel signaling molecule with properties of a guanine-
exchange factor, termed alsin.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Because ALS is currently untreatable, it is imperative that poten-
tially remediable causes of motor neuron dysfunction be excluded 
(Table 429-1). This is particularly true in cases that are atypical by 
virtue of (1) restriction to either upper or lower motor neurons, 
resistance to passive movements of the affected limbs. Patients with 
significant reflex hyperactivity complain of muscle stiffness often out of 
proportion to weakness. Degeneration of the corticobulbar projections 
innervating the brainstem results in dysarthria and exaggeration of the 
motor expressions of emotion. The latter leads to involuntary excess in 
weeping or laughing (pseudobulbar affect).
Virtually any muscle group may be the first to show signs of dis-
ease, but, as time passes, more and more muscles become involved 
until ultimately the disorder takes on a symmetric distribution in all 
regions. It is characteristic of ALS that, regardless of whether the initial 
disease involves upper or lower motor neurons, both will eventually 
be implicated. Even in the late stages of the illness, sensory, bowel and 
bladder, and cognitive functions are preserved. Even when there is 
severe brainstem disease, ocular motility is spared until the very late 
TABLE 429-2  Sporadic Motor Neuron Diseases
CHRONIC
ENTITY
Upper and lower motor neuron
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Predominantly upper motor neuron
Primary lateral sclerosis
Predominantly lower motor neuron
Multifocal motor neuropathy with 
conduction block
Motor neuropathy with 
paraproteinemia or cancer
Motor predominant peripheral 
neuropathies
Other
Associated with other 
neurodegenerative disorders
Secondary motor neuron disorders 
(see Table 429-1)
Acute
Poliomyelitis
Herpes zoster
Coxsackie virus
West Nile virus
FIGURE 429-1  Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Axial T2-weighted magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) scan through the lateral ventricles of the brain reveals 
abnormal high signal intensity within the corticospinal tracts (arrows). This MRI 
feature represents an increase in water content in myelin tracts undergoing 
Wallerian degeneration secondary to cortical motor neuronal loss. This finding is 
commonly present in ALS, but can also be seen in AIDS-related encephalopathy, 
infarction, or other disease processes that produce corticospinal neuronal loss 
in a symmetric fashion.


--- PDF PAGE 3190 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3144
TABLE 429-3  Genetic Motor Neuron Diseases
DISEASE
GENE 
SYMBOL
GENE NAME
INHERITANCE
FREQUENCY 
(IN THE UNITED 
STATES)
USUAL ONSET
PROTEIN 
FUNCTION
UNUSUAL 
FEATURES
I. Upper and Lower Motor Neurons (Familial ALS)
ALS1
SOD1
Cu/Zn superoxide 
dismutase 1
AD
20% FALS
Adult
Protein antioxidant
ALS2
ALS2
Alsin
AR
<1% FALS
Juvenile
GEF signaling
Severe corticobulbar, 
corticospinal 
featuresk may mimic 
PLS
ALS4
SETX
Senataxin
AD
~1% FALS
Late juvenile
DNA helicase
Late childhood onset
ALS6
FUS/TLS
Fused in Sarcoma/
Translocated in 
liposarcoma
AD
5% FALS
Adult
DNA, RNA binding
ALS8 /SMA
VAPB
Vesicle associated  
protein B
AD
<1%
Adult
Vesicular 
trafficking
ALS9
ANG
Angiogenin
AD
<1%
Adult
RNAse, 
angiogenesis
ALS10
TARDBP
TAR DNA binding protein
AD
5% FALS
Adult
DNA, RNA binding
ALS12
OPTN
Optineurin
AD/AR
~1% FALS
Adult
Attenuates NF-κB
ALS13
ATXN2
Ataxin 2
AD
<1%
Adult
Cytotoxic 
expanded CAG 
repeat
ALS14
VCP
Valosin-containing protein
AD
~ 1% FALS
Adult
ATPase
ALS18
PFN1
Profilin 1
AD
~1% FALS
Adult
Involved in actin 
polymerization
ALS19
ERB4
v-erb-b2 avian 
erythroblastic leukemia 
viral oncogene homolog 4
AD
Adult
Signaling molecule
ALS20
HNRNPA1
Heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein A1
AD
<1%
Adult
Heteronuclear 
RNA binding 
protein
ALS
DCTN1
Dynactin
AD
<1%
Adult
Axonal transport
May cause vocal 
cord paralysis or 
PLSe
ALS-FTD
TBK1
TankBinding Protein 1
AD
Adult
NF-κB signalling
also mimics PLS
ALS-FTD
UBQLN2
Ubiquilin 2
X-LD
<1%
Adult or 
Juvenile
Protein 
degradation
ALS-FTD
CHMP2B
Chromatin modifying 
protein 2B
AD
<1% FALS
Adult
Chromatin binding 
protein
ALS-FTD
C9ORF72
Chromosome 9 Open 
Reading Frame 72
AD
40-50% FALS
Adult
Regulates vessicle 
trafficking
May also be 
associated with 
Parkinosonism, PLS
ALS-FTD
MAPT
Microtubule Associated 
Protein Tau
AD
Adult
cytoskeletal 
protein
Usually causes only 
FTD
ALS
COX
Cytochrome c oxidase
Maternally 
inherited
Adult
Mitochondrial: ATP 
generation
ALS
tRNA-
isoleucine
Maternally 
inherited
Adult
Mitochondrial: ATP 
generation
II. Lower Motor Neurons
Spinal muscular 
atrophies
SMN
Survival motor neuron
AR
1/10,000 live 
births
Infancy
RNA metabolism
GM2-gangliosidosis
  1. Sandhoff’s 
disease
HEXB
Hexosaminidase B
AR
Childhood
Ganglioside 
recycling
  2. AB variant
GM2A
GM2-activator protein
AR
Childhood
Ganglioside 
recycling
  3. Adult Tay-Sachs 
disease
HEXA
Hexosaminidase A
AR
Childhood
Ganglioside 
recycling
X-linked spinobulbar 
muscular atrophy
AR
Androgen receptor
XR
Adult
Nuclear signaling
III. Upper Motor Neuron (Selected HSPs)
  SPG3A
ATL1
Atlastin
AD
10% AD FSP
Childhood
GTPase—vesicle 
recycling
  SPG4
SPAST
Spastin
AD
50-60% AD FSP
Early adulthood ATPase family—
microtubule 
associate
Some sensory loss
(Continued)


--- PDF PAGE 3191 ---

CHAPTER 429 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
3145
TABLE 429-3  Genetic Motor Neuron Diseases
DISEASE
GENE 
SYMBOL
GENE NAME
INHERITANCE
FREQUENCY 
(IN THE UNITED 
STATES)
USUAL ONSET
PROTEIN 
FUNCTION
UNUSUAL 
FEATURES
  SPG6
NIPA1
Non imprinted in  
Prader-Willi/Angelman 
syndrome 1
AD
Early adulthood Membrane 
transporter or 
receptor
Deleted in Prader-
Willi, Angelman’s
  SPG8
WASHC5
Strumpellin
AD
Early adulthood Ubiquitous, 
spectrin-like
  SPG10
KIF5A
Kinesin heavy chain 
isoform 5A
AD
10% AD FSP
Second–third 
decade
Motor-associated 
protein
± Peripheral 
neuropathy, 
retardation
  SPG12
RTN2
Reticulon 2
AD
Childhood
ER protein, 
interacts with 
spastin
  SPG13
HSP60
Heat shock protein 60
AD
Early adulthood Chaperone protein
SPG17/ variants 
of charcot Marie 
Tooth type 2/ Silver 
syndrome
BSCL2
Seipin lipid droplet 
biogenesis associated
AD
Variable
Membrane protein 
in ER
Amyotrophy hands, 
feet
  SPG31
REEP1
Receptor Expression 
Enhancing Protein 1
AD
10% AD FSP
Early
Mitochondrial 
protein
Rarely, amyotrophy
  SPG33
ZFYVE27
Zinc Finger FYVE-Type 
Containing 27
AD
Adult
Interacts with 
spastin
Pes equinus
  SPG42
SLC33A1
Acetyl-CoA-transporter
AD
Variable
Solute carrier
  SPG72
REEP2
Receptor Expression 
Enhancing Protein 2
AD
Childhood
ER protein
  SPG5
CYP7B1
Cytochrome P450
AR
5-10% AR FSP
Variable
Degrades 
endogenous 
substances
Sensory loss
  SPG7
SPG7
Paraplegin
AR
5-10% AR FSP
Variable
Mitochondrial 
protein
Rarely, optic atrophy, 
ataxia, rarely PLS
  SPG11
SPG11
Spatacsin
AR
20-70% AR FSP 
depends on 
ethnicity
Predominantly 
childhood
Cytosolic, ? 
membrane-
associated
Some sensory 
loss, thin corpus 
callosum; may mimic 
ALS (ALS5)
  SPG15
ZFYVE26
Spastizin
AR
Childhood
Zinc finger protein
Some amyotrophy, 
some CNS features
  SPG20
SPG20
Spartin
AR
Childhood
Endosomal 
trafficking protein
  SPG21
SPG21
Maspardin
AR
Childhood
Endosomal 
trafficking protein
  SPG35
Fatty 
acid 2 
hydrolase
AR
Childhood
Membrane protein
Multiple CNS 
features
  SPG39
PNPLA6
patatin-like phospholipase 
domain-containing protein 
6 / Neuropathy target 
esterase
AR
Early childhood
Esterase
May have PLS=like 
phenotype
  SPG44
GJC2
Gap junction protein 
gamma 2/ Connexin 47
AR
Childhood
Gap junction 
protein
Possible mild CNS 
features
  SPG46
GBA2
β-Glucosidase 2
AR
Childhood
Glycoside 
hydrolase
Thin corpus 
callosum, mental 
retardation
  SPG2
PLP
Proteolipid protein
XR
Early childhood
Myelin protein
Sometimes multiple 
CNS features
  SPG1
L1-CAM
Neural cell adhesion 
molecule L1 precursor
XR
Infancy
Cell adhesion 
molecule
  SPG22
SLC16A2
Solute Carrier Family 16 
Member 2
XR
Infancy
Monocarboxylic 
acid transporter
Adrenoleukodystrophy
ALDP
Adrenoleukodystrophy 
protein
XR
Early adulthood ATP binding 
transporter protein
Possible adrenal 
insufficiency, CNS 
inflammation
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; AR, autosomal recessive; CNS, central nervous system; BSCL2, Bernadelli-Seip congenital 
lipodystrophy 2B; FUS/TLS, fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma; GEF, Guanidine nucleotide exchange factor; HSP, hereditary spastic paraplegia; TDP43, Tar 
DNA binding protein 43 kd; XR, X-linked recessive.
(Continued)


--- PDF PAGE 3192 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3146 (2) involvement of neurons other than motor neurons, and (3) evidence 
of motor neuronal conduction block on electrophysiologic testing. 
Compression of the cervical spinal cord or cervicomedullary junction 
from tumors in the cervical regions or at the foramen magnum or from 
cervical spondylosis with osteophytes projecting into the vertebral 
canal can produce weakness, wasting, and fasciculations in the upper 
limbs and spasticity in the legs, closely resembling ALS. The absence of 
cranial nerve involvement may be helpful in differentiation, although 
some foramen magnum lesions may compress the twelfth cranial 
(hypoglossal) nerve, with resulting paralysis of the tongue. Absence 
of pain or of sensory changes, normal bowel and bladder function, 
normal radiologic studies of the spine, and normal cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) all favor ALS. Where doubt exists, magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) scans and possibly contrast myelography should be performed 
to visualize the cervical spinal cord.
Another important entity in the differential diagnosis of ALS is mul-
tifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block (MMCB), discussed below. 
A diffuse, lower motor axonal neuropathy mimicking ALS sometimes 
evolves in association with hematopoietic disorders such as lym-
phoma or multiple myeloma. In this clinical setting, the presence of an 
M-component in serum should prompt consideration of a bone mar-
row biopsy. Lyme disease (Chap. 181) may also cause an axonal, lower 
motor neuropathy, although typically with intense proximal limb pain 
and a CSF pleocytosis.
Other treatable disorders that occasionally mimic ALS are chronic 
lead poisoning and thyrotoxicosis. These disorders may be suggested 
by the patient’s social or occupational history or by unusual clinical 
features. When the family history is positive, disorders involving 
the genes encoding C9orf72, cytosolic SOD1, TDP43, FUS/TLS, and 
adult hexosaminidase A or α-glucosidase deficiency must be excluded 
(Chap. 411). These are readily identified by appropriate laboratory 
tests. Benign fasciculations are occasionally a source of concern because 
on inspection they resemble the fascicular twitchings that accompany 
motor neuron degeneration. The absence of weakness, atrophy, or 
denervation phenomena on electrophysiologic examination usually 
excludes ALS or other serious neurologic disease. Patients who have 
recovered from poliomyelitis may experience a delayed deterioration of 
motor neurons that presents clinically with progressive weakness, atro-
phy, and fasciculations. Its cause is unknown, but it is thought to reflect 
sublethal prior injury to motor neurons by poliovirus (Chap. 199).
Rarely, ALS develops concurrently with features indicative of more 
widespread neurodegeneration. Thus, one infrequently encounters 
otherwise typical ALS patients with a parkinsonian movement disor-
der or frontotemporal dementia, particularly in instances of C9orf72 
mutations, which strongly suggests that the simultaneous occurrence 
of two disorders is a direct consequence of the gene mutation. As 
another example, prominent amyotrophy has been described as a dom-
inantly inherited disorder in individuals with bizarre behavior and a 
movement disorder suggestive of parkinsonism; many such cases have 
now been ascribed to mutations that alter the expression of tau protein 
in brain (Chap. 424). In other cases, ALS develops simultaneously with 
a striking frontotemporal dementia. An ALS-like disorder has also been 
described in some individuals with chronic traumatic encephalopathy, 
associated with deposition of TDP43 and neurofibrillary tangles in 
motor neurons.
■
■PATHOGENESIS
The cause of sporadic ALS is not well defined. Several mechanisms that 
impair motor neuron viability have been elucidated in rodents induced 
to develop motor neuron disease by SOD1 or profilin-1 transgenes with 
ALS-associated mutations. One may loosely group the genetic causes of 
ALS into three categories. In one group, the primary problem is inher-
ent instability of the mutant proteins, with subsequent perturbations 
in protein degradation (SOD1, ubiquilin-1 and 2, p62). In the second 
category, the causative mutant genes perturb RNA processing, trans-
port, and metabolism (C9orf73, TDP43, FUS). In the case of C9orf72, 
the molecular pathology is an expansion of an intronic hexanucleotide 
repeat (-GGGGCC-) beyond an upper normal of 30 repeats to hundreds 
or even thousands of repeats. As observed in other intronic repeat 
disorders such as myotonic dystrophy (Chap. 441) and spinocerebellar 
atrophy type 8 (Chap. 431), data suggest that the expanded intronic 
repeats generate expanded RNA repeats that form intranuclear foci 
and may confer toxicity by sequestering transcription factors or by 
undergoing noncanonical protein translation across all possible read-
ing frames of the expanded RNA tracts. Importantly, the latter process 
generates lengthy dipeptides that are detected in the spinal fluid and 
are a unique biomarker for C9orf72 ALS. TDP43 and FUS are multi-
functional proteins that bind RNA and DNA and shuttle between the 
nucleus and the cytoplasm, playing multiple roles in the control of cell 
proliferation, DNA repair and transcription, and gene translation, both 
in the cytoplasm and locally in dendritic spines in response to electrical 
activity. How mutations in FUS/TLS provoke motor neuron cell death 
is not clear, although this may represent loss of function of FUS/TLS 
in the nucleus or an acquired, toxic function of the mutant proteins in 
the cytosol. In the third group of ALS genes, the primary problem is 
defective axonal cytoskeleton and transport (dynactin, profilin-1). It is 
striking that variants in other genes (e.g., EphA4) influence survival in 
ALS but not ALS susceptibility. Data indicate that intermediate-length 
polyglutamine-coding expansions (-CAG-) in the gene ataxin-2 con-
fer increased ALS susceptibility; suppression of ataxin-2 expression 
extends survival in transgenic ALS mice. Beyond the upstream, pri-
mary defects, it is also evident that the ultimate neuronal cell death 
process is complex, involving multiple cellular processes acting in 
diverse components of the motor neuron (dendrites, cell body, axons, 
neuromuscular junction) to accelerate cell death. These include but are 
not limited to excitotoxicity, defective autophagy, impairment of axonal 
transport, oxidative stress, activation of endoplasmic reticulum stress 
and the unfolded protein response, and mitochondrial dysfunction. As 
well, the hexanucleotide expansions that cause C9orf72 ALS disrupt 
nucleocytoplasmic transport; the importance of this observation is 
underscored by the finding that mutations in the gene encoding GLE1, 
a protein that mediates mRNA export, cause an aggressive, infantile 
motor neuron disease.
Multiple recent studies have convincingly demonstrated that prolif-
erating, activated nonneuronal cells such as microglia and astrocytes 
importantly influence the disease course, at least in ALS transgenic 
mice. A striking additional finding in ALS and most neurodegenerative 
disorders is that miscreant proteins arising from gene defects in familial 
forms of these diseases are often implicated in sporadic forms of the 
same disorder. For example, some reports propose that nonheritable, 
posttranslational modifications in SOD1 are pathogenic in sporadic 
ALS; indeed, SOD1 aggregates are sometimes observed in spinal cord 
in sporadic ALS without SOD1 mutations. Germline mutations in the 
genes encoding β-amyloid and α-synuclein cause familial forms of Alz-
heimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, and posttranslational, noninherited 
abnormalities in these proteins are also central to sporadic Alzheimer’s 
and Parkinson’s diseases.
TREATMENT
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
No treatment arrests the underlying pathologic process in ALS. The 
drug riluzole (100 mg/d) was approved for ALS because it produces 
a modest lengthening of survival. In one trial, the survival rate at 
18 months with riluzole was similar to placebo at 15 months. The 
mechanism of this effect is not known with certainty; riluzole may 
reduce excitotoxicity by diminishing glutamate release. Riluzole is 
generally well tolerated; nausea, dizziness, weight loss, and ele-
vated liver enzymes occur occasionally. A second drug, edaravone, 
has also been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
based on a single 6-month study in a highly selected ALS population 
that demonstrated a modest reduction in the trajectory of worsening 
on an ALS disability scale; survival was not included as an endpoint. 
This drug, which is believed to act as an antioxidant, is admin-
istered via recurring monthly 10-day series of daily intravenous 
infusions. Pathophysiologic studies of mutant SOD1–related ALS 
in mice have disclosed diverse targets for therapy; consequently, 


--- PDF PAGE 3193 ---

CHAPTER 429 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
3147
within the first year of life. Chronic childhood SMA (SMA II) begins later 
in childhood and evolves with a more slowly progressive course. Juve-
nile SMA (SMA III, Kugelberg-Welander disease) manifests during late 
childhood and runs a slow, indolent course. Unlike most denervating 
diseases, in this chronic disorder weakness is greatest in the proximal 
muscles; indeed, the pattern of clinical weakness can suggest a primary 
myopathy such as limb-girdle dystrophy. Electrophysiologic and mus-
cle biopsy evidence of denervation distinguish SMA III from the myo-
pathic syndromes. Remarkably, two treatments have shown dramatic 
benefit in infantile SMA. One, nusinersen, now an approved therapy, 
entails administering small oligonucleotides that alter mRNA splicing 
of one of the SMN genes, generating sufficient normal SMN protein to 
provide clinical benefit (including prolonged survival). The other uses 
systemically administered adeno-associated virus (AAV) to deliver the 
missing SMN gene to motor neurons and other cells.
Multifocal Motor Neuropathy with Conduction Block  In 
this disorder, lower motor neuron function is regionally and chron-
ically disrupted by focal blocks in conduction. Many cases have ele-
vated serum titers of mono- and polyclonal antibodies to ganglioside 
GM1; it is hypothesized that the antibodies produce selective, focal, 
paranodal demyelination of motor neurons. MMCB is not typically 
associated with corticospinal signs. In contrast with ALS, MMCB 
may respond dramatically to therapy such as IV immunoglobulin or 
chemotherapy; thus, it is imperative that MMCB be excluded when 
considering a diagnosis of ALS.
Other Forms of Lower Motor Neuron Disease  In individ-
ual families, other syndromes characterized by selective lower motor 
neuron dysfunction in an SMA-like pattern have been described. There 
are rare X-linked and autosomal dominant forms of apparent SMA. 
There is an ALS variant of juvenile onset, the Fazio-Londe syndrome, 
that involves mainly the musculature innervated by the brainstem. A 
component of lower motor neuron dysfunction is also found in degen-
erative disorders such as Machado-Joseph disease and the related 
olivopontocerebellar degenerations (Chap. 431).
■
■SELECTED DISORDERS OF THE UPPER  
MOTOR NEURON
Primary Lateral Sclerosis  This rare disorder arises sporadi-
cally in adults in mid to late life. Clinically, PLS is characterized by 
progressive spastic weakness of the limbs, preceded or followed by 
spastic dysarthria and dysphagia, indicating combined involvement of 
the corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts. Fasciculations, amyotrophy, 
and sensory changes are absent; neither electromyography nor muscle 
biopsy shows denervation. On neuropathologic examination, there 
is selective loss of the large pyramidal cells in the precentral gyrus 
and degeneration of the corticospinal and corticobulbar projections. 
The peripheral motor neurons and other neuronal systems are spared. 
The course of PLS is variable; although long-term survival is docu-
mented, the course may be as aggressive as in ALS, with ~3-year sur-
vival from onset to death. Early in its course, PLS raises the question of 
multiple sclerosis or other demyelinating diseases as diagnostic consid-
erations (Chap. 436). A myelopathy suggestive of PLS is infrequently 
seen with infection with the retrovirus human T cell lymphotropic 
virus 1 (HTLV-1) (Chap. 434). The clinical course and laboratory testing 
will distinguish these possibilities.
Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia  In its pure form, HSP is usu-
ally transmitted as an autosomal trait; most adult-onset cases are 
dominantly inherited. There are more than 80 genetic types of HSP for 
which causative mutations in more than 60 genes have been identified. 
Table 429-3 lists more commonly identified genetic types of HSP. Symp-
toms usually begin in the third or fourth decade, presenting as pro-
gressive spastic weakness beginning in the lower extremities; however, 
there are variants with onset so early that the differential diagnosis 
includes cerebral palsy. HSP typically has a long survival, presumably 
because respiratory function is spared. Late in the illness, there may be 
urinary urgency and incontinence and sometimes fecal incontinence; 
sexual function tends to be preserved.
multiple therapies are presently in clinical trials for ALS including 
experimental trials of small molecules, mesenchymal stem cells, 
and immunosuppression. Interventions such as antisense oligonu-
cleotides (ASO) that diminish expression of mutant SOD1 protein 
prolong survival in transgenic ALS mice and rats are also now in 
clinical trials for SOD1-mediated ALS.
In the absence of a primary therapy for ALS, a variety of reha-
bilitative aids may substantially assist ALS patients. Foot-drop 
splints facilitate ambulation by obviating the need for excessive 
hip flexion and by preventing tripping on a floppy foot. Finger 
extension splints can potentiate grip. Respiratory support may be 
life-sustaining. For patients electing against long-term ventilation 
by tracheostomy, positive-pressure ventilation by mouth or nose 
provides transient (weeks to months) relief from hypercarbia and 
hypoxia. Also extremely beneficial for some patients is a respiratory 
device (Cough Assist Device) that produces an artificial cough. This 
is highly effective in clearing airways and preventing aspiration 
pneumonia. When bulbar disease prevents normal chewing and 
swallowing, gastrostomy is uniformly helpful, restoring normal 
nutrition and hydration. Fortunately, an increasing variety of speech 
synthesizers are now available to augment speech when there is 
advanced bulbar palsy. These facilitate oral communication and may 
be effective for telephone use.
In contrast to ALS, several of the disorders (Tables 429-1 and 
429-3) that bear some clinical resemblance to ALS are treatable. For 
this reason, a careful search for causes of secondary motor neuron 
disease is warranted.
OTHER MOTOR NEURON DISEASES
■
■SELECTED LOWER MOTOR NEURON DISORDERS
In these motor neuron diseases, the peripheral motor neurons are 
affected without evidence of involvement of the corticospinal motor 
system (Tables 429-1–429-3).
X-Linked Spinobulbar Muscular Atrophy (Kennedy’s 
Disease)  This is an X-linked lower motor neuron disorder in which 
progressive weakness and wasting of limb and bulbar muscles begins 
in males in mid-adult life and is conjoined with androgen insensitivity 
manifested by gynecomastia and reduced fertility (Chap. 384). In addi-
tion to gynecomastia, which may be subtle, two findings distinguishing 
this disorder from ALS are the absence of signs of pyramidal tract 
disease (spasticity) and the presence of a subtle sensory neuropathy in 
some patients. The underlying molecular defect is an expanded trinu-
cleotide repeat (-CAG-) in the first exon of the androgen receptor gene 
on the X chromosome. An inverse correlation appears to exist between 
the number of CAG- repeats and the age of onset of the disease.
Adult Tay-Sachs Disease 
Several reports have described 
adult-onset, predominantly lower motor neuropathies arising from 
deficiency of the enzymeβ-hexosaminidase (hex A). These tend to be 
distinguishable from ALS because they are very slowly progressive 
and in some cases may have been symptomatic for years; dysarthria 
and radiographically evident cerebellar atrophy may be prominent. 
In rare cases, spasticity may also be present, although it is generally 
absent (Chap. 411).
Spinal Muscular Atrophy  The SMAs are a family of selective 
lower motor neuron diseases of early onset. Despite some phenotypic 
variability (largely in age of onset), the defect in the majority of fam-
ilies with SMA is loss of a protein (SMN, for survival motor neuron) 
that is important in the formation and trafficking of RNA complexes 
across the nuclear membrane. Neuropathologically these disorders are 
characterized by extensive loss of large motor neurons; muscle biopsy 
reveals evidence of denervation atrophy. Several clinical forms exist.
Infantile SMA (SMA I, Werdnig-Hoffmann disease) has the earliest 
onset and most rapidly fatal course. In some instances, it is apparent 
even before birth, as indicated by decreased fetal movements late in 
the third trimester. Though alert, afflicted infants are weak and floppy 
(hypotonic) and lack muscle stretch reflexes. Death generally ensues 


================================================================================
Ch434 Diseases of the Spinal Cord
Pages 3218-3228
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3218 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3172
multiple cranial nerve palsies form a number of distinctive syndromes, 
listed in Table 433-2. Sarcoidosis is the cause of some cases of multiple 
cranial neuropathy; tuberculosis, the Chiari malformation, platybasia, 
and basilar invagination of the skull are additional causes. A purely 
motor disorder without atrophy always raises the question of myas-
thenia gravis (Chap. 440). As noted above, Guillain-Barré syndrome 
commonly affects the facial nerves bilaterally. In the Fisher variant of 
the Guillain-Barré syndrome, oculomotor paresis occurs with ataxia 
and areflexia in the limbs (Chap. 439). Wernicke’s encephalopathy can 
cause a severe ophthalmoplegia combined with other brainstem signs 
(Chap. 301).
The cavernous sinus syndrome (Fig. 433-4) is a distinctive and fre-
quently life-threatening disorder. It often presents as orbital or facial 
pain; orbital swelling and chemosis due to occlusion of the ophthalmic 
veins; fever; oculomotor neuropathy affecting the third, fourth, and 
sixth cranial nerves; and trigeminal neuropathy affecting the ophthal-
mic (V1) and occasionally the maxillary (V2) divisions of the trigeminal 
nerve. Cavernous sinus thrombosis, often secondary to infection from 
orbital cellulitis (frequently Staphylococcus aureus), a cutaneous source 
on the face, or sinusitis (especially with mucormycosis in diabetic 
patients), is the most frequent cause; other etiologies include aneurysm 
of the carotid artery, a carotid-cavernous fistula (orbital bruit may be 
present), meningioma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, other tumors, or an 
idiopathic granulomatous disorder (Tolosa-Hunt syndrome). The two 
cavernous sinuses directly communicate via intercavernous channels; 
thus, involvement on one side may extend to become bilateral. Early 
diagnosis is essential, especially when due to infection, and treatment 
depends on the underlying etiology.
In infectious cases, prompt administration of broad-spectrum antibi-
otics, drainage of any abscess cavities, and identification of the offend-
ing organism are essential. Anticoagulant therapy may benefit cases of 
primary thrombosis. Repair or occlusion of the carotid artery may be 
required for treatment of fistulas or aneurysms. The Tolosa-Hunt syn-
drome generally responds to glucocorticoids. A dramatic improvement 
in pain is usually evident within a few days; oral prednisone (60 mg 
daily) is usually continued for 2 weeks and then gradually tapered over 
a month, or longer if pain recurs. Occasionally an immunosuppressive 
medication, such as azathioprine or methotrexate, needs to be added to 
maintain an initial response to glucocorticoids.
An idiopathic form of multiple cranial nerve involvement on one 
or both sides of the face is occasionally seen. The syndrome consists of 
a subacute onset of boring facial pain, followed by paralysis of motor 
cranial nerves. The clinical features overlap those of the Tolosa-Hunt 
syndrome and appear to be due to idiopathic inflammation of the 
dura mater, which may be visualized by MRI. The syndrome is usually 
responsive to glucocorticoids.
Ant. cerebral a.
Int. carotid a.
Ant. clinoid process
Subarachnoid
space
Oculomotor (III) n.
Trochlear (IV) n.
Ophthalmic (VI) n.
Abducens (VI) n.
Maxillary (V2) n.
Pia
Dura
Arachnoid
Sphenoid
  sinus
Optic
  chiasma
Hypophysis
FIGURE 433-4  Anatomy of the cavernous sinus in coronal section, illustrating 
the location of the cranial nerves in relation to the vascular sinus, internal carotid 
artery (which loops anteriorly to the section), and surrounding structures.
■
■FURTHER READING
Cruccu G et al: Trigeminal neuralgia: New classification and diagnostic 
grading for practice and research. Neurology 87:220, 2016.
Gagyor I et al: Antiviral treatment for Bell’s palsy (idiopathic facial 
paralysis). Cochrane Database Syst Rev (11):CD001869, 2015.
Kelly HR, Curtin HD: Imaging of skull base lesions. Handb Clin 
Neurol 135:637, 2016.
Madhok VB et al: Corticosteroids for Bell’s palsy (idiopathic facial 
paralysis). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD001942, 2016.
Diseases of the spinal cord are frequently devastating. They produce 
quadriplegia, paraplegia, and sensory deficits far beyond the dam-
age they would inflict elsewhere in the nervous system because the 
spinal cord contains, in a small cross-sectional area, almost the entire 
motor output and sensory input of the trunk and limbs. Many spinal 
cord diseases are reversible if recognized and treated at an early stage 
(Table 434-1); thus, they are among the most critical of neurologic 
emergencies. The efficient use of diagnostic procedures, guided by 
knowledge of the anatomy and the clinical features of spinal cord dis-
eases, is required to maximize the likelihood of a successful outcome.
434 Diseases of the Spinal Cord
Stephen L. Hauser 
TABLE 434-1  Treatable Spinal Cord Disorders
Compressive
  Epidural, intradural, or intramedullary neoplasm
  Epidural abscess
  Epidural hemorrhage
  Cervical spondylosis
  Herniated disk
  Posttraumatic compression by fractured or displaced vertebra or 
hemorrhage
Vascular
  Arteriovenous malformation and dural fistula
  Antiphospholipid syndrome and other hypercoagulable states
Inflammatory
  Multiple sclerosis
  Neuromyelitis optica
  Transverse myelitis
  Sarcoidosis
  Sjögren-related myelopathy
  Systemic lupus erythematosus-related myelopathy
  Vasculitis
Infectious
  Viral: VZV, HSV-1 and 2, CMV, HIV, HTLV-1, others
  Bacterial and mycobacterial: Borrelia, Listeria, syphilis, others
  Mycoplasma pneumoniae
  Parasitic: schistosomiasis, toxoplasmosis, cystercercosis
Developmental
  Syringomyelia
  Meningomyelocele
  Tethered cord syndrome
Metabolic
  Vitamin B12 deficiency (subacute combined degeneration)
  Copper deficiency
Abbreviations: CMV, cytomegalovirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; HTLV, human T 
cell lymphotropic virus; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.


--- PDF PAGE 3219 ---

CHAPTER 434 Diseases of the Spinal Cord
3173
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Spinal Cord Disease
SPINAL CORD ANATOMY RELEVANT TO CLINICAL SIGNS
The spinal cord is a thin, tubular extension of the central nervous 
system contained within the bony spinal canal. It originates at the 
medulla and continues caudally to the conus medullaris at the lum-
bar level; its fibrous extension, the filum terminale, terminates at the 
coccyx. The adult spinal cord is ~46 cm (18 in.) long, oval in shape, 
and enlarged in the cervical and lumbar regions, where neurons 
that innervate the upper and lower extremities, respectively, are 
located. The white matter tracts containing ascending sensory and 
descending motor pathways are located peripherally, whereas nerve 
cell bodies are clustered in an inner region of gray matter shaped 
like a four-leaf clover that surrounds the central canal (anatomically 
an extension of the fourth ventricle). The membranes that cover the 
spinal cord—the pia, arachnoid, and dura—are continuous with 
those of the brain, and the cerebrospinal fluid is contained within the 
subarachnoid space between the pia and arachnoid.
The spinal cord has 31 segments, each defined by an exiting 
ventral motor root and entering dorsal sensory root. During embry-
ologic development, growth of the cord lags behind that of the ver-
tebral column, and the mature spinal cord ends at approximately the 
first lumbar vertebral body. The lower spinal nerves take an increas-
ingly downward course to exit via intervertebral foramina. The first 
seven pairs of cervical spinal nerves exit above the same-numbered 
vertebral bodies, whereas all the subsequent nerves exit below the 
same-numbered vertebral bodies because of the presence of eight 
cervical spinal cord segments but only seven cervical vertebrae. The 
relationship between spinal cord segments and the corresponding 
vertebral bodies is shown in Table 434-2. These relationships assume 
particular importance for localization of lesions that cause spinal 
cord compression. Sensory loss below the circumferential level of 
the umbilicus, for example, corresponds to the T10 cord segment 
but indicates involvement of the cord adjacent to the seventh or 
eighth thoracic vertebral body (see Figs. 22-2 and 22-3). In addition, 
at every level, the main ascending and descending tracts are soma-
totopically organized with a laminated distribution that reflects the 
origin or destination of nerve fibers.
Determining the Level of the Lesion  The presence of a horizontally 
defined level below which sensory, motor, and autonomic function 
is impaired is a hallmark of a lesion of the spinal cord. This sen-
sory level is sought by asking the patient to identify a pinprick or 
cold stimulus applied to the proximal legs and lower trunk and 
successively moved up toward the neck on each side. Sensory loss 
below this level is the result of damage to the spinothalamic tract 
on the opposite side, one to two segments higher in the case of a 
unilateral spinal cord lesion, and at the level of a bilateral lesion. 
The discrepancy in the level of a unilateral lesion is the result of the 
course of the second-order sensory fibers, which originate in the 
dorsal horn, and ascend for one or two levels as they cross anterior 
to the central canal to join the opposite spinothalamic tract. Lesions 
that transect the descending corticospinal and other motor tracts 
cause paraplegia or quadriplegia with heightened deep tendon 
reflexes, Babinski signs, and eventual spasticity (the upper motor 
neuron syndrome). Transverse damage to the cord also produces 
TABLE 434-2  Spinal Cord Levels Relative to the Vertebral Bodies
SPINAL CORD LEVEL
CORRESPONDING VERTEBRAL BODY
Upper cervical
Same as cord level
Lower cervical
1 level higher
Upper thoracic
2 levels higher
Lower thoracic
2–3 levels higher
Lumbar
T10-T12
Sacral
T12-L1
autonomic disturbances consisting of absent sweating below the 
implicated cord level and bladder, bowel, and sexual dysfunction.
The uppermost level of a spinal cord lesion can also be localized 
by attention to the segmental signs corresponding to disturbed motor 
or sensory innervation by an individual cord segment. A band of 
altered sensation (hyperalgesia or hyperpathia) at the upper end of 
the sensory disturbance, fasciculations or atrophy in muscles inner-
vated by one or several segments, or a muted or absent deep tendon 
reflex may be noted at this level. These signs also can occur with 
focal root or peripheral nerve disorders; thus, they are most useful 
when they occur together with signs of long tract damage. With 
severe and acute transverse lesions, the limbs initially may be flaccid 
rather than spastic. This state of “spinal shock” lasts for several days, 
rarely for weeks, and may be mistaken for extensive damage to the 
anterior horn cells over many segments of the cord or for an acute 
polyneuropathy.
The main features of transverse damage at each level of the spinal 
cord are summarized below.
Cervical Cord  Upper cervical cord lesions produce quadriplegia 
and weakness of the diaphragm. The uppermost level of weakness 
and reflex loss with lesions at C5-C6 is in the biceps; at C7, in finger 
and wrist extensors and triceps; and at C8, finger, and wrist flexion. 
Horner’s syndrome (miosis, ptosis, and facial hypohidrosis) may 
accompany a cervical cord lesion at any level.
Thoracic Cord  Lesions here are localized by the sensory level on 
the trunk and, if present, by the site of midline back pain. Useful 
markers of the sensory level on the trunk are the nipples (T4) and 
umbilicus (T10). Leg weakness and disturbances of bladder and 
bowel function accompany the paralysis. Lesions at T9-T10 para-
lyze the lower—but not the upper—abdominal muscles, resulting 
in upward movement of the umbilicus when the abdominal wall 
contracts (Beevor’s sign).
Lumbar Cord  Lesions at the L2-L4 spinal cord levels paralyze 
flexion and adduction of the thigh, weaken leg extension at the 
knee, and abolish the patellar reflex. Lesions at L5-S1 paralyze only 
movements of the foot and ankle, flexion at the knee, and extension 
of the thigh, and abolish the ankle jerks (S1).
Sacral Cord/Conus Medullaris  The conus medullaris is the tapered 
caudal termination of the spinal cord, comprising the sacral and 
single coccygeal segments. The distinctive conus syndrome con-
sists of bilateral saddle anesthesia (S3-S5), prominent bladder and 
bowel dysfunction (urinary retention and incontinence with lax 
anal tone), and impotence. The bulbocavernosus (S2-S4) and anal 
(S4-S5) reflexes are absent (Chap. 415). Muscle strength is largely 
preserved. By contrast, lesions of the cauda equina, the nerve roots 
derived from the lower cord, are characterized by low back and 
radicular pain, asymmetric leg weakness and sensory loss, variable 
areflexia in the lower extremities, and relative sparing of bowel and 
bladder function. Mass lesions in the lower spinal canal often pro-
duce a mixed clinical picture with elements of both cauda equina 
and conus medullaris syndromes. Cauda equina syndromes are 
also discussed in Chap. 14.
Special Patterns of Spinal Cord Disease  The location of the major 
ascending and descending pathways of the spinal cord are shown 
in Fig. 434-1. Most fiber tracts—including the posterior columns 
and the spinocerebellar and pyramidal tracts—are situated on the 
side of the body they innervate. However, afferent fibers mediating 
pain and temperature sensation ascend in the spinothalamic tract 
contralateral to the side they supply. The anatomic configurations 
of these tracts produce characteristic syndromes that provide clues 
to the underlying disease process.
Brown-Sequard Hemicord Syndrome  This consists of ipsilateral 
weakness (corticospinal tract) and loss of joint position and vibra-
tory sense (posterior column), with contralateral loss of pain and 
temperature sense (spinothalamic tract) one or two levels below the 


--- PDF PAGE 3220 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3174
Anterior horn
(motor neurons)
Lateral
corticospinal
(pyramidal) tract
Dorsal root
Dorsal 
spinocerebellar
tract
Ventral
spinocerebellar
tract
Lateral
spinothalamic
tract
C
T
L S
Ventral
spinothalamic
tract
Pressure, touch
(minor role)
Ventral
(uncrossed)
corticospinal
tract
Tectospinal
tract
S L T C
C
T
L
S
Fasciculus
cuneatus
Rubrospinal
tract
Lateral
reticulospinal
tract
Vestibulospinal
tract
Ventral 
root
Axial and 
proximal
limb 
movements
(Joint Position, Vibration, Pressure)
Posterior Columns
Distal limb
movements
(minor role)
Pain, 
temperature
Ventral
reticulospinal
tract
Fasciculus
gracilis
S
L T C
Distal limb
movements
L/
S
L/
S
P
E
D
F
FIGURE 434-1  Transverse section through the spinal cord, composite representation, illustrating the principal ascending (left) and descending (right) pathways. The 
lateral and ventral spinothalamic tracts ascend contralateral to the side of the body that is innervated. C, cervical; D, distal; E, extensors; F, flexors; L, lumbar; P, 
proximal; S, sacral; T, thoracic.
lesion. Segmental signs, such as radicular pain, muscle atrophy, or 
loss of a deep tendon reflex, are unilateral. Partial forms are more 
common than the fully developed syndrome.
Central Cord Syndrome  This syndrome results from selective dam-
age to the gray matter nerve cells and crossing spinothalamic tracts 
surrounding the central canal. In the cervical cord, the central cord 
syndrome produces arm weakness out of proportion to leg weak-
ness and a “dissociated” sensory loss, meaning loss of pain and 
temperature sensations over the shoulders, lower neck, and upper 
trunk (cape distribution), in contrast to preservation of light touch, 
joint position, and vibration sense in these regions. Spinal trauma, 
syringomyelia, and intrinsic cord tumors are the main causes.
Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome  Infarction of the cord is generally 
the result of occlusion or diminished flow in this artery. The result 
is bilateral tissue destruction at several contiguous levels that spares 
the posterior columns. All spinal cord functions—motor, sensory, 
and autonomic—are lost below the level of the lesion, with the strik-
ing exception of retained vibration and position sensation.
Foramen Magnum Syndrome  Lesions in this area interrupt decus-
sating pyramidal tract fibers destined for the legs, which cross 
caudal to those of the arms, resulting in weakness of the legs (crural 
paresis). Compressive lesions near the foramen magnum may pro-
duce weakness of the ipsilateral shoulder and arm followed by 
weakness of the ipsilateral leg, then the contralateral leg, and finally 
the contralateral arm, an “around the clock” pattern that may begin 
in any of the four limbs. There is typically suboccipital pain spread-
ing to the neck and shoulders.
Intramedullary and Extramedullary Syndromes  It is useful to dif-
ferentiate intramedullary processes, arising within the substance 
of the cord, from extramedullary ones that lie outside the cord and 
compress the spinal cord or its vascular supply. The differentiat-
ing features are only relative and serve as clinical guides. With 
extramedullary lesions, radicular pain is often prominent, and 
there is early sacral sensory loss and spastic weakness in the legs 
with incontinence due to the superficial location of the correspond-
ing sensory and motor fibers in the spinothalamic and corticospinal 
tracts (Fig. 434-1). Intramedullary lesions tend to produce poorly 
localized burning pain rather than radicular pain and to spare sen-
sation in the perineal and sacral areas (“sacral sparing”), reflecting 
the laminated configuration of the spinothalamic tract with sacral 
fibers outermost; corticospinal tract signs appear later. Regarding 
extramedullary lesions, a further distinction is made between 
extradural and intradural masses, as the former are generally 
malignant and the latter benign (neurofibroma being a common 
cause). Consequently, a long duration of symptoms favors an 
intradural origin.
ACUTE AND SUBACUTE SPINAL  
CORD DISEASES
Symptoms of the cord diseases that evolve over days or weeks are focal 
neck or back pain, followed by various combinations of paresthesias, 
sensory loss, motor weakness, and sphincter disturbance. There may 
be mild sensory symptoms only or a devastating functional transec-
tion of the cord. When paresthesias begin in the feet and then ascend 
a polyneuropathy is often considered, and in such cases the presence 
of bladder disturbances and a sharply demarcated spinal cord level 
provide important clues to the spinal cord origin of the disease.
In severe and abrupt cases, areflexia reflecting spinal shock may be 
present, but hyperreflexia supervenes over days or weeks; persistent 
areflexic paralysis with a sensory level usually indicates necrosis over 
multiple segments of the spinal cord.


--- PDF PAGE 3221 ---

CHAPTER 434 Diseases of the Spinal Cord
3175
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Compressive and Noncompressive Myelopathy
DISTINGUISHING COMPRESSIVE FROM NONCOMPRESSIVE 
MYELOPATHY
The first priority is to exclude treatable compression of the cord 
by a mass lesion. The common causes are tumor, epidural abscess 
or hematoma, herniated disk, and spondylitic vertebral pathology. 
Epidural compression due to malignancy or abscess often causes 
warning signs of neck or back pain, bladder disturbances, and sen-
sory symptoms that precede the development of paralysis. Spinal 
subluxation, hemorrhage, and noncompressive etiologies such as 
infarction are more likely to produce myelopathy without anteced-
ent symptoms. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium, 
centered on the clinically suspected level, is the initial diagnostic 
procedure if it is available; it is often appropriate to image the entire 
spine (cervical through sacral regions) to search for additional clin-
ically silent lesions. Once compressive lesions have been excluded, 
noncompressive causes of acute myelopathy that are intrinsic to the 
cord are considered, primarily vascular, inflammatory, and infec-
tious etiologies.
■
■COMPRESSIVE MYELOPATHIES
Neoplastic Spinal Cord Compression  In adults, most neo-
plasms are epidural in origin, resulting from metastases to the adjacent 
vertebral column. The propensity of solid tumors to metastasize to the 
vertebral column probably reflects the high proportion of bone marrow 
located in the axial skeleton. Almost any malignant tumor can metas-
tasize to the spinal column, with breast, lung, prostate, kidney, lym-
phoma, and myeloma being particularly frequent. The thoracic spinal 
column is most commonly involved; exceptions are metastases from 
prostate and ovarian cancer, which occur disproportionately in the 
sacral and lumbar vertebrae, probably from spread through Batson’s 
plexus, a network of veins along the anterior epidural space. Retro-
peritoneal neoplasms (especially lymphomas or sarcomas) enter the 
spinal canal laterally through the intervertebral foramina and produce 
radicular pain with signs of weakness that corresponds to the level of 
involved nerve roots.
Pain is usually the initial symptom of spinal metastasis; it may be 
aching and localized or sharp and radiating in quality and typically 
worsens with movement, coughing, or sneezing and characteristically 
awakens patients at night. A recent onset of persistent back pain, 
particularly if in the thoracic spine (which is uncommonly involved 
by spondylosis), should prompt consideration of vertebral metas-
tasis. Rarely, pain is mild or absent. Plain radiographs of the spine 
and radionuclide bone scans have a limited role in diagnosis because 
they do not identify 15–20% of metastatic vertebral lesions and fail to 
detect paravertebral masses that reach the epidural space through the 
intervertebral foramina. MRI provides excellent anatomic resolution 
of the extent of spinal tumors (Fig. 434-2) and is able to distinguish 
between malignant lesions and other masses—epidural abscess, tuber-
culoma, lipoma, or epidural hemorrhage, among others—that present 
in a similar fashion. Vertebral metastases are usually hypointense rel-
ative to a normal bone marrow signal on T1-weighted MRI; after the 
administration of gadolinium, contrast enhancement may deceptively 
“normalize” the appearance of the tumor by increasing its intensity to 
that of normal bone marrow. Infections of the spinal column (osteomy-
elitis and related disorders) are distinctive in that, unlike tumor, they 
often cross the disk space to involve the adjacent vertebral body.
If spinal cord compression is suspected, imaging should be obtained 
promptly. If there are radicular symptoms but no evidence of myelop-
athy, it may be safe to defer imaging for 24–48 h. Up to 40% of patients 
who present with cord compression at one level are found to have 
asymptomatic epidural metastases elsewhere; thus, imaging of the 
entire length of the spine is important to define the extent of disease.
TREATMENT
Neoplastic Spinal Cord Compression
Management of cord compression includes glucocorticoids to 
reduce cord edema, local radiotherapy (initiated as early as possible) 
to the symptomatic lesion, and specific therapy for the underlying 
tumor type. Glucocorticoids (typically dexamethasone, 10 mg intra-
venously) can be administered before an imaging study if there is 
clinical suspicion of cord compression and continued at a lower dose 
(4 mg every 6 h orally) until definitive treatment with radiotherapy 
(generally 30–40 Gy administered in 8–10 fractions) and/or surgi-
cal decompression is completed. In one trial, initial management 
with surgery followed by radiotherapy was more effective than 
radiotherapy alone for patients with a single area of spinal cord 
compression by extradural tumor; however, patients with recur-
rent cord compression, brain metastases, radiosensitive tumors, or 
severe motor symptoms of >48 h in duration were excluded from 
this study. Radiotherapy alone may be effective even for some 
typically radioresistant metastases. A good response to therapy can 
be expected in individuals who are ambulatory at presentation. 
Treatment usually prevents new weakness, and some recovery of 
motor function occurs in up to one-third of patients. Motor deficits 
(paraplegia or quadriplegia), once established for >12 h, do not 
usually improve, and beyond 48 h the prognosis for substantial 
motor recovery is poor. Although most patients do not experience 
recurrences in the months following radiotherapy, with survival 
beyond 2 years recurrence becomes increasingly likely and can be 
managed with additional radiotherapy. Newer techniques such as 
stereotactic radiosurgery can deliver high doses of focused radiation 
with similar rates of response compared to traditional radiotherapy, 
and these are increasingly being used, particularly for patients with 
traditionally radioresistant tumors or those requiring re-irradiation. 
Biopsy of the epidural mass is unnecessary in patients with known 
primary cancer, but it is indicated if a history of underlying cancer is 
lacking. Surgery, either decompression by laminectomy or vertebral 
body resection, is also indicated when signs of cord compression 
worsen despite radiotherapy, when the maximum-tolerated dose 
of radiotherapy has been delivered previously to the site, or when 
a vertebral compression fracture or spinal instability contributes to 
cord compression.
A
B
FIGURE 434-2  Epidural spinal cord compression due to breast carcinoma. 
Sagittal T1-weighted (A) and T2-weighted (B) magnetic resonance imaging scans 
through the cervicothoracic junction reveal an infiltrated and collapsed second 
thoracic vertebral body with posterior displacement and compression of the 
upper thoracic spinal cord. The low-intensity bone marrow signal in A signifies 
replacement by tumor.


--- PDF PAGE 3222 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3176
In contrast to tumors of the epidural space, most intradural mass 
lesions are slow-growing and benign. Meningiomas and neurofi-
bromas account for most of these, with occasional cases caused by 
chordoma, lipoma, dermoid, or sarcoma. Meningiomas (Fig. 434-3) 
are often located posterior to the thoracic cord or near the foramen 
magnum, although they can arise from the meninges anywhere along 
the spinal canal. Neurofibromas are benign tumors of the nerve sheath 
that typically arise from the posterior root; when multiple, neurofibro-
matosis is the likely etiology. Symptoms usually begin with radicular 
sensory symptoms followed by an asymmetric, progressive spinal cord 
syndrome. Therapy is surgical resection.
Primary intramedullary tumors of the spinal cord are uncommon. 
They present as central cord or hemicord syndromes, often in the 
cervical region. There may be poorly localized burning pain in the 
extremities and sparing of sacral sensation. In adults, these lesions 
are ependymomas, hemangioblastomas, or low-grade astrocytomas 
(Fig. 434-4). Complete resection of an intramedullary ependymoma 
is often possible with microsurgical techniques. Debulking of an 
intramedullary astrocytoma can also be helpful, as these are often 
slowly growing lesions; the value of adjunctive radiotherapy and 
chemotherapy is uncertain. Secondary (metastatic) intramedullary 
tumors also occur, especially in patients with advanced metastatic 
disease (Chap. 86), although these are not nearly as frequent as brain 
metastases.
Spinal Epidural Abscess  Spinal epidural abscess presents with 
midline back or neck pain, fever, and progressive limb weakness. 
Prompt recognition of this distinctive process may prevent permanent 
sequelae. Aching pain is almost always present, either over the spine 
or in a radicular pattern. The duration of pain prior to presentation is 
generally ≤2 weeks but may on occasion be several months or longer. 
Fever is typically but not invariably present, accompanied by elevated 
white blood cell count, sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein. As 
the abscess expands, further spinal cord damage results from venous 
congestion and thrombosis. Once weakness and other signs of mye-
lopathy appear, progression may be rapid and irreversible. A more 
chronic sterile granulomatous form of abscess is also known, usually 
after treatment of an acute epidural infection.
Risk factors include an impaired immune status (HIV, diabetes mel-
litus, renal failure, alcoholism, malignancy), intravenous drug abuse, 
and infections of the skin or other tissues. Two-thirds of epidural 
infections result from hematogenous spread of bacteria from the skin 
(furunculosis), soft tissue (pharyngeal or dental abscesses; sinusitis), or 
deep viscera (bacterial endocarditis). The remainder arises from direct 
extension of a local infection to the subdural space; examples of local 
predisposing conditions are vertebral osteomyelitis, decubitus ulcers, 
lumbar puncture, epidural anesthesia, or spinal surgery. Most cases 
are due to Staphylococcus aureus; gram-negative bacilli, Streptococcus, 
anaerobes, and fungi can also cause epidural abscesses. Methicillin 
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is an important consideration, 
and therapy should be tailored to this possibility. Tuberculosis from an 
adjacent vertebral source (Pott’s disease) remains an important cause 
in the developing world.
MRI (Fig. 434-5) localizes the abscess and excludes other causes of 
myelopathy. Blood cultures are positive in more than half of cases, but 
direct aspiration of the abscess at surgery is often required for a micro-
biologic diagnosis. Lumbar puncture is only required if encephalopa-
thy or other clinical signs raise the question of associated meningitis, a 
feature that is found in <25% of cases. The level of the puncture should 
be planned to minimize the risk of meningitis due to passage of the 
needle through infected tissue. A high cervical tap is sometimes the 
safest approach. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) abnormalities in epidural 
and subdural abscess consist of pleocytosis with a preponderance of 
polymorphonuclear cells, an elevated protein level, and a reduced 
glucose level, but the responsible organism is not cultured unless there 
is associated meningitis.
TREATMENT
Spinal Epidural Abscess
Treatment is by decompressive laminectomy with debridement 
combined with long-term antibiotic treatment. Surgical evacuation 
prevents development of paralysis and may improve or reverse 
paralysis in evolution, but it is unlikely to improve deficits of more 
than several days in duration. Broad-spectrum antibiotics (typically 
vancomycin 15–20 mg/kg q12h (staphylococcus including MRSA, 
streptococcus), ceftriaxone 2 gm q24h (gram-negative bacilli), and 
when indicated metronidazole 30 mg/kg/d divided into q6h inter-
vals (anaerobes) should be started empirically before surgery and 
then modified on the basis of culture results; medication is generally 
FIGURE 434-3  Magnetic resonance imaging of a thoracic meningioma. Coronal 
T1-weighted postcontrast image through the thoracic spinal cord demonstrates 
intense and uniform enhancement of a well-circumscribed extramedullary mass 
(arrows) that displaces the spinal cord to the left.
FIGURE 434-4  Magnetic resonance imaging of an intramedullary astrocytoma. 
Sagittal T1-weighted postcontrast image through the cervical spine demonstrates 
expansion of the upper cervical spine by a mass lesion emanating from within the 
spinal cord at the cervicomedullary junction. Irregular peripheral enhancement 
occurs within the mass (arrows).


--- PDF PAGE 3223 ---

CHAPTER 434 Diseases of the Spinal Cord
3177
A
B
FIGURE 434-5  Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of a spinal epidural abscess 
due to tuberculosis. A. Sagittal T2-weighted free spin-echo MR sequence. A 
hypointense mass replaces the posterior elements of C3 and extends epidurally 
to compress the spinal cord (arrows). B. Sagittal T1-weighted image after contrast 
administration reveals a diffuse enhancement of the epidural process (arrows) 
with extension into the epidural space.
continued for 6–8 weeks. If surgery is contraindicated or if there 
is a fixed paraplegia or quadriplegia that is unlikely to improve 
following surgery, long-term administration of systemic and oral 
antibiotics can be used; in such cases, the choice of antibiotics 
may be guided by results of blood cultures. Surgical management 
remains the treatment of choice unless the abscess is limited in size 
and causes few or no neurologic signs.
With prompt diagnosis and treatment of spinal epidural abscess, 
up to two-thirds of patients experience significant recovery.
Spinal Epidural Hematoma  Hemorrhage into the epidural (or 
subdural) space causes acute focal or radicular pain followed by vari-
able signs of a spinal cord or conus medullaris disorder. Therapeutic 
anticoagulation, trauma, tumor, or blood dyscrasias are predisposing 
conditions. Rare cases complicate lumbar puncture or epidural anes-
thesia. MRI and computed tomography (CT) confirm the clinical sus-
picion and can delineate the extent of the bleeding. Treatment consists 
of prompt reversal of any underlying clotting disorder and surgical 
decompression. Surgery may be followed by substantial recovery, espe-
cially in patients with some preservation of motor function preopera-
tively. Because of the risk of hemorrhage, lumbar puncture should be 
avoided whenever possible in patients with severe thrombocytopenia 
or other coagulopathies.
Hematomyelia  Hemorrhage into the substance of the spinal cord 
is a rare result of trauma, intraparenchymal vascular malformation 
(see below), vasculitis due to polyarteritis nodosa or systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE), bleeding disorders, or a spinal cord neoplasm. 
Hematomyelia presents as an acute painful transverse myelopathy. 
With large lesions, extension into the subarachnoid space results in 
subarachnoid hemorrhage (Chap. 302). Diagnosis is by MRI or CT. 
Therapy is supportive, and surgical intervention is generally not 
useful. An exception is hematomyelia due to an underlying vascular 
malformation, for which spinal angiography and endovascular occlu-
sion may be indicated, or surgery to evacuate the clot and remove the 
underlying vascular lesion.
■
■NONCOMPRESSIVE MYELOPATHIES
The most frequent causes of noncompressive acute transverse mye-
lopathy are spinal cord infarction; systemic inflammatory disorders, 
including SLE and sarcoidosis; demyelinating diseases, including 
multiple sclerosis (MS); neuromyelitis optica (NMO); postinfectious 
or idiopathic transverse myelitis, which is presumed to be an immune 
condition related to acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (Chap. 436); 
and infectious (primarily viral) causes. After spinal cord compression 
is excluded, the evaluation generally requires a lumbar puncture and a 
search for underlying systemic disease (Table 434-3).
Spinal Cord Infarction  The cord is supplied by three arteries 
that course vertically over its surface: a single anterior spinal artery and 
paired posterior spinal arteries. The anterior spinal artery originates in 
paired branches of the vertebral arteries at the cranciocervical junction 
and is fed by additional radicular vessels that arise at C6, at an upper 
thoracic level, and, most consistently, at T11-L2 (artery of Adamkiewicz). 
At each spinal cord segment, paired penetrating vessels branch from 
the anterior spinal artery to supply the anterior two-thirds of the cord; 
the posterior spinal arteries, which often become less distinct below the 
midthoracic level, supply the posterior columns.
Spinal cord ischemia can occur at any level; however, the presence 
of the artery of Adamkiewicz below, and the anterior spinal artery 
circulation above, creates a region of marginal blood flow in the upper 
thoracic segments. With hypotension or cross-clamping of the aorta, 
cord infarction typically occurs at the level of T3-T4, and also at bound-
ary zones between the anterior and posterior spinal artery territories. 
The latter may result in a rapidly progressive syndrome over hours of 
weakness and spasticity with little sensory change.
Acute infarction in the territory of the anterior spinal artery produces 
paraplegia or quadriplegia, dissociated sensory loss affecting pain 
and temperature sense but sparing vibration and position sense, and 
loss of sphincter control (“anterior cord syndrome”). Onset may be 
sudden but more typically is progressive over minutes or a few hours, 
unlike stroke in the cerebral hemispheres. Sharp midline or radiating 
back pain localized to the area of ischemia is frequent. Areflexia due 
to spinal shock is often present initially; with time, hyperreflexia and 
spasticity appear. Less common is infarction in the territory of the pos-
terior spinal arteries, resulting in loss of posterior column function either 
on one side or bilaterally.
Causes of spinal cord infarction include aortic atherosclerosis, dis-
secting aortic aneurysm, vertebral artery occlusion or dissection in the 
neck, aortic surgery, or profound hypotension from any cause. A surf-
er’s myelopathy usually in the thoracic region, has been associated with 
prolonged back extension due to lifting the upper body off the board 
while waiting for waves; it, typically manifests as back pain followed 
TABLE 434-3  Evaluation of Acute Transverse Myelopathy
1.  MRI of spinal cord with and without contrast (exclude compressive causes).
2.  CSF studies: Cell count, protein, glucose, IgG index/synthesis rate, 
oligoclonal bands, VDRL; Gram’s stain, acid-fast bacilli, and India ink 
stains; PCR for VZV, HSV-2, HSV-1, EBV, CMV, HHV-6, enteroviruses, HIV; 
antibody for HTLV-1, Borrelia burgdorferi, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and 
Chlamydia pneumoniae; viral, bacterial, mycobacterial, and fungal cultures.
3.  Blood studies for infection: HIV; RPR; IgG and IgM enterovirus antibody; 
IgM mumps, measles, rubella, group B arbovirus, Brucella melitensis, 
Chlamydia psittaci, Bartonella henselae, schistosomal antibody; cultures 
for B. melitensis. Also consider nasal/pharyngeal/anal cultures for 
enteroviruses; stool O&P for Schistosoma ova.
4.  Systemic immune-mediated disorders: ESR; ANA; ENA; dsDNA; rheumatoid 
factor; anti-SSA; anti-SSB, complement levels; antiphospholipid and 
anticardiolipin antibodies; p-ANCA; antimicrosomal and antithyroglobulin 
antibodies; if Sjögren’s syndrome suspected, Schirmer test, salivary gland 
scintigraphy, and salivary/lacrimal gland biopsy.
5.  Neuromyelitis Optica: Serum anti-aquaporin-4 antibody, anti-MOG antibody.
6.  Demyelinating disease: Brain MRI scan; evoked potentials.
7.  Sarcoidosis: Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme; serum Ca; 24-h urine 
Ca; chest x-ray; chest CT; total-body gallium scan; lymph node biopsy.
8.  Vascular causes: MRI, CT myelogram; spinal angiogram.
Abbreviations: ANA, antinuclear antibodies; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CSF, 
cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ENA, 
epithelial neutrophil-activating peptide; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; HHV, 
human herpes virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; HTLV, human T cell leukemia/
lymphoma virus; MOG, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein; MRI, magnetic 
resonance imaging; O&P, ova and parasites; p-ANCA, perinuclear antineutrophilic 
cytoplasmic antibodies; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid plasma reagin 
(test); VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.


--- PDF PAGE 3224 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3178 by an anterior cord syndrome with progressive paralysis and loss of 
sphincter control, and is likely vascular in origin. Cardiogenic emboli, 
vasculitis (Chap. 356), and collagen vascular disease (particularly SLE 
[Chap. 349], Sjögren’s syndrome [Chap. 354], and the antiphospholipid 
antibody syndrome [Chap. 350]) are other etiologies. Occasional cases 
develop from embolism of nucleus pulposus material into spinal vessels, 
usually from local spine trauma. In a substantial number of cases, no 
cause can be found, and thromboembolism in arterial feeders is sus-
pected. MRI may fail to demonstrate infarctions of the cord, especially 
in the first day, but often the imaging becomes abnormal at the affected 
level.
In cord infarction due to presumed thromboembolism, acute antico-
agulation is not indicated, with the possible exception of the unusual 
transient ischemic attack or incomplete infarction with a stuttering 
or progressive course. The antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is 
treated with anticoagulation (Chap. 350). Increasing systemic blood 
pressure to a mean arterial pressure of >90 mmHg, or lumbar drainage 
of spinal fluid, was reportedly helpful in a few published cases of cord 
infarction, but neither of these approaches has been studied system-
atically. Prognosis following spinal cord infarction is influenced by 
the severity of the deficits at presentation; patients with severe motor 
weakness and those with persistent areflexia usually do poorly, but in 
one recent large series some improvement over time occurred in many 
patients, with more than half ultimately regaining some ambulation.
Inflammatory and Immune Myelopathies (Myelitis)  This 
broad category includes the demyelinating conditions MS, NMO, and 
postinfectious myelitis, as well as sarcoidosis and systemic autoim-
mune disease. In approximately one-quarter of cases of myelitis, no 
underlying cause can be identified. Some will later manifest additional 
symptoms of an immune-mediated disease. Recurrent episodes of myelitis 
are usually due to one of the immune-mediated diseases or to infection 
with herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 2 (below).
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS  MS may present with acute myelitis, particularly 
in individuals of Asian or African ancestry. In Caucasians, MS attacks 
rarely cause a transverse myelopathy (i.e., attacks of bilateral sensory 
disturbances, unilateral or bilateral weakness, and bladder or bowel 
symptoms), but it is among the most common causes of a partial cord 
syndrome. MRI findings in MS-associated myelitis typically consist of 
mild swelling of the cord and diffuse or multifocal “shoddy” areas of 
abnormal signal on T2-weighted sequences. Contrast enhancement, 
indicating disruption in the blood-brain barrier associated with inflam-
mation, is present in many acute cases. In one study 68% of patients 
presenting with partial myelitis developed MS after a mean follow-up 
of 4 years; risk factors for conversion to MS included age <40 years; 
inflammatory CSF, and >3 periventricular lesions on brain MRI.
Treatment of acute episodes of MS-associated myelitis consists of 
intravenous methylprednisolone (500 mg qd for 3 days) followed by 
oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/d for several weeks, then gradual taper). A 
course of plasma exchange may be indicated for severe cases if gluco-
corticoids are ineffective. MS is discussed in Chap. 436.
NEUROMYELITIS OPTICA  NMO is an immune-mediated demyeli-
nating disorder consisting of a severe myelopathy that is typically 
longitudinally extensive, meaning that the lesion spans three or 
more vertebral segments. NMO is associated with optic neuritis that 
is often bilateral and may precede or follow myelitis by weeks or 
months, and also by brainstem and, in some cases, hypothalamic or 
focal cerebral white matter involvement. Recurrent myelitis without 
optic nerve or other involvement can also occur in NMO. CSF studies 
reveal a variable mononuclear pleocytosis of up to several hundred 
cells per microliter; unlike MS, oligoclonal bands are generally 
absent. Diagnostic serum autoantibodies against the water channel 
protein aquaporin-4 are present in 60–70% of patients with NMO, and 
less commonly autoantibodies against the CNS myelin protein mye-
lin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) are found. NMO has also 
been associated with SLE (see below) as well as with other systemic 
autoimmune diseases; rare cases are paraneoplastic in origin. There 
have been no definitive trials of therapy for NMO. Recommended 
treatment of acute relapses is with glucocorticoids and, for refrac-
tory cases, plasma exchange. Prophylactic treatment with azathio-
prine, mycophenylate, or rituximab may protect against subsequent 
relapses; treatment for 5 years or longer is generally recommended. 
NMO is discussed in Chap. 437.
SYSTEMIC IMMUNE-MEDIATED DISORDERS  Myelitis occurs in a small 
number of patients with SLE, many cases of which are associated 
with antibodies to aquaporin-4 and satisfy diagnostic criteria for 
NMO-spectrum disorder (Chap. 437). These patients are at high risk of 
developing future episodes of myelitis and/or optic neuritis. In others 
the etiology of SLE-associated myelitis is uncertain; anti-phospholipid 
antibodies have been suggested to play a role, however the presence 
of these antibodies appears to be no more frequent in SLE patients 
with and without myelitis. The CSF in NMO-associated myelitis typ-
ically shows a pleocytosis with polymorphonuclear leukocytes and 
no oligoclonal bands; in cases not due to NMO a mild lymphocytic 
pleocytosis and oligoclonal bands are variable findings. Although there 
are no systematic trials of therapy for SLE myelitis, based on limited 
data, high-dose glucocorticoids followed by cyclophosphamide have 
been recommended. Acute severe episodes of transverse myelitis that 
do not initially respond to glucocorticoids are often treated with a 
course of plasma exchange. Sjögren’s syndrome (Chap. 354) can also 
be associated with NMO-spectrum disorder and also with cases of 
chronic progressive myelopathy. Other immune-mediated myelitides 
include antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (Chap. 350), mixed con-
nective tissue disease (Chap. 353), Behçet’s syndrome (Chap. 357), and 
vasculitis related to polyarteritis nodosa, perinuclear antineutrophilic 
cytoplasmic (p-ANCA) antibodies, or primary central nervous system 
vasculitis (Chap. 356).
Another important consideration in this group is sarcoid myelopa-
thy that may present as a slowly progressive or relapsing disorder. MRI 
reveals an edematous swelling of the spinal cord that may mimic tumor; 
there is almost always gadolinium enhancement of active lesions and 
in some cases nodular enhancement of the adjacent surface of the cord; 
lesions may be single or multiple, and on axial images, enhancement 
of the central cord is often present. The typical CSF profile consists of 
a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis and mildly elevated protein level; in a 
minority of cases, reduced glucose and oligoclonal bands are found. 
The diagnosis is particularly difficult when systemic manifestations of 
sarcoid are minor or absent (nearly 50% of cases) or when other typical 
neurologic manifestations of the disease—such as cranial neuropathy, 
hypothalamic involvement, or meningeal enhancement visualized 
by MRI—are lacking. A slit-lamp examination of the eye to search 
for uveitis, chest x-ray and CT to assess pulmonary involvement and 
mediastinal lymphadenopathy, serum or CSF angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE; CSF values elevated in only a minority of cases), serum 
calcium, and a gallium scan may assist in the diagnosis. The usefulness 
of spinal fluid ACE is uncertain. Initial treatment is with oral glucocor-
ticoids; immunosuppressant drugs, including the tumor necrosis factor 
α inhibitor infliximab, have been used for resistant cases. Sarcoidosis 
is discussed in Chap. 360.
POSTINFECTIOUS MYELITIS  Many cases of myelitis, termed postinfec-
tious or postvaccinal, follow an infection or vaccination. Numerous 
organisms have been implicated, including Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 
cytomegalovirus (CMV), mycoplasma, influenza, measles, varicella, 
mumps, and yellow fever. As in the related disorder acute dissem-
inated encephalomyelitis (Chap. 436), postinfectious myelitis often 
begins as the patient appears to be recovering from an acute febrile 
infection, or in the subsequent days or weeks, but an infectious agent 
cannot be isolated from the nervous system or CSF. The presumption 
is that the myelitis represents an autoimmune disorder triggered by 
infection and is not due to direct infection of the spinal cord. No ran-
domized controlled trials of therapy exist; treatment is usually with 
glucocorticoids or, in fulminant cases, plasma exchange.
ACUTE INFECTIOUS MYELITIS  Many viruses have been associated with 
an acute myelitis that is infectious in nature rather than postinfec-
tious. Nonetheless, the two processes are often difficult to distinguish. 


--- PDF PAGE 3225 ---

CHAPTER 434 Diseases of the Spinal Cord
3179
Herpes zoster is the best characterized viral myelitis, but HSV types 1 
and 2, EBV, CMV, and rabies virus are other well-described causes and 
Zika virus has also been recognized as a cause of infectious myelitis. 
HSV-2 (and less commonly HSV-1) produces a distinctive syndrome 
of recurrent sacral cauda equina neuritis in association with outbreaks 
of genital herpes (Elsberg’s syndrome). Poliomyelitis is the prototypic 
viral myelitis, but it is more or less restricted to the anterior gray matter 
of the cord containing the spinal motoneurons. A polio-like syndrome 
can also be caused by a large number of enteroviruses (including 
enterovirus 71 and coxsackie), and with Japanese encephalitis and 
other flaviviruses such as West Nile virus. Recently, cases of paralysis 
in children and adolescents were associated with enterovirus D-68 
infection but a causal role for this virus has not been established. 
Chronic viral myelitic infections, such as those due to HIV or human T 
cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1), are discussed below.
Bacterial and mycobacterial myelitis (most are essentially abscesses) 
are less common than viral causes and much less frequent than cerebral 
bacterial abscess. Almost any pathogenic species may be responsible, 
including Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Listeria monocytogenes, 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Treponema pallidum (syphilis). Mycop-
lasma pneumoniae may be a cause of myelitis, but its status is uncertain 
because many cases are more properly classified as postinfectious.
Schistosomiasis (Chap. 229) is an important cause of parasitic 
myelitis in endemic areas. The process is intensely inflammatory and 
granulomatous, caused by a local response to tissue-digesting enzymes 
from the ova of the parasite, typically Schistosoma hematobium or Schis-
tosoma mansoni. Toxoplasmosis (Chap. 223) can occasionally cause a 
focal myelopathy, and this diagnosis should especially be considered 
in patients with AIDS (Chap. 197). Cysticercosis (Chap. 230) is another 
consideration, although myelitis from this helminth is far less common 
than parenchymal brain or meningeal involvement.
In cases of suspected viral myelitis, it may be appropriate to begin 
specific therapy pending laboratory confirmation. Herpes zoster, HSV, 
and EBV myelitis are treated with intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg q8h) 
or oral valacyclovir (2 g tid) for 10–14 days; CMV is treated with gan-
ciclovir (5 mg/kg IV bid) plus foscarnet (60 mg/kg IV tid) or cidofovir 
(5 mg/kg per week for 2 weeks).
High-Voltage Electrical Injury  Spinal cord injuries are promi-
nent following electrocution from lightning strikes or other accidental 
electrical exposures. The syndrome consists of transient weakness 
acutely (often with an altered sensorium and focal cerebral distur-
bances), sometimes followed several days or even weeks later by a 
myelopathy that can be severe and permanent. This is a rare injury 
type, and limited data incriminate a vascular pathology involving 
the anterior spinal artery and its branches in some cases. Therapy is 
supportive.
CHRONIC MYELOPATHIES
■
■SPONDYLOTIC MYELOPATHY
Spondylotic myelopathy is one of the most common causes of chronic 
cord compression and of gait difficulty in the elderly. Neck and shoul-
der pain with stiffness are early symptoms; impingement of bone 
and soft tissue overgrowth on nerve roots results in radicular arm 
pain, most often in a C5 or C6 distribution. Compression of the cer-
vical cord, which occurs in fewer than one-third of cases, produces a 
slowly progressive spastic paraparesis, at times asymmetric and often 
accompanied by paresthesias in the feet and hands. Vibratory sense is 
diminished in the legs, there is a Romberg sign, and occasionally there 
is a sensory level for vibration or pinprick on the upper thorax. In 
some cases, coughing or straining produces leg weakness or radiating 
arm or shoulder pain. Dermatomal sensory loss in the arms, atrophy of 
intrinsic hand muscles, increased deep-tendon reflexes in the legs, and 
extensor plantar responses are common. Urinary urgency or inconti-
nence occurs in advanced cases, but there are many alternative causes 
of these problems in older individuals. A tendon reflex in the arms 
is often diminished at some level; most often at the biceps (C5-C6). 
In individual cases, radicular, myelopathic, or combined signs may 
predominate. The diagnosis should be considered in appropriate cases 
of progressive cervical myelopathy, paresthesias of the feet and hands, 
or wasting of the hands.
Diagnosis is usually made by MRI and may be suspected from CT 
images; plain x-rays are less helpful. Extrinsic cord compression and 
deformation are appreciated on axial MRI views, and T2-weighted 
sequences may reveal areas of high signal intensity within the cord 
adjacent to the site of compression. A cervical collar may be helpful in 
milder cases, but the likelihood of progression of medically-treated mye-
lopathy is high, estimated at 8% over 1 year. Definitive therapy consists 
of surgical decompression, either posterior laminectomy or an anterior 
approach with resection of the protruded disk and bony material. Cer-
vical spondylosis and related degenerative diseases of the spine are 
discussed in Chap. 14.
■
■VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS OF THE CORD  
AND DURA
Vascular malformations, comprising ~4% of all mass lesions of the cord 
and overlying dura, are treatable causes of progressive myelopathy. 
Most common are fistulas located within the dura or posteriorly along 
the surface of the cord. Most dural arteriovenous (AV) fistulas are 
located at or below the midthoracic level, usually consisting of a direct 
connection between a radicular feeding artery in the nerve root sleeve 
with dural veins. The typical presentation is a middle-aged man with a 
progressive myelopathy that worsens slowly or intermittently and may 
have periods of remission, sometimes mimicking MS. Acute deterio-
ration due to hemorrhage into the spinal cord (hematomyelia) or sub-
arachnoid space may also occur but is rare. In many cases, progression 
results from local ischemia and edema due to venous congestion. Most 
patients have incomplete sensory, motor, and bladder disturbances. 
The motor disorder may predominate and produce a mixture of upper 
and restricted lower motor neuron signs, simulating amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS). Pain over the dorsal spine, dysesthesias, or 
radicular pain may be present. Other symptoms suggestive of AV 
malformation (AVM) or dural fistula include intermittent claudication; 
symptoms that change with posture, exertion, Valsalva maneuver, or 
menses; and fever.
Less commonly, AVM disorders are intramedullary rather than 
dural. One unusual disorder is a progressive thoracic myelopathy with 
paraparesis developing over weeks or months, characterized patholog-
ically by abnormally thick, hyalinized vessels within the cord (subacute 
necrotic myelopathy, or Foix-Alajouanine syndrome).
Spinal bruits are infrequent but may be sought at rest and after 
exercise in suspected cases. A vascular nevus on the overlying skin 
may indicate an underlying vascular malformation as occurs with 
Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome. MR angiography and CT angi-
ography can detect the draining vessels of many AVMs (Fig. 434-6). 
Definitive diagnosis requires selective spinal angiography, which 
defines the feeding vessels and the extent of the malformation. Treat-
ment is tailored to the anatomy and location of the lesion, and generally 
consists of microsurgical resection, endovascular embolization of the 
major feeding vessels, or a combination of the two approaches.
■
■RETROVIRUS-ASSOCIATED MYELOPATHIES
The myelopathy associated with HTLV-1, formerly called tropical spas-
tic paraparesis, is a slowly progressive spastic syndrome with variable 
sensory and bladder disturbance. Approximately half of patients have 
mild back or leg pain. The neurologic signs may be asymmetric, often 
lacking a well-defined sensory level; the only sign in the arms may 
be hyperreflexia after several years of illness. The onset is usually 
insidious, and the tempo of progression of the illness occurs at a vari-
able rate; in one study, median time for progression to cane, walker, 
or wheelchair dependent state was 6, 13, and 21 years, respectively. 
Progression appears to be more rapid in older patients and those with 
higher viral loads. Diagnosis is made by demonstration of HTLV-1-
specific antibody in serum by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA), confirmed by radioimmunoprecipitation or Western blot anal-
ysis. Especially in endemic areas, a finding of HTLV-1 seropositivity 
in a patient with myelopathy does not necessarily prove that HTLV-1 


--- PDF PAGE 3226 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3180
is causative. The CSF/serum antibody index may provide support by 
establishing intrathecal synthesis of antibodies, including oligoclonal 
antibodies, favoring HTVL-1 myelopathy over asymptomatic carriage. 
Measuring proviral DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in serum 
and CSF cells can be useful as an ancillary part of diagnosis. The patho-
genesis of the myelopathy is uncertain. It could result from an immune 
response directed against HTLV-1 antigens in the nervous system, or 
alternatively to secondary autoimmunity triggered by the viral infec-
tion. There is no proven effective treatment. Based on limited evidence, 
the use of chronic low dose oral glucocorticoids can be tried; interferon 
is of uncertain value, and antiviral treatment is ineffective. Symptom-
atic therapy for spasticity and bladder symptoms may be helpful.
A progressive myelopathy can also result from HIV infection 
(Chap. 197). It is characterized by vacuolar degeneration of the pos-
terior and lateral tracts, resembling subacute combined degeneration 
(see below).
SYRINGOMYELIA
Syringomyelia is a developmental cavity of the cervical cord that may 
enlarge and produce progressive myelopathy or may remain asymp-
tomatic. Symptoms begin insidiously in adolescence or early adult-
hood, progress irregularly, and may undergo spontaneous arrest for 
several years. Many young patients acquire a cervical-thoracic scoliosis. 
More than half of all cases are associated with Chiari type 1 malforma-
tions in which the cerebellar tonsils protrude through the foramen mag-
num and into the cervical spinal canal. The pathophysiology of syrinx 
expansion is controversial, but some interference with the normal flow 
of CSF seems likely, perhaps by the Chiari malformation. Acquired cav-
itations of the cord in areas of necrosis are also termed syrinx cavities; 
these follow trauma, myelitis, necrotic spinal cord tumors, and chronic 
arachnoiditis due to tuberculosis and other etiologies.
The presentation is a central cord syndrome consisting of a regional 
dissociated sensory loss (loss of pain and temperature sensation with 
sparing of touch and vibration) and areflexic weakness in the upper 
limbs. The sensory deficit has a distribution that is “suspended” over 
the nape of the neck, shoulders, and upper arms (cape distribution) or 
in the hands. Most cases begin asymmetrically with unilateral sensory 
loss in the hands that leads to injuries and burns that are not appreci-
ated by the patient. Muscle wasting in the lower neck, shoulders, arms, 
and hands with asymmetric or absent reflexes in the arms reflects 
expansion of the cavity in the gray matter of the cord. As the cavity 
enlarges and compresses the long tracts, spasticity and weakness of the 
legs, bladder and bowel dysfunction, and a Horner’s syndrome appear. 
Some patients develop facial numbness and sensory loss from damage 
to the descending tract of the trigeminal nerve (C2 level or above). In 
cases with Chiari malformations, cough-induced headache and neck, 
arm, or facial pain may be reported. Extension of the syrinx into the 
medulla, syringobulbia, causes palatal or vocal cord paralysis, dys-
arthria, horizontal or vertical nystagmus, episodic dizziness or vertigo, 
and tongue weakness with atrophy.
MRI accurately identifies developmental and acquired syrinx cavi-
ties and their associated spinal cord enlargement (Fig. 434-7). Images of 
the brain and the entire spinal cord should be obtained to delineate the 
full longitudinal extent of the syrinx, assess posterior fossa structures 
for the Chiari malformation, and determine whether hydrocephalus is 
present.
TREATMENT
Syringomyelia
Treatment of syringomyelia is generally unsatisfactory. The Chiari 
tonsillar herniation may be decompressed, generally by suboccipital 
craniectomy, upper cervical laminectomy, and placement of a dural 
graft. Fourth ventricular outflow is reestablished by this procedure. 
If the syrinx cavity is large, some surgeons recommend direct 
decompression or drainage, but the added benefit of this procedure 
is uncertain, and complications are common. With Chiari malforma-
tions, shunting of hydrocephalus generally precedes any attempt to 
correct the syrinx. Surgery may stabilize the neurologic deficit, and 
some patients improve. Patients with few symptoms and signs from 
the syrinx do not require surgery and are followed by serial clinical 
and imaging examinations.
Syrinx cavities secondary to trauma or infection, if symptomatic, 
are treated with a decompression and drainage procedure in which 
a small shunt is inserted between the cavity and subarachnoid space; 
FIGURE 434-6  Arteriovenous malformation. Sagittal magnetic resonance scans 
of the thoracic spinal cord: T2 fast spin-echo technique (left) and T1 postcontrast 
image (right). On the T2-weighted image (left), abnormally high signal intensity is 
noted in the central aspect of the spinal cord (arrowheads). Numerous punctate 
flow voids indent the dorsal and ventral spinal cord (arrow). These represent the 
abnormally dilated venous plexus supplied by a dural arteriovenous fistula. After 
contrast administration (right), multiple, serpentine, enhancing veins (arrows) on 
the ventral and dorsal aspect of the thoracic spinal cord are visualized, diagnostic 
of arteriovenous malformation. This patient was a 54-year-old man with a 4-year 
history of progressive paraparesis.
FIGURE 434-7  Magnetic resonance imaging of syringomyelia associated with a 
Chiari malformation. Sagittal T1-weighted image through the cervical and upper 
thoracic spine demonstrates descent of the cerebellar tonsils below the level of 
the foramen magnum (black arrows). Within the substance of the cervical and 
thoracic spinal cord, a cerebrospinal fluid collection dilates the central canal 
(white arrows).


--- PDF PAGE 3227 ---

CHAPTER 434 Diseases of the Spinal Cord
3181
alternatively, the cavity can be fenestrated. Cases due to intramed-
ullary spinal cord tumor are generally managed by resection of the 
tumor.
■
■CHRONIC MYELOPATHY OF MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
A chronic progressive myelopathy is the most frequent cause of dis-
ability in both primary progressive and secondary progressive forms 
of MS. Involvement is typically bilateral but asymmetric and produces 
motor, sensory, and bladder/bowel disturbances. Fixed motor disabil-
ity appears to result from extensive loss of axons in the corticospinal 
tracts. Diagnosis is facilitated by identification of earlier attacks such as 
optic neuritis. MRI, CSF, and evoked response testing are confirmatory. 
Treatment with ocrelizumab, an anti-CD20 B-cell monoclonal antibody, 
is effective in patients with primary progressive MS, and disease mod-
ifying therapy is also indicated in patients with secondary progressive 
MS who have coexisting MS relapses. MS is discussed in Chap. 436.
■
■SUBACUTE COMBINED DEGENERATION  
(VITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY)
This treatable myelopathy presents with subacute paresthesias in 
the hands and feet, loss of vibration and position sensation, and a 
progressive spastic and ataxic weakness. Loss of reflexes due to an 
associated peripheral neuropathy in a patient who also has Babinski 
signs is an important diagnostic clue. Optic atrophy and irritability or 
other cognitive changes may be prominent in advanced cases and are 
occasionally the presenting symptoms. The myelopathy of subacute 
combined degeneration tends to be diffuse rather than focal; signs 
are generally symmetric and reflect predominant involvement of the 
posterior and lateral tracts, including Romberg’s sign. Causes include 
dietary deficiency, especially in vegans, and gastric malabsorption 
syndromes including pernicious anemia (Chap. 95). The diagnosis is 
confirmed by the finding of macrocytic red blood cells, a low serum B12 
concentration, and elevated serum levels of homocysteine and meth-
ylmalonic acid. Treatment is by replacement therapy, beginning with 
1000 μg of intramuscular vitamin B12 repeated at regular intervals or by 
subsequent oral treatment.
■
■HYPOCUPRIC MYELOPATHY
This myelopathy is similar to subacute combined degeneration 
(described above), except there is no neuropathy, and explains cases 
with normal serum levels of B12. Low levels of serum copper are found, 
and often there is also a low level of serum ceruloplasmin. Some cases 
follow gastrointestinal procedures, particularly bariatric surgery, that 
result in impaired copper absorption; others have been associated with 
excess zinc from health food supplements or in the past zinc-containing 
denture creams, all of which impair copper absorption via induction of 
metallothionein, a copper-binding protein. Many cases are idiopathic. 
Improvement or at least stabilization may be expected with reconstitu-
tion of copper stores by oral supplementation. There is microcytic or 
macrocytic anemia. The pathophysiology and pathology of the idio-
pathic form are not known.
■
■TABES DORSALIS
The classic syphilitic syndromes of tabes dorsalis and meningovascular 
inflammation of the spinal cord are now less frequent than in the past 
but must be considered in the differential diagnosis of spinal cord dis-
orders. The characteristic symptoms of tabes are fleeting and repetitive 
lancinating pains, primarily in the legs or less often in the back, thorax, 
abdomen, arms, and face. Ataxia of the legs and gait due to loss of 
position sense occurs in half of patients. Paresthesias, bladder distur-
bances, and acute abdominal pain with vomiting (visceral crisis) occur 
in 15–30% of patients. The cardinal signs of tabes are loss of reflexes 
in the legs; impaired position and vibratory sense; Romberg sign; and, 
in almost all cases, bilateral Argyll Robertson pupils, which fail to 
constrict to light but accommodate. Diabetic polyradiculopathy may 
simulate this condition. Treatment of tabes dorsalis and other forms 
of neurosyphilis consists of penicillin G administered intravenously, 
or intramuscularly in combination with oral probenecid (Chap. 177).
■
■HEREDITARY SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA
Many cases of slowly progressive myelopathy are genetic in origin 
(Chap. 429). More than 60 different causative loci have been identified, 
including autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked 
forms. Especially for the recessive and X-linked forms, a family history 
of myelopathy may be lacking. Most patients present with almost 
imperceptibly progressive spasticity and weakness in the legs, usually 
but not always symmetrical. Sensory symptoms and signs are absent 
or mild, but sphincter disturbances may be present. In some families, 
additional neurologic signs are prominent, including nystagmus, 
ataxia, or optic atrophy. The onset may be as early as the first year of 
life or as late as middle adulthood. Only symptomatic therapies are 
available.
■
■ADRENOMYELONEUROPATHY
This X-linked disorder is a variant of adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). 
Most affected males have a history of adrenal insufficiency and then 
develop a progressive spastic (or ataxic) paraparesis beginning in 
early or sometimes middle adulthood; some patients also have a mild 
peripheral neuropathy. Female heterozygotes may develop a slower, 
insidiously progressive spastic myelopathy beginning later in adult-
hood and without adrenal insufficiency. Diagnosis is usually made 
by demonstration of elevated levels of very-long-chain fatty acids 
in plasma and in cultured fibroblasts. The responsible gene encodes 
the adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP), a peroxisomal membrane 
transporter involved in carrying long-chain fatty acids to peroxisomes 
for degradation. Corticosteroid replacement is indicated if hypoadren-
alism is present. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been suc-
cessful in slowing progression of cognitive decline in ALD, but appears 
to be ineffective for the myelopathy of ALD. Nutritional supplements 
(Lorenzo’s oil) have also been attempted for this condition without 
evidence of efficacy.
■
■OTHER CHRONIC MYELOPATHIES
Primary lateral sclerosis (Chap. 429) is a mid to late life onset degen-
erative disorder characterized by progressive spasticity with weak-
ness, eventually accompanied by dysarthria and dysphonia; bladder 
symptoms occur in approximately half of patients. Sensory function 
is spared. The disorder resembles ALS and is considered a variant of 
the motor neuron degenerations, but without the characteristic lower 
motor neuron disturbance and with typically a slower progression. 
Some cases may represent late-onset cases of familial spastic paraple-
gia, particularly autosomal recessive or X-linked varieties in which a 
family history may be absent.
Tethered cord syndrome is a developmental disorder of the lower 
spinal cord and nerve roots that rarely presents in adulthood as low 
back pain accompanied by a progressive lower spinal cord and/or 
nerve root syndrome. Some patients have a small leg or foot deformity 
indicating a long-standing process, and in others, a dimple, patch of 
hair, or sinus tract on the skin overlying the lower back is the clue to 
a congenital lesion. Diagnosis is made by MRI, which demonstrates a 
low-lying conus medullaris and thickened filum terminale. The MRI 
may also reveal diastematomyelia (division of the lower spinal cord 
into two halves), lipomas, cysts, or other congenital abnormalities of 
the lower spine coexisting with the tethered cord. Treatment is with 
surgical release.
There are a number of rare toxic causes of spastic myelopathy, includ-
ing lathyrism due to ingestion of chickpeas containing the excitotoxin 
β-N-oxalylamino-l-alanine (BOAA), seen primarily in the developing 
world, and nitrous oxide inhalation producing a myelopathy identical 
to subacute combined degeneration. SLE, Sjögren’s syndrome, and 
sarcoidosis may each cause a myelopathy without overt evidence of 
systemic disease. Cancer-related causes of chronic myelopathy, besides 
the common neoplastic compressive myelopathy discussed earlier, 
include radiation injury (Chap. 86) and rare paraneoplastic myelopa-
thies. The last of these are most often associated with lung cancer and 
anti-Hu or anti-CV2/CRMP5 antibodies (Chap. 90) or with lymphoma 
that causes a syndrome of destruction of anterior horn cells; NMO with 
aquaporin-4 antibodies (Chap. 437) can also rarely be paraneoplastic in 


--- PDF PAGE 3228 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3182 origin. Metastases to the cord are probably more common than either 
of these in patients with cancer. Often, a cause of intrinsic myelopathy 
can be identified only through periodic reassessment.
REHABILITATION OF SPINAL  
CORD DISORDERS
The prospects for recovery from an acute destructive spinal cord lesion 
fade after ~6 months. There are currently no effective means to promote 
repair of injured spinal cord tissue; promising but entirely experimen-
tal approaches include the use of factors that influence reinnervation 
by axons of the corticospinal tract, nerve and neural sheath graft 
bridges, forms of electrical stimulation at the site of injury, and the local 
introduction of stem cells. The disability associated with irreversible 
spinal cord damage is determined primarily by the level of the lesion 
and by whether the disturbance in function is complete or incomplete 
(Table 434-4). Even a complete high cervical cord lesion may be com-
patible with a productive life. The primary goals are development of a 
rehabilitation plan framed by realistic expectations and attention to the 
neurologic, medical, and psychological complications that commonly 
arise.
Many of the usual symptoms associated with medical illnesses, 
especially somatic and visceral pain, may be lacking because of the 
destruction of afferent pain pathways. Unexplained fever, worsening 
of spasticity, or deterioration in neurologic function should prompt a 
search for infection, thrombophlebitis, or an intraabdominal pathology. 
The loss of normal thermoregulation and inability to maintain normal 
body temperature can produce recurrent fever (quadriplegic fever), 
although most episodes of fever are due to infection of the urinary 
tract, lung, skin, or bone.
Bladder dysfunction generally results from loss of supraspinal 
innervation of the detrusor muscle of the bladder wall and the sphinc-
ter musculature. Detrusor spasticity is treated with anticholinergic 
drugs (oxybutynin, 2.5–5 mg qid) or tricyclic antidepressants with 
anticholinergic properties (imipramine, 25–200 mg/d). Failure of the 
sphincter muscle to relax during bladder emptying (urinary dyssyner-
gia) may be managed with the α-adrenergic blocking agent terazosin 
hydrochloride (1–2 mg tid or qid), with intermittent catheterization, 
or, if that is not feasible, by use of a condom catheter in men or a per-
manent indwelling catheter. Surgical options include the creation of an 
artificial bladder by isolating a segment of intestine that can be cathe-
terized intermittently (enterocystoplasty) or can drain continuously to 
an external appliance (urinary conduit). Bladder areflexia due to acute 
spinal shock or conus lesions is best treated by catheterization. Bowel 
regimens and disimpaction are necessary in most patients to ensure at 
least biweekly evacuation and avoid colonic distention or obstruction.
Patients with acute cord injury are at risk for venous thrombo-
sis and pulmonary embolism. Use of calf-compression devices and 
anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin is recommended. 
In cases of persistent paralysis, anticoagulation should probably be 
continued for 3 months.
Prophylaxis against decubitus ulcers should involve frequent 
changes in position in a chair or bed, the use of special mattresses, 
and cushioning of areas where pressure sores often develop, such as 
the sacral prominence and heels. Early treatment of ulcers with care-
ful cleansing, surgical or enzyme debridement of necrotic tissue, and 
appropriate dressing and drainage may prevent infection of adjacent 
soft tissue or bone.
Spasticity is aided by stretching exercises to maintain mobility of 
joints. Drug treatment is effective but may result in reduced function, as 
some patients depend on spasticity as an aid to stand, transfer, or walk. 
Baclofen (up to 240 mg/d in divided doses) is effective; it acts by facil-
itating γ-aminobutyric acid–mediated inhibition of motor reflex arcs. 
Diazepam acts by a similar mechanism and is useful for leg spasms 
that interrupt sleep (2–4 mg at bedtime). Tizanidine (2–8 mg tid), an α2 
adrenergic agonist that increases presynaptic inhibition of motor neu-
rons, is another option. For nonambulatory patients, the direct muscle 
inhibitor dantrolene (25–100 mg qid) may be used, but it is potentially 
hepatotoxic. In refractory cases, intrathecal baclofen administered via 
an implanted pump, botulinum toxin injections, or dorsal rhizotomy 
may be required to control spasticity.
Despite the loss of sensory function, many patients with spinal cord 
injury experience chronic pain sufficient to diminish their quality of 
life. Randomized controlled studies indicate that gabapentin or prega-
balin is useful in this setting. Epidural electrical stimulation and intra-
thecal infusion of pain medications have been tried with some success. 
Management of chronic pain is discussed in Chap. 10.
A paroxysmal autonomic hyperreflexia may occur following lesions 
above the major splanchnic sympathetic outflow at T6. Headache, 
flushing, and diaphoresis above the level of the lesion, as well as hyper-
tension with bradycardia or tachycardia, are the major symptoms. The 
trigger is typically a noxious stimulus—for example, bladder or bowel 
distention, a urinary tract infection, or a decubitus ulcer—below the 
level of the cord lesion. Treatment consists of removal of offending 
stimuli; ganglionic blocking agents (mecamylamine, 2.5–5 mg) or other 
short-acting antihypertensive drugs are useful in some patients.
Attention to these details allows longevity and a productive life for 
patients with complete transverse myelopathies.
■
■FURTHER READING
Kato S et al: Comparison of anterior and posterior surgery for degener-
ative cervical myelopathy: An MRI-based propensity-score-matched 
analysis using data from the prospective multicenter AOSpine CSM 
North America and international studies. J Bone Joint Surg Am 
99:1013, 2017.
Kühl JS et al: Long-term outcomes of allogeneic haematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation for adult cerebral X-linked adrenoleukodystro-
phy. Brain 140:953, 2017.
Loblaw DA et al: A 2011 updated systematic review and clinical prac-
tice guideline for the management of malignant extradural spinal 
cord compression. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 84:312, 2012.
Ozpinar A et al: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, diagnostic evalu-
ation, and prognosis of spinal arteriovenous malformations. Handb 
Clin Neurol 143:145, 2017.
Patchell RA et al: Direct decompressive surgical resection in the 
treatment of spinal cord compression caused by metastatic cancer: A 
randomised trial. Lancet 366:643, 2005.
Robertson CE et al: Recovery after spinal cord infarcts: Long-term 
outcome in 115 patients. Neurology 78:114, 2012.
Ropper AE, Ropper AH: Acute spinal cord compression. N Engl J Med 
376:1358, 2017.
Ruet A et al: Predictive factors for multiple sclerosis in patients with 
clinically isolated spinal cord syndrome. Mult Scler 17:312, 2011.
Yáñez ML et al: Diagnosis and treatment of epidural metastases. 
Cancer 123:1106, 2017.
TABLE 434-4  Expected Neurologic Function Following Complete 
Cord Lesions
LEVEL
SELF-CARE
TRANSFERS
MAXIMUM 
MOBILITY
High quadriplegia 
(C1-C4)
Dependent 
on others; 
requires 
respiratory 
support
Dependent on 
others
Motorized 
wheelchair
Low quadriplegia 
(C5-C8)
Partially 
independent 
with adaptive 
equipment
May be 
dependent or 
independent
May use manual 
wheelchair, drive 
an automobile 
with adaptive 
equipment
Paraplegia (below 
T1)
Independent
Independent
Ambulates short 
distances with aids
Source: Adapted from JF Ditunno, CS Formal: Chronic spinal cord injury. N Engl J 
Med 330:550, 1994; with permission.


================================================================================
Ch435 Concussion and TBI
Pages 3229-3233
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3229 ---

CHAPTER 435 Concussion and Other Traumatic Brain Injuries
3183
Classification of TBI Severity: Numerous systems have been devel-
oped over the years to define and classify TBI severity along a contin-
uum from mild to moderate to severe. These systems are usually most 
applicable to closed head injuries. In nearly all classification systems, 
traumatic brain injury severity is graded based on acute injury charac-
teristics rather than postacute injury status, as other factors can inter-
vene to influence functional outcome. Historically, the presence and 
duration of unconsciousness and amnesia have been the main points of 
distinction along the gradient of TBI severity. Current TBI classification 
systems are symptom-based and do not incorporate patho-anatomical 
or molecular features.
The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is the most recognized and widely 
used method for grading TBI severity. The GCS provides a practical 
indicator of gross neurologic status by assessing motor function, verbal 
responses, and the patient’s ability to open his or her eyes voluntar-
ily or in response to external commands and stimuli. The grading is 
applied to the best response that can be elicited from the patient at the 
time of assessment, preferably before any paralyzing or sedating medi-
cation is administered or the patient is intubated, as these interventions 
confound interpretation of the score. The GCS assessment produces 
scores ranging from 3 to 15 (Table 435-1).
Upon the 40th anniversary of the GCS, the wording for responses 
was revised, and recommendations were made to improve its utility. 
Importantly, individual patients are best described by the three compo-
nents of the coma scale (eye, verbal, motor, e.g., E3V4M6); the derived 
total coma score (e.g., 13) is less informative and should only be used 
to characterize groups of patients.
Several injury classification systems have been developed to go 
beyond GCS score or acute injury characteristics and incorporate chief 
signs and symptoms in defining mTBI. The use of multiple severity 
indicators is intended to improve sensitivity in the detection of mTBI 
(GCS 13–15), while also taking into consideration traditional acute 
injury characteristics that have been presumed to predict outcome fol-
lowing mild and moderate brain injury. Loss of consciousness (LOC) 
and posttraumatic amnesia (PTA) remain the most common injury 
characteristics referenced in these classification systems. In the case 
of moderate (GCS 9–12) and severe (GCS 3–8) TBI, GCS score and the 
duration of LOC and PTA can be robust predictors of long-term out-
come and morbidity. In cases of mTBI, however, while PTA and LOC 
are important indicators of acute injury severity, they are less predictive 
of eventual recovery time and outcome.
■
■TBI TYPES AND PATHOLOGIES
Mild TBI (Concussion): It is estimated that between 70 and 90% of all 
treated traumatic brain injuries are mild in severity based on tra-
ditional case definitions and acute injury characteristics, with most 
reported estimates in the order of 85%. The published figures likely 
under-represent the true incidence of mTBI because of variable case 
definitions and heterogeneous methods. Moreover, because a subgroup 
■
■INTRODUCTION
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) represents a significant global public health 
problem facing the United States and other countries around the world. 
In the United States, estimates of the frequency of TBI range between 
2.5 and 4 million cases per year, depending on the study and methods 
used to define and include cases. Age-specific rates show a bimodal 
distribution, with highest risk in younger individuals and older adults. 
The most common mechanism of injury in the young is motor vehicle 
accidents and is more common in men, while in older adults falls are 
the major cause of injury and are more likely to occur in women.
TBI imposes substantial demands on health care systems. World-
wide, at least 10 million TBIs are serious enough to result in death 
or hospitalization. In the United States, the estimated annual cost is 
>$76 billion. Due to advances in medical care and other factors, more 
people are surviving traumatic brain injury than ever before. Brain 
injury accounts for more lost productivity at work among Americans 
than any other form of injury. An estimated 5.3 million Americans are 
living with significant disabilities resulting from TBI that complicate 
their return to a full and productive life. Increased media attention to 
military and sports-related TBI has highlighted the growing concern 
that injuries that were previously dismissed can have life-long conse-
quences for some individuals.
Head injuries are so common that almost all physicians will be 
called upon to provide some aspect of immediate care or to see patients 
who are suffering from various sequelae. Patients initially need educa-
tion regarding the natural history of TBI along with treatment of acute 
symptoms such as headache. Follow-up of TBI patients is important 
to make sure that the sequelae that some patients experience—such as 
postconcussive disorder (PCD), depression, or sleep disorders—can be 
identified and treated by a coordinated multidisciplinary team.
■
■DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
TBI is commonly defined as an alteration in brain function, or other 
evidence of brain pathology, caused by an external force, and characterized 
by the following: (1) any period of loss or decreased level of consciousness 
(LOC), (2) any loss of memory for events immediately before (retrograde) or 
after (posttraumatic) the injury, (3) any neurological deficits, and/or (4) any 
alteration in mental state at the time of injury.
Evidence of TBI can include visual, neuroradiologic, or laboratory 
confirmation of damage to the brain, but TBI is more often diagnosed 
on the basis of acute clinical criteria. In addition to standard computed 
tomography (CT) imaging, modern structural magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), and functional imaging (resting state functional MRI) 
techniques show increasing sensitivity, and it is likely that sensitive 
blood-based biomarkers will be developed in the near future.
Mechanisms of TBI: Common mechanisms of TBI include the head 
being struck by an object, the head striking an object, the brain 
undergoing an acceleration/deceleration movement, a foreign body 
penetrating the brain, or forces generated from events such as a blast 
or explosion. Motor vehicle crashes have historically been cited as the 
most common cause of TBI. All forms of transportation, however, are 
common causes of TBI, including motorcycle crashes, bicycle accidents, 
skateboard and pedestrian injuries. The other leading causes of TBI are 
falls, assaults, and sports, with varied frequency across the lifespan. 
Certainly, there has been an increased focus on the high frequency 
of mild TBI (mTBI), often referred to as concussion, encountered by 
athletes participating in contact and collision sports at all competitive 
levels, as well as the potential short-term effects and long-term risks 
associated with sport-related concussion.
435 Concussion and Other 
Traumatic Brain Injuries
Geoffrey T. Manley, Stephen L. Hauser,  
Michael McCrea 
TABLE 435-1  Glasgow Coma Scale
Eye Opening (E)
 
Verbal Response (V)
 
Spontaneous
4
Oriented
5
To speech
3
Confused
4
To pressure
2
Words
3
None
1
Sounds
2
 
 
None
1
Best Motor Response (M)
Obeying commands
6
 
 
Localizing
5
 
 
Normal flexion
4
 
 
Abnormal flexion
3
 
 
Extension
2
 
 
None
1
 
 
Note: Revised GCS (2014).
Source: From G Teasdale et al: The Glasgow Coma Scale at 40 years: Standing 
the test of time. Lancet Neurol 13:844, 2014.


--- PDF PAGE 3230 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3184 of individuals with milder brain injuries do not seek medical atten-
tion, epidemiological studies that depend on hospital-based data also 
underestimate the true incidence.
The term concussion, while popular, is vague and is not based on 
widely accepted objective criteria, resulting in multiple definitions 
from various groups. There has been debate as to whether concussion 
is part of the TBI spectrum or a separate entity. In 2017, the Concus-
sion in Sports Group issued a consensus statement that “concussion 
is a traumatic brain injury” (McCrory et al, 2017). By firmly placing 
concussion in the spectrum of TBI, the underlying pathophysiological 
processes common to all TBI presentations can now be considered 
together.
■
■SKULL FRACTURE, EXTRA-AXIAL HEMATOMA, 
CONTUSION, AND AXONAL INJURY
Skull Fracture  A blow to the skull that exceeds the elastic tol-
erance of the bone causes a fracture. Intracranial lesions accompany 
roughly two-thirds of skull fractures, and the presence of a fracture 
increases many-fold the chances of an underlying subdural or epidural 
hematoma. Consequently, fractures are primarily markers of the site 
and severity of injury. If the underlying arachnoid membrane has been 
torn, fractures also provide potential pathways for entry of bacteria to 
the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with a risk of meningitis and for leakage 
of CSF outward through the dura. If there is leakage of CSF, severe 
orthostatic headache results from lowered pressure in the spinal fluid 
compartment.
Most fractures are linear and extend from the point of impact toward 
the base of the skull. Basilar skull fractures are often extensions of 
adjacent linear fractures over the convexity of the skull but may occur 
independently owing to stresses on the floor of the middle cranial fossa 
or occiput. Basilar fractures are usually parallel to the petrous bone 
or along the sphenoid bone and directed toward the sella turcica and 
ethmoidal groove. Although most basilar fractures are uncomplicated, 
they can cause CSF leakage, pneumocephalus, and delayed cavernous- 
carotid fistulas. Hemotympanum (blood behind the tympanic mem-
brane), ecchymosis over the mastoid process (Battle sign), and periorbital 
ecchymosis (“raccoon sign”) are associated with basilar fractures and 
should be suspected if these clinical signs are present.
■
■EPIDURAL AND SUBDURAL HEMATOMAS
Hemorrhages between the dura and skull (epidural) or beneath the 
dura (subdural) have characteristic clinical and imaging features. They 
are sometimes associated with underlying brain contusions and other 
injuries, often making it difficult to determine the relative contribution 
of each component to the clinical state. The mass effect of raised intra-
cranial pressure (ICP) caused by these hematomas can be life threaten-
ing, making it imperative to identify them rapidly by CT or MRI scan 
and to surgically remove them when appropriate.
Epidural Hematoma  (Fig. 435-1) These highly dangerous lesions 
usually arise from an injury to a meningeal arterial vessel and evolve 
rapidly. They are often accompanied by a “lucid interval” of several 
minutes to hours prior to neurological deterioration. They occur in up 
to 10% of cases of severe head injury, but are less often associated with 
underlying cortical damage compared to subdural hematomas. Rapid 
surgical evacuation and ligation or cautery of the damaged vessel, 
usually the middle meningeal artery that has been lacerated by an 
overlying skull fracture, is indicated. If recognized and treated rapidly, 
patients often have a favorable outcome.
Acute Subdural Hematoma  (Fig. 435-2) Direct cranial trauma 
may be minor and is not always required for acute subdural hemor-
rhage to occur, especially in the elderly and those taking anticoagulant 
medications. Acceleration forces alone, as from whiplash, are some-
times sufficient to produce subdural hematoma. Up to one-third of 
patients have a lucid interval lasting minutes to hours before coma 
supervenes, but most are drowsy or comatose from the moment 
of injury. A unilateral headache and slightly enlarged pupil on the 
side of the hematoma are frequently, but not invariably, present. 
Small subdural hematomas may be asymptomatic and usually do not 
require surgical evacuation if they do not enlarge. Stupor or coma, 
hemiparesis, and unilateral pupillary enlargement are signs of larger 
hematomas. The bleeding that causes larger subdural hematomas is 
primarily venous in origin, although arterial bleeding sites are some-
times found at operation, and a few large hematomas have a purely 
arterial origin. In an acutely deteriorating patient, an emergency 
craniotomy is required. In contrast to epidural hematomas, there is 
significant morbidity and mortality associated with acute subdural 
hematomas that require surgery.
Chronic Subdural Hematoma 
A subacutely evolving syn-
drome due to subdural hematoma occurs days or weeks after injury 
with drowsiness, headache, confusion, or mild hemiparesis, usually 
in the elderly with age-related atrophy and often after only minor or 
unnoticed trauma. On imaging studies, chronic subdural hematomas 
appear as crescentic clots over the convexity of one or both hemi-
spheres, most commonly in the frontotemporal region (Fig. 435-3). A 
history of trauma may or may not be elicited in relation to chronic 
subdural hematoma; the injury may have been trivial and forgotten, 
particularly in the elderly and those with clotting disorders. Headache 
is common but not invariable. Additional features that may appear 
weeks later include slowed thinking, vague change in personality, 
FIGURE 435-1  Acute epidural hematoma. The tightly attached dura is stripped 
from the inner table of the skull, producing a characteristic lenticular-shaped 
hemorrhage on noncontrast computed tomography scan. Epidural hematomas 
are usually caused by tearing of the middle meningeal artery following fracture of 
the temporal bone.
FIGURE 435-2  Acute subdural hematoma. Noncontrast computed tomography 
scan reveals a hyperdense clot that has an irregular border with the brain and 
causes more horizontal displacement (mass effect) than might be expected from 
its thickness. The disproportionate mass effect is the result of the large rostral-
caudal extent of these hematomas. Compare to Fig. 435-1.


--- PDF PAGE 3231 ---

CHAPTER 435 Concussion and Other Traumatic Brain Injuries
3185
seizure, or a mild hemiparesis. The headache typically fluctuates in 
severity, sometimes with changes in head position. Drowsiness, inat-
tentiveness, and incoherence of thought are generally more prominent 
than focal signs such as hemiparesis. Rarely, chronic hematomas cause 
brief episodes of hemiparesis or aphasia that are indistinguishable from 
transient ischemic attacks.
CT without contrast initially shows a low-density mass over the 
convexity of the hemisphere. Between 2 and 6 weeks after the initial 
bleeding, the clot becomes isodense compared to adjacent brain and 
may be inapparent. Many subdural hematomas that are several weeks 
in age contain areas of blood and intermixed serous fluid. Infusion of 
contrast material demonstrates enhancement of the vascular fibrous 
capsule surrounding the collection. MRI reliably identifies both 
subacute and chronic hematomas.
Clinical observation coupled with serial imaging is a reasonable 
approach to patients with few symptoms and small chronic subdural 
collections that do not cause mass effect. Treatment with surgical evac-
uation through burr holes is usually successful, if a cranial drain is used 
postoperatively. The fibrous membranes that grow from the dura and 
encapsulate the collection may require removal with a craniotomy to 
prevent recurrent fluid accumulation.
■
■TRAUMATIC SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is common in TBI. Rupture of small 
cortical arteries or veins can cause bleeding into the subarachnoid 
space. Traumatic SAH is often seen in the sulci and is frequently the 
only radiographic finding on CT following mild TBI. SAH occurs dif-
fusely after severe TBI and confers an increase in mortality. In mild TBI, 
SAH provides an objective imaging biomarker for TBI, and in some 
patients is associated with unfavorable outcomes.
Contusion  (Fig. 435-4) A surface bruise of the brain, or contusion, 
consists of varying degrees of petechial hemorrhage, edema, and tissue 
destruction. Contusions and deeper hemorrhages result from mechani-
cal forces that displace and compress the hemispheres forcefully and by 
deceleration of the brain against the inner skull, either under a point of 
impact (coup lesion) or, as the brain swings back, in the antipolar area 
(contrecoup lesion). Trauma sufficient to cause prolonged unconscious-
ness usually produces some degree of contusion. Blunt deceleration 
impact, as occurs against an automobile dashboard or from falling 
forward onto a hard surface, causes contusions on the orbital surfaces 
of the frontal lobes and the anterior and basal portions of the temporal 
lobes. With lateral forces, as from impact on an automobile door frame, 
contusions are situated on the lateral convexity of the hemisphere. 
The clinical signs of contusion are determined by the location and 
size of the lesion; often, there are no focal abnormalities with a routine 
neurological exam, but these injured regions are later the sites of gliotic 
scars that may produce seizures. A hemiparesis or gaze preference is 
fairly typical of moderately sized contusions. Large bilateral contusions 
produce stupor with extensor posturing, while those limited to the 
frontal lobes cause a taciturn state. Contusions in the temporal lobe 
may cause delirium or an aggressive, combative syndrome. Torsional 
or shearing forces within the brain can cause hemorrhages of the basal 
ganglia and other deep regions. Large contusions and hemorrhages 
after minor trauma should raise concerns for coagulopathy due to an 
underlying disease or more commonly anticoagulant therapy.
Acute contusions are easily visible on CT and MRI scans, appearing 
as inhomogeneous hyperdensities on CT and as hyperintensities on T2 
and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI sequences; there 
is usually surrounding localized brain edema and some subarachnoid 
bleeding. Blood in the CSF due to trauma may provoke a mild inflam-
matory reaction. Over a few days, contusions acquire a surrounding 
contrast enhancement and edema that may be mistaken for tumor or 
abscess.
Axonal Injury  (Fig. 435-5) Traumatic axonal injury (TAI) is one of 
the most common injuries after TBI. There is disruption, or shearing, 
of axons at the time of impact and this is associated with microhem-
orrhages. It occurs following high-speed deceleration injuries, such as 
motor vehicle collisions (Johnson et al, 2013). The presence of ≥4 areas 
FIGURE 435-3  Computed tomography scan of chronic bilateral subdural 
hematomas of different ages. The collections began as acute hematomas and 
have become hypodense in comparison to the adjacent brain after a period during 
which they were isodense and difficult to appreciate. Some areas of resolving 
blood are contained on the more recently formed collection on the left (arrows).
FIGURE 435-4  Traumatic cerebral contusion. Noncontrast computed tomography 
scan demonstrating a hyperdense hemorrhagic region in the anterior temporal 
lobe.
FIGURE 435-5  Multiple small areas of hemorrhage and tissue disruption in the 
white matter of the frontal lobes on noncontrast computed tomography scan. 
These appear to reflect an extreme type of the diffuse axonal shearing lesions 
that occur with closed head injury.


--- PDF PAGE 3232 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3186 of TAI is called diffuse axonal injury (DAI), and when widespread, has 
been proposed to explain persistent coma and the vegetative state after 
TBI (Chap. 300). Only severe TAI lesions that contain substantial blood 
are visualized by CT, usually in the corpus callosum and centrum 
semiovale. More commonly, the CT will be negative for TAI, but subse-
quent MRI, particularly gradient-echo or susceptibility weighted imag-
ing, will show hemosiderin deposits reflective of microhemorrhages in 
addition to the axonal damage on diffusion sequences.
■
■CRANIAL NERVE INJURIES
The cranial nerves most often injured with TBI are the olfactory, 
optic, oculomotor, and trochlear; the first and second branches of the 
trigeminal nerve; and the facial and auditory nerves. Anosmia and an 
apparent loss of taste (actually a loss of perception of aromatic flavors, 
with retained elementary taste perception) occur in ~10% of persons 
with serious head injuries, particularly from falls on the back of the 
head. This is the result of displacement of the brain and shearing of 
the fine olfactory nerve filaments that course through the cribriform 
bone. At least partial recovery of olfactory and gustatory function 
is expected, but if bilateral anosmia persists for several months, the 
prognosis is poor. Partial optic nerve injuries from closed trauma 
result in blurring of vision, central or paracentral scotomas, or sector 
defects. Direct orbital injury may cause short-lived blurred vision for 
close objects due to reversible iridoplegia. Diplopia limited to down-
ward gaze and corrected when the head is tilted away from the side 
of the affected eye indicates trochlear (fourth nerve) nerve damage. 
It occurs frequently as an isolated problem after minor head injury or 
may develop for unknown reasons after a delay of several days. Facial 
nerve injury caused by a basilar fracture is present immediately in up 
to 3% of severe injuries; it may also be delayed for 5–7 days. Fractures 
through the petrous bone, particularly the less common transverse 
type, are liable to produce facial palsy. Delayed facial palsy occurring 
up to a week after injury, the mechanism of which is unknown, has a 
good prognosis. Injury to the eighth cranial nerve from a fracture of the 
petrous bone causes loss of hearing, vertigo, and nystagmus immedi-
ately after injury. Deafness from eighth nerve injury is rare and must be 
distinguished from blood in the middle ear or disruption of the middle 
ear ossicles. Dizziness, tinnitus, and high-tone hearing loss occur from 
cochlear concussion.
■
■SEIZURES
Convulsions are surprisingly uncommon immediately after TBI, but a 
brief period of tonic extensor posturing or a few clonic movements 
of the limbs just after the moment of impact can occur. However, the 
cortical scars that evolve from contusions are highly epileptogenic 
and may later manifest as seizures, even after many months or years 
(Chap. 418). The severity of injury roughly determines the risk of future 
seizures. It has been estimated that 17% of individuals with brain con-
tusion, subdural hematoma, or prolonged LOC will develop a seizure 
disorder and that this risk extends for an indefinite period of time, 
whereas the risk is ≤2% after mild injury. The majority of convulsions 
in the latter group occur within 5 years of injury but may be delayed 
for decades. Penetrating injuries have a much higher rate of subsequent 
epilepsy.
CLINICAL SYNDROMES AND TREATMENT  
OF HEAD INJURY
■
■CONCUSSION/MILD TBI
The patient who has briefly lost consciousness or been stunned after 
a minor head injury usually becomes fully alert and attentive within 
minutes but may complain of headache, dizziness, faintness, nausea, a 
single episode of emesis, difficulty with concentration, a brief amnestic 
period, or slight blurring of vision. This typical concussion syndrome 
has a good prognosis with little risk of subsequent deterioration. 
Children are particularly prone to drowsiness, vomiting, and irrita-
bility, symptoms that are sometimes delayed for several hours after 
apparently minor injuries. Vasovagal syncope that follows injury may 
cause undue concern. Generalized or frontal headache is common in 
the following days. It may be migrainous (throbbing and hemicranial) 
in nature or aching and bilateral. After several hours of observation, 
patients with minor injury may be accompanied home and observed 
for a day by a family member or friend, with written instructions to 
return if symptoms worsen.
Persistent severe headache and repeated vomiting in the context 
of normal alertness and no focal neurologic signs is usually benign, 
but CT should be obtained and a longer period of observation is 
appropriate. The decision to perform imaging tests also depends on 
clinical signs that indicate that the impact was severe (e.g., persistent 
confusion, repeated vomiting, palpable skull fracture); the presence 
of other serious bodily injuries, an underlying coagulopathy, or age 
>65 years; and on the degree of surveillance that can be anticipated 
after discharge. Guidelines have also indicated that older age (>65), 
two or more episodes of vomiting, >30 min of retrograde or persistent 
anterograde amnesia, seizure, and concurrent drug or alcohol intoxi-
cation are sensitive (but not specific) indicators of intracranial hemor-
rhage that justify CT scanning.
■
■SPORT-RELATED CONCUSSION
Based on its reported prevalence and acute effects, and fears over 
potential long-term neurological consequences, sport-related con-
cussion has become the focus of increasing concern from clinicians, 
researchers, sporting organizations, and athletes themselves. Concus-
sion is a frequent injury in contact and collision sports (e.g., football, 
hockey, wrestling) at all levels of participation, including youth sports. 
One study indicated that from 1997 to 2007 emergency department 
visits for 8- to 13-year-old children affected by concussion in organized 
team sports doubled, and increased by >200% in the 14- to 19-year-old 
group; these increases could represent improvements in identification 
in addition to actual changes in incidence rates.
Research over the last decade has advanced our understanding of 
the true natural history of clinical recovery following sport-related 
concussion. In general, the findings on acute recovery are favorable. A 
2003 report was the first to chart the continuous time course of acute 
recovery within several days after concussion, indicating that >90% 
of athletes reported symptom recovery within 1 week. Several other 
prospective studies have since demonstrated that the overwhelming 
majority of athletes achieve a complete recovery in symptoms, cogni-
tive functioning, postural stability, and other functional impairments 
over a period of 1–3 weeks following concussion.
There are frequent anecdotal reports, however, of athletes who 
remain symptomatic or impaired on functional testing well beyond the 
window of recovery commonly reported in group studies. The greatest 
challenge arguably still facing sport medicine clinicians and public 
health experts is how to most effectively manage and reduce risk in this 
subset of athletes who do not follow the “typical” course of recovery. 
The precise frequency of athletes who do not follow the typical course 
of rapid, spontaneous recovery and instead exhibit prolonged postcon-
cussive symptoms or other functional impairments after concussion 
remains unclear. There is little empirical evidence regarding which 
risk factors may be associated with prolonged recovery time or poor 
outcome in athletes and how these risks can be modified in a clinical 
setting.
In the current absence of adequate data, a common sense approach 
to athletic concussion has been to remove the individual from play 
immediately and avoid contact sports for at least several days after a 
mild injury, and for a longer period if there are more severe injuries 
or if there are protracted neurologic symptoms such as headache and 
difficulty concentrating. No individual should return to play unless all 
symptoms have resolved and an assessment has been made by a health 
care professional who has experience with treatment of concussion. 
Once cleared, the individual can then begin a graduated program of 
increasing activity. Younger athletes are particularly likely to experi-
ence protracted concussive symptoms, and a slower return to play in 
this age group may be reasonable. These guidelines are designed in 
part to avoid a perpetuation of symptoms but also to prevent the rare 
second impact syndrome, in which diffuse and fatal cerebral swelling 
follows a second minor head injury.


--- PDF PAGE 3233 ---

CHAPTER 435 Concussion and Other Traumatic Brain Injuries
3187
In the past, mental decline in boxers late in their careers had been 
called dementia pugilistica. There is some evidence that repeated con-
cussions from other sports, and especially in professional American 
football players, are associated with a similar delayed and progressive 
cognitive disorder, sometimes with prominent behavioral symptoms 
that can include depression, insomnia, violent behaviors, and suicid-
ality. The brains of these patients display a characteristic deposition 
of tau protein in neurons located in the superficial cortical layers and 
perivascular regions, and particularly in the depths of sulci, a pattern 
named chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). CTE is an intensively 
studied and provocative entity. A recent neuropathologic study of ath-
letes who had donated their brains for research reported that changes 
of CTE were extremely common findings. However, the majority of 
former football players do not complain of cognitive symptoms, and 
at this time the true prevalence of CTE is unknown. Its contribution, if 
any, to late-life dementia and parkinsonism in former athletes, soldiers, 
or others who have sustained repeated concussive injuries is unknown. 
CTE is also discussed in Chap. 417.
■
■POSTCONCUSSIVE STATES
The postconcussion syndrome (PCS) refers to a state following minor 
TBI consisting of combinations of fatigue, dizziness, headache, and 
difficulty in concentration. Management is difficult and generally 
requires the identification and management of the specific problem or 
problems that are most troubling to the individual. A clear explana-
tion of the symptoms that may follow concussion has been shown to 
reduce subsequent complaints. Care is taken to avoid prolonged use 
of drugs that produce dependence. Headache may initially be treated 
with acetaminophen and small doses of amitriptyline. Vestibular exer-
cises (Chap. 19) and small doses of vestibular suppressants such as 
promethazine (Phenergan) may be helpful when dizziness is the main 
problem. Patients who after minor or moderate injury have difficulty 
with memory or with complex cognitive tasks at work may be reas-
sured that these problems usually improve over several months, and 
workload may be reduced in the interim.
For the vast majority of individuals with mTBI, the symptoms of 
PCS subside and resolve within a few weeks of injury. For a subset of 
individuals with mTBI, complaints of postconcussion symptoms persist 
beyond the expectation derived from TBI severity markers. The term 
PCD has been proposed for diagnostic use when symptoms following 
mTBI such as neurologic, cognitive, behavioral or somatic complaints 
persist beyond the acute and subacute periods and become chronic, 
often operationalized as persisting beyond 3 months. Although the 
overall risk of developing PCD following mTBI is low, the frequency of 
mTBI patients who meet criteria for a diagnosis of PCD and present in 
a clinical setting is believed to be higher.
mTBI patients with PCD frequently present to the outpatient clinics 
of primary care physicians, physiatrists or neurologists seeking relief 
for lingering PCD-related symptoms. While some patients will have 
already received an initial medical work-up to rule out a more serious 
brain injury during the acute phase, many patients will have had no 
prior contact with health care specialists. A medical work-up ordered in 
the outpatient setting for PCD-related complaints is typically unremark-
able for any identifiable neurologic cause to account for the persisting 
symptoms reported by the patient. The development of uniform deci-
sion trees or “standard of care” treatment regimens for PCD-related 
symptoms has been limited by the diversity of symptoms that patients 
experience, even within mTBI subgroups that have sustained very sim-
ilar injury patterns. While some patients experience somatic symptoms, 
others complain of subjective cognitive or behavioral changes.
PCD is not a unidimensional condition but rather an outcome 
influenced by diverse cognitive, emotional, medical, psychosocial, and 
motivational factors. Because of this complexity, treatments targeting 
persistent and refractory PCD-related symptoms should be tailored 
to the needs and expectations of the individual patient, with referrals 
to specialists as needed for assistance with management of headache, 
neck and back pain, dizziness and vertigo, and other symptoms 
reported within the context of PCD. In addition, patients are frequently 
referred to behavioral health providers such as neuropsychologists, 
rehabilitation psychologists, health psychologists, and/or psychiatrists 
for a variety of reasons, but particularly when they are experiencing 
cognitive, emotional, or behavioral changes that accompany PCD. 
Patients with mood disorders (e.g., depression), anxiety disorders (e.g., 
posttraumatic stress disorder), or adjustment reactions may benefit 
from psychiatric consultation for appropriate medication trials or from 
time-limited psychotherapy such as cognitive behavioral therapy.
■
■INJURY OF INTERMEDIATE SEVERITY
Patients who are not fully alert or have persistent confusion, behavioral 
changes, extreme dizziness, or focal neurologic signs such as hemipa-
resis should be admitted to the hospital and undergo a cerebral imag-
ing study. A cerebral contusion or hematoma will usually be found. 
Common syndromes include: (1) delirium with a disinclination to be 
examined or moved, expletive speech, and resistance if disturbed 
(anterior temporal lobe contusions); (2) a quiet, disinterested, slowed 
mental state (abulia) alternating with irascibility (inferior frontal 
and frontopolar contusions); (3) a focal deficit such as aphasia or 
mild hemiparesis (due to subdural hematoma or convexity contusion 
or, less often, carotid artery dissection); (4) confusion and inattention, 
poor performance on simple mental tasks, and fluctuating orientation 
(associated with several types of injuries, including those described 
above, and with medial frontal contusions and interhemispheric 
subdural hematoma); (5) repetitive vomiting, nystagmus, drowsiness, 
and unsteadiness (labyrinthine concussion, but occasionally due to a 
posterior fossa subdural hematoma or vertebral artery dissection); and 
(6) diabetes insipidus (damage to the median eminence or pituitary 
stalk). Injuries of this degree are often complicated by drug or alcohol 
intoxication, and clinically inapparent cervical spine injury may be 
present. Blast injuries are often accompanied by rupture of the tympanic 
membranes.
After surgical removal of hematomas, patients in this category 
improve over weeks to months. During the first week, the state of alert-
ness, memory, and other cognitive functions often fluctuate, and agita-
tion and somnolence are common. Behavioral changes tend to be worse 
at night, as with many other encephalopathies, and may be treated 
with small doses of antipsychotic medications. Subtle abnormalities 
of attention, intellect, spontaneity, and memory return toward normal 
weeks or months after the injury, sometimes abruptly. However, the 
full extent of recovery may not be realized for several years. Persistent 
cognitive problems are discussed below.
■
■SEVERE INJURY
Patients who are comatose from the moment of injury require immedi-
ate neurologic attention and resuscitation. After intubation, with care 
taken to immobilize the cervical spine, the depth of coma, pupillary size 
and reactivity, limb movements, and Babinski responses are assessed. 
As soon as vital functions permit and cervical spine x-rays and a CT 
scan have been obtained, the patient should be transported to a critical 
care unit. Hypoxia should be reversed, and normal saline used as the 
resuscitation fluid in preference to albumin. The finding of an epidural 
or subdural hematoma or large intracerebral hemorrhage is usually an 
indication for prompt surgery and intracranial decompression in an 
otherwise salvageable patient. Measurement of ICP with a ventricu-
lar catheter or fiberoptic device in order to guide treatment has been 
favored by many units but has not improved outcome. Hyperosmolar 
intravenous solutions are used in various regimens to limit intracranial 
pressure. Prophylactic antiepileptic medications are recommended for 
7 days and should be discontinued unless there are multiple seizures 
postinjury. Management of raised ICP, a frequent feature of severe 
head injury, is discussed in Chap. 301.
Despite the improvement in mortality for severe TBI over the past 
few decades, a great deal of therapeutic nihilism persists in TBI. The 
common use of a 6-month outcome for TBI clinical studies reinforces 
this misconception. The recovery from severe TBI can take years. 
Furthermore, the ability to predict long-term outcome is limited and 
frequently incorrect. Recent best practice guidelines recommend, in the 
absence of brain death, that aggressive therapy be instituted for at least 
72 h in the acute injury period.


================================================================================
Ch436 Multiple Sclerosis
Pages 3234-3247
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3234 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3188 Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge the contributions of Dr. Allan Ropper to 
earlier editions of this chapter.
■
■FURTHER READING
Jagoda AS et al: American College of Emergency Physicians and Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention. Clinical policy: Neuroimaging 
and decisionmaking in adult mild traumatic brain injury in the acute 
setting. Ann Emerg Med 52:714, 2008.
Johnson VE et al: Axonal pathology in traumatic brain injury. Exp 
Neurol 246:35, 2013.
McCrory P et al: Consensus statement on concussion in sport—the 
5th international conference on concussion in sport held in Berlin, 
October 2016. Br J Sports Med 51:838, 2017.
Mez J et al: Clinicopathological evaluation of chronic traumatic enceph-
alopathy in players of American football. JAMA 25;318:360, 2017.
Taylor CA et al: Traumatic brain injury-related emergency department 
visits, hospitalizations, and deaths—United States, 2007 and 2013. 
MMWR Surveill Summ 66:1, 2017.
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease of the central ner-
vous system (CNS) characterized by chronic inflammation, demyeli-
nation, gliosis (plaques or scarring), and neuronal loss; the course can 
be relapsing or progressive. MS plaques typically develop at different 
times and in different CNS locations (i.e., MS is said to be disseminated 
in time and space). Approximately more than 900,000 individuals in the 
United States and millions of individuals worldwide are affected. The 
clinical course is extremely variable, ranging from a relatively benign 
condition to a rapidly evolving and incapacitating disease requiring 
profound lifestyle adjustments.
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The onset of MS may be abrupt or insidious. Symptoms may be 
severe or seem so trivial that a patient may not seek medical attention 
for months or years. Indeed, at autopsy, ~0.1% of individuals who 
were asymptomatic during life will be found, unexpectedly, to have 
pathologic evidence of MS. Similarly, an magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) scan obtained for an unrelated reason may show evidence of 
asymptomatic MS. Symptoms of MS are extremely varied and depend 
on the location and severity of lesions within the CNS (Table 436-1). 
Examination often reveals evidence of neurologic dysfunction, often 
Multiple Sclerosis
Bruce A. C. Cree, Stephen L. Hauser 
436
in asymptomatic locations. For example, a patient may present with 
symptoms in one leg but signs in both.
Sensory symptoms are varied and include both paresthesias (e.g., tin-
gling, prickling sensations, formications, “pins and needles,” or painful 
burning) and hypesthesia (e.g., reduced sensation, numbness, or a 
“dead” feeling). Unpleasant sensations (e.g., feelings that body parts 
are swollen, wet, raw, or tightly wrapped) are also common. Sensory 
impairment of the trunk and legs below a horizontal line on the torso (a 
sensory level) indicates that the spinal cord is the origin of the sensory 
disturbance. It is often accompanied by a bandlike sensation of tight-
ness around the torso. Pain is a common symptom of MS, experienced 
by >50% of patients. Pain can occur anywhere on the body and can 
change locations over time.
Optic neuritis (ON) presents as diminished visual acuity, dimness, or 
decreased color perception (desaturation) in the central field of vision. 
These symptoms can be mild or may progress to severe visual loss. 
Rarely, there is complete loss of light perception. Visual symptoms are 
generally monocular but may be bilateral. Periorbital pain (aggravated 
by eye movement) often precedes or accompanies the visual loss. An 
afferent pupillary defect (Chap. 28) is usually present. Funduscopic 
examination may be normal or reveal optic disc swelling (papilli-
tis). Pallor of the optic disc (optic atrophy) commonly follows ON. 
Uveitis is uncommon and should raise the possibility of alternative 
diagnoses such as sarcoid or lymphoma.
Weakness of the limbs may manifest as loss of strength, speed, or dexter-
ity, as fatigue, or as a disturbance of gait. Exercise-induced weakness is a 
characteristic symptom of MS. The weakness is of the upper motor neu-
ron type (Chap. 21) and is usually accompanied by other pyramidal signs 
such as spasticity, hyperreflexia, and Babinski signs. Occasionally, a ten-
don reflex may be lost (simulating a lower motor neuron lesion) if an MS 
lesion disrupts the afferent reflex fibers in the spinal cord (see Fig. 21-2).
Facial weakness due to a lesion in the pons may resemble idiopathic 
Bell’s palsy (Chap. 433). Unlike Bell’s palsy, facial weakness in MS 
is usually not associated with ipsilateral loss of taste sensation or 
retroauricular pain.
Spasticity (Chap. 21) is commonly associated with spontaneous and 
movement-induced muscle spasms. More than 30% of MS patients 
have moderate to severe spasticity, especially in the legs. This is often 
accompanied by painful spasms interfering with ambulation, work, or 
self-care. Occasionally, spasticity provides support for the body weight 
during ambulation, and in these cases, treatment of spasticity may 
actually do more harm than good.
Visual blurring in MS may result from ON or diplopia (double 
vision); if the symptom resolves when either eye is covered, the cause is 
diplopia. Diplopia may result from internuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO) 
or from palsy of the sixth cranial nerve (rarely the third or fourth). An 
INO consists of impaired adduction of one eye due to a lesion in the 
ipsilateral medial longitudinal fasciculus (Chaps. 28 and V3). Promi-
nent nystagmus is often observed in the abducting eye, along with a 
small skew deviation. A bilateral INO is particularly suggestive of MS. 
Other common gaze disturbances in MS include (1) a horizontal gaze 
palsy, (2) a “one and a half” syndrome (horizontal gaze palsy plus an 
INO), and (3) acquired pendular nystagmus.
Ataxia usually manifests as cerebellar tremors (Chap. 431). Ataxia 
may also involve the head and trunk or the voice, producing a charac-
teristic cerebellar dysarthria (scanning speech).
Vertigo may appear suddenly from a brainstem lesion, superficially 
resembling acute labyrinthitis (Chap. 19). Hearing loss (Chap. 30) may 
also occur in MS but is uncommon.
Ancillary Symptoms  Paroxysmal symptoms are distinguished by 
their brief duration (10 s to 2 min), high frequency (5–40 episodes per 
day), lack of any alteration of consciousness or change in background 
electroencephalogram during episodes, and a self-limited course (gen-
erally lasting weeks to months). They may be precipitated by hyper-
ventilation or movement. These syndromes may include Lhermitte’s 
symptom; tonic contractions of a limb, face, or trunk (tonic seizures); 
paroxysmal dysarthria and ataxia; paroxysmal sensory disturbances; 
and several other less well-characterized syndromes. Paroxysmal 
TABLE 436-1  Initial Symptoms of Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
SYMPTOM
PERCENTAGE  
OF CASES
SYMPTOM
PERCENTAGE  
OF CASES
Sensory loss
37
Lhermitte
3
Optic neuritis
36
Pain
3
Weakness
35
Dementia
2
Paresthesias
24
Visual loss
2
Diplopia
15
Facial palsy
1
Ataxia
11
Impotence
1
Vertigo
6
Myokymia
1
Paroxysmal 
attacks
4
Epilepsy
1
Bladder
4
Falling
1
Source: After WB Matthews et al: McAlpine’s Multiple Sclerosis. New York, Churchill 
Livingstone, 1991.


--- PDF PAGE 3235 ---

CHAPTER 436 Multiple Sclerosis
3189
attacks, there is often substantial or complete recovery over the 
ensuing weeks to months. However, as attacks continue recovery 
may be less evident (Fig. 436-1A). Between attacks, patients are 
neurologically stable.
2.	 Secondary progressive MS (SPMS) always begins as RMS (Fig. 436-1B). 
At some point, however, the clinical course changes so that the 
patient experiences deterioration in function unassociated with 
acute attacks. SPMS produces a greater amount of fixed neurologic 
disability than RMS. For a patient with RMS, the risk of developing 
SPMS is ~2% each year, meaning that the great majority of RMS 
ultimately evolves into SPMS. As such, SPMS appears to represent a 
late stage of the same underlying illness as RMS.
3.	 Primary progressive MS (PPMS) accounts for ~10% of cases. These 
patients do not experience attacks but rather steadily decline in 
function from disease onset (Fig. 436-1C). Compared to RMS, the sex 
distribution is more even, the disease begins later in life (mean age 
~40 years), and disability develops faster (relative to the onset of the 
first clinical symptom). Despite these differences, PPMS appears to 
represent the same underlying illness as RMS.
Progressive MS and disease activity. Patients with SPMS or even PPMS 
will occasionally experience relapses, albeit far less often than in RMS. 
Progressive MS patients experiencing relapses or who are found to 
have acute new lesions on MRI are considered to have “active” MS. In 
contrast, the term “progression” is reserved to describe neurological 
worsening that accumulates independently from disease activity.
Epidemiology 
MS is approximately threefold more common 
in women than men. The age of onset is typically between 20 and 
40 years (slightly later in men than in women), but the disease can 
present across the lifespan. Approximately 10% of cases begin before 
the age of 18 years, and a small percentage of cases begin before the 
age of 10 years.
Geographical gradients are observed in MS, with the highest 
known prevalence for MS (250 per 100,000) in the Orkney Islands, 
located north of Scotland. In other temperate zone areas (e.g., northern 
North America, northern Europe, southern Australia, and southern 
New Zealand), the prevalence of MS is 0.1–0.2%. By contrast, in the 
tropics (e.g., Asia, equatorial Africa, and the Middle East), the preva-
lence is often tenfold to twentyfold less.
The prevalence of MS has increased steadily (and dramatically) in 
several regions around the world over the past half-century, presum-
ably reflecting the impact of some environmental shift. Moreover, the 
fact that this increase has occurred primarily (or exclusively) in women 
symptoms probably result from spontaneous discharges, arising at the 
edges of demyelinated plaques and spreading to adjacent white matter 
tracts.
Lhermitte’s symptom is an electric shock–like sensation (typically 
induced by flexion or other movements of the neck) that radiates down 
the back into the legs. Rarely, it radiates into the arms. It is generally 
self-limited but may persist for years. Lhermitte’s symptom can also 
occur with other disorders of the cervical spinal cord (e.g., cervical 
spondylosis).
Trigeminal neuralgia, hemifacial spasm, and glossopharyngeal neuralgia 
(Chap. 433) can occur when the demyelinating lesion involves the 
root entry (or exit) zone of the fifth, seventh, and ninth cranial nerve, 
respectively. Trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux) is a very brief lanci-
nating facial pain often triggered by an afferent input from the face or 
teeth. Most cases of trigeminal neuralgia are not MS related; however, 
atypical features such as onset before age 50 years, bilateral symptoms, 
objective sensory loss, or nonparoxysmal pain should raise the possi-
bility that MS could be responsible.
Facial myokymia consists of either persistent rapid flickering con-
tractions of the facial musculature (especially the lower portion of the 
orbicularis oculus) or a contraction that slowly spreads across the face. 
It results from lesions of the corticobulbar tracts or brainstem course of 
the facial nerve.
Heat sensitivity refers to neurologic symptoms produced by an eleva-
tion of the body’s core temperature. For example, unilateral visual blur-
ring may occur during a hot shower or with physical exercise (Uhthoff’s 
symptom). It is also common for MS symptoms to worsen transiently, 
sometimes dramatically, during febrile illnesses (see “Acute Attacks or 
Initial Demyelinating Episodes,” below). Such heat-related symptoms 
probably result from transient conduction block (see above).
Bladder dysfunction is present in >90% of MS patients, and in a third 
of patients, dysfunction results in weekly or more frequent episodes of 
incontinence. During normal reflex voiding, relaxation of the bladder 
sphincter (α-adrenergic innervation) is coordinated with contraction of 
the detrusor muscle in the bladder wall (muscarinic cholinergic inner-
vation). Detrusor hyperreflexia, due to impairment of suprasegmental 
inhibition, causes urinary frequency, urgency, nocturia, and uncon-
trolled bladder emptying. Detrusor sphincter dyssynergia, due to loss 
of synchronization between detrusor and sphincter muscles, causes 
difficulty in initiating and/or stopping the urinary stream, producing 
hesitancy, urinary retention, overflow incontinence, and recurrent 
infection.
Constipation occurs in >30% of patients. Fecal urgency or bowel 
incontinence is less common (<15%) but can be socially debilitating.
Sexual dysfunction may manifest as decreased libido, impaired geni-
tal sensation, impotence in men, and diminished vaginal lubrication or 
adductor spasms in women.
Cognitive dysfunction can include memory loss; impaired attention; 
difficulties in executive functioning, memory, and problem solv-
ing; slowed information processing; and problems shifting between 
cognitive tasks. Euphoria (elevated mood) was once thought to be 
characteristic of MS but is actually uncommon, occurring in <20% of 
patients. Cognitive dysfunction sufficient to impair activities of daily 
living is rare.
Depression, experienced by approximately half of patients, can be 
reactive, endogenous, or part of the illness itself and can contribute to 
fatigue.
Fatigue (Chap. 20) is experienced by 90% of patients; this symptom 
is the most common reason for work-related disability in MS. Fatigue 
can be exacerbated by elevated temperatures, depression, expending 
exceptional effort to accomplish basic activities of daily living, or sleep 
disturbances (e.g., from frequent nocturnal awakenings to urinate).
■
■DISEASE COURSE
Three clinical types of MS exist (Fig. 436-1):
1.	 Relapsing or bout onset MS (RMS) accounts for 90% of MS cases and 
is characterized by discrete attacks of neurological dysfunction that 
generally evolve over days to weeks (rarely over hours). With initial 
A
Disability
Time
RMS
C
Disability
Time
PPMS
B
Disability
Time
SPMS
FIGURE 436-1  Clinical course of multiple sclerosis (MS). A. Relapsing MS 
(RMS). B. Secondary progressive MS (SPMS). C. Primary progressive MS (PPMS).


--- PDF PAGE 3236 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3190 indicates that women are more responsive to this environmental 
change.
Well-established risk factors for MS include a genetic predisposition, 
vitamin D deficiency, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) exposure after early 
childhood, and cigarette smoking.
Vitamin D deficiency is associated with an increase in MS risk, and 
data suggest that ongoing deficiency also increases disease activity 
after MS begins. Immunoregulatory effects of vitamin D could explain 
these apparent relationships. Exposure of the skin to ultraviolet-B 
(UVB) radiation from the sun is essential for the biosynthesis of 
vitamin D, and this endogenous production is the most important 
source of vitamin D in most individuals. A diet rich in fatty fish rep-
resents another source of vitamin D. At high latitudes, the amount of 
UVB radiation reaching the earth’s surface is often insufficient, partic-
ularly during winter months, and consequently, low serum levels of 
vitamin D are common in temperate zones. The common practice to 
avoid direct sun exposure and the widespread use of sun block would 
be expected to exacerbate any population-wide vitamin D deficiency 
(sun protection factor [SPF] 15 blocks 94% of incoming UVB radiation).
Evidence of a remote EBV infection playing some role in MS is sup-
ported by numerous epidemiologic and laboratory studies. A higher 
risk of infectious mononucleosis (associated with relatively late EBV 
infection) and higher antibody titers to latency-associated EBV nuclear 
antigen have been repeatedly associated with MS risk, although a 
causal role for EBV is not established.
A history of cigarette smoking also is associated with MS risk. 
Interestingly, in an animal model of MS, the lung was identified as a 
critical site for activation of pathogenic T lymphocytes responsible for 
autoimmune demyelination.
■
■GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Whites are inherently at higher risk for MS than Africans or 
Asians, even when residing in a similar environment. MS also 
aggregates within some families, and adoption, half-sibling, twin, 
and spousal studies indicate that familial aggregation is due to genetic, 
and not environmental, factors (Table 436-2).
Susceptibility to MS is polygenic, with each gene contributing a 
relatively small amount to the overall risk. The strongest susceptibility 
signal genome-wide maps to the HLA-DRB1 gene in the class II region 
of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), and this association 
accounts for ~10% of the disease risk. This HLA association, first 
described in the early 1970s, suggests that MS, at its core, is an autoim-
mune disease. Whole-genome association studies have now identified 
~200 other MS susceptibility variants, each of which individually has 
only a very small effect on MS risk. Many of these MS-associated genes 
have known roles in the adaptive immune system, for example the 
genes for the interleukin (IL) 7 receptor (CD127), IL-2 receptor (CD25), 
and T cell costimulatory molecule LFA-3 (CD58); some variants also 
influence susceptibility to other autoimmune diseases in addition to 
MS. The variants identified so far all lack specificity and sensitivity for 
MS; thus, at present, they are not useful for diagnosis or prediction of 
the future disease course.
■
■PATHOGENESIS
Pathology  New MS lesions begin with perivenular cuffing by 
inflammatory mononuclear cells, predominantly T cells and macro-
phages, which also infiltrate the surrounding white matter. At sites of 
inflammation, the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is disrupted, but unlike 
vasculitis, the vessel wall is preserved. Involvement of the humoral 
immune system is also evident; small numbers of B lymphocytes infil-
trate the nervous system, myelin-specific autoantibodies are present on 
degenerating myelin sheaths, and complement is activated. Demyelina-
tion is the pathological hallmark and evidence of myelin degeneration 
is found at the earliest time points of tissue injury. Although relative 
sparing of axons is typical of MS, partial or total axonal destruction 
can also occur, especially within highly inflammatory lesions. In some 
lesions, surviving oligodendrocytes or those that differentiate from 
precursor cells partially remyelinate the surviving axons, producing 
so-called shadow plaques. However, in many lesions, although oligoden-
drocyte precursor cells are present, they fail to differentiate into mature 
myelin-producing cells. As lesions evolve, there is prominent astro-
cytic proliferation (gliosis) and the term sclerosis refers to these gliotic 
plaques that have a rubbery or hardened texture at autopsy.
MS is not solely a disease of myelin, and neuronal pathology is 
increasingly recognized as a major contributor to irreversible neuro-
logic disability. Inflammation, demyelination, and plaque formation 
are also present in the cerebral cortex, and significant axon loss indicat-
ing death of neurons is widespread, especially in advanced cases (see 
“Neurodegeneration,” below). Cortical plaques may extend upward 
from demyelinated white matter, or may be restricted to the cortex 
itself, or located underneath the pia. A recently recognized feature 
of MS pathology is the presence of ectopic clusters of lymphocytes, 
termed lymphoid follicles, consisting of aggregates of T, B, and plasma 
cells resembling secondary lymphoid tissue located in the meninges, 
especially overlying deep cortical sulci; they are also present in perivas-
cular spaces and less commonly within brain parenchyma. These struc-
tures appear to be more prevalent in progressive MS and are located in 
proximity to cortical plaques suggesting that perhaps diffused factors 
from these ectopic follicles contribute to subpial cortical demyelination 
and neurodegeneration.
Inflammation is always present when active demyelination or 
axonal injury occurs, and the presence of T-cell and B-cell infiltration 
is related to the extent of demyelination and axonal injury. However, 
the nature of the inflammatory response appears to be somewhat dif-
ferent between early and later stages of MS. In relapsing MS, inflam-
mation is associated with focal perivenular parenchymal infiltration 
of lymphocytes and monocytes associated with BBB disruption and 
active demyelination. In contrast, inflammation in progressive MS is 
more diffuse and is characterized by widespread microglial activation. 
Acute perivascular infiltrates are fewer in number, and lymphocytes 
and monocytes in chronic MS plaques aggregate at the lesion border 
suggesting ongoing inflammatory injury at the lesion edge. In addi-
tion, a diffuse low-grade inflammation with microglial proliferation is 
observed across large areas of white matter, associated with reduced 
myelin staining and axonal injury (“dirty white matter”). Activated 
astrocytes induced by microglia may also contribute to tissue damage 
(Chap. 417). These observations imply that ongoing inflammation 
occurs behind a partially repaired BBB in many patients with progres-
sive MS, and this feature could explain the failure of immunotherapies 
not capable of crossing the BBB to benefit patients with progressive MS.
Physiology  Nerve conduction in myelinated axons occurs in a 
saltatory manner, with the nerve impulse jumping from one node 
of Ranvier to the next without depolarization of the axonal mem-
brane underlying the myelin sheath between nodes (Fig. 436-2). This 
produces considerably faster conduction velocities (~70 m/s) than 
the slow velocities (~1 m/s) produced by continuous propagation 
in unmyelinated nerves. Conduction block occurs when the nerve 
impulse is unable to traverse the demyelinated segment. This can 
happen when the resting axon membrane becomes hyperpolarized 
due to the exposure of voltage-dependent potassium channels that 
are normally buried underneath the myelin sheath. A temporary 
conduction block often follows a demyelinating event before sodium 
channels (originally concentrated at the nodes) redistribute along the 
naked axon (Fig. 436-2). This redistribution ultimately allows continu-
ous propagation of nerve action potentials through the demyelinated 
segment. Conduction block may be incomplete, affecting high- but 
TABLE 436-2  Risk of Developing Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
1 in 3
If an identical twin has MS
1 in 15
If a fraternal twin has MS
1 in 25
If a sibling has MS
1 in 50
If a parent or half-sibling has MS
1 in 100
If a first cousin has MS
1 in 1000
If a spouse has MS
1 in 1000
If no one in the family has MS


--- PDF PAGE 3237 ---

CHAPTER 436 Multiple Sclerosis
3191
not low-frequency volleys of impulses. Variable conduction block can 
occur with raised body temperature or metabolic alterations and may 
explain clinical fluctuations that vary from hour to hour or appear with 
fever or exercise. Conduction slowing occurs when the demyelinated 
segments of the axonal membrane are reorganized to support continu-
ous (slow) nerve impulse propagation.
IMMUNOLOGY  A proinflammatory autoimmune response directed 
against a component of CNS myelin, and perhaps other neural ele-
ments as well, remains the cornerstone of current concepts of MS 
pathogenesis.
AUTOREACTIVE T LYMPHOCYTES  Myelin basic protein (MBP), an intra-
cellular protein involved in myelin compaction, is an important T cell 
antigen in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), a laboratory 
model, and possibly also in human MS. Activated MBP-reactive T cells 
have been identified in the blood, in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and 
within MS lesions. Moreover, DRB1*15:01 may influence the autoim-
mune response because it binds with high affinity to a fragment of 
MBP (spanning amino acids 89–96), stimulating T cell responses to this 
self-protein. Two different populations of proinflammatory T cells are 
likely to mediate autoimmunity in MS. T-helper type 1 (TH1) cells pro-
ducing interferon γ (IFN-γ) are one key effector population, and a role 
for highly proinflammatory TH17 T cells has also been established, at 
least in some patients. TH17 cells are induced by transforming growth 
factor β (TGF-β) and IL-6 and are amplified by IL-21 and IL-23. TH17 
cells and levels of their corresponding cytokine IL-17 are increased 
in MS lesions. TH1 cytokines, including IL-2, tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-α, and IFN-γ, also play key roles in activating and maintaining 
autoimmune responses, and TNF-α and IFN-γ may directly injure oli-
godendrocytes or the myelin membrane.
HUMORAL AUTOIMMUNITY  B cell activation and antibody responses are 
also involved in the development of demyelinating lesions. Clonally 
restricted populations of activated, antigen-experienced, memory B 
cells and plasma cells are present in MS lesions, in meningeal lym-
phoid follicle-like structures overlying the cerebral cortex, and in the 
CSF. Similar populations are found in each compartment, indicating 
that a highly focused B cell response occurs locally within the CNS. 
Myelin-specific autoantibodies, some directed against an extracellular 
myelin protein, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), have 
been detected bound to vesiculated myelin debris in MS plaques. In 
the CSF, elevated levels of locally synthesized immunoglobulins and 
oligoclonal antibodies, derived from clonally restricted CNS B cells 
and plasma cells, are also characteristic of MS. The pattern of oligoclo-
nal banding is unique to each individual, and attempts to identify the 
targets of these antibodies have been largely unsuccessful. Moreover, 
when proteins recognized by CSF restricted oligoclonal bands (OCBs) 
have been found, they appear to recognize a variety of antigens includ-
ing intracellular ubiquitous proteins. Therefore, although intrathecal 
OCBs and elevated intrathecal synthesis of immunoglobulins are char-
acteristic of MS, their role in disease pathogenesis remains uncertain.
■
■NEURODEGENERATION
Axonal damage occurs in every newly formed MS lesion, and cumu-
lative axonal and neuronal loss is considered to be the most important 
contributor to irreversible neurologic disability. As many as 70% of 
axons are lost from the lateral corticospinal (e.g., motor) tracts in 
patients with advanced paraparesis from MS, and longitudinal MRI 
studies suggest that there is progressive axonal loss over time within 
established lesions. Demyelination can result in reduced trophic 
support for axons, redistribution of ion channels, and destabilization 
of action potential membrane potentials. Axons can adapt initially 
to these injuries, but over time distal and retrograde degeneration 
(“dying–back” axonopathy) occurs. Therefore, promoting remyelina-
tion to protect axons remains an important therapeutic goal.
In addition to white matter plaques and axonopathy, as noted above 
(see Pathology), recent studies in progressive MS have highlighted 
an important role for a primary injury to the cerebral cortex, perhaps 
related to overlying meningeal inflammation.
Data also support a role for one, or more likely several, of the follow-
ing mechanisms in progressive MS. Axonal and neuronal death may 
result from glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity, oxidative injury, iron 
accumulation, and/or mitochondrial failure either occurring as a con-
sequence of free-radical damage or due to accumulation of deletions in 
mitochondrial DNA.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
There is no single diagnostic test for MS. Diagnostic criteria for clin-
ically definite MS require documentation of two or more episodes of 
symptoms and two or more signs that reflect pathology in anatomically 
noncontiguous white matter tracts of the CNS (Table 436-3). Symptoms 
must last for >24 h and occur as distinct episodes that are separated by 
a month or more. In patients who have only one of the two required 
signs on neurologic examination, the second may be documented by 
abnormal tests such as MRI or evoked potentials (EPs). Similarly, in the 
most recent diagnostic scheme, the second clinical event (in time) may 
be supported solely by MRI findings, consisting of either the develop-
ment of new focal white matter lesions on MRI or the simultaneous 
presence of both an enhancing lesion and a nonenhancing lesion in an 
asymptomatic location. In patients whose course is progressive from 
onset for ≥6 months without superimposed relapses, documentation of 
intrathecal IgG synthesis may be used to support a diagnosis of PPMS.
■
■DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Magnetic Resonance Imaging  MRI has revolutionized the 
diagnosis and management of MS (Fig. 436-3); characteristic abnormal-
ities are found in >95% of patients, although >90% of the lesions visu-
alized by MRI are asymptomatic. An increase in vascular permeability 
from a breakdown of the BBB is detected by leakage of intravenous 
gadolinium (Gd) into the parenchyma. Such leakage occurs early in the 
development of an MS lesion and serves as a useful marker of inflam-
mation. Gd enhancement typically persists for <1 month, and the 
residual MS plaque remains visible indefinitely as a focal area of hyper-
intensity (a lesion) on T2-weighted images. Lesions are frequently 
oriented perpendicular to the ventricular surface, corresponding to the 
pathologic pattern of perivenous demyelination (Dawson’s fingers). 
Lesions are multifocal within the brain, brainstem, and spinal cord. 
Lesions >6 mm located in the corpus callosum, periventricular white 
matter, brainstem, cerebellum, or spinal cord are particularly helpful 
diagnostically. Current criteria for the use of MRI in the diagnosis of 
MS are shown in Table 436-3.
Saltatory nerve impulse
Myelin sheath
Axon
Node of Ranvier
Na+ channels
Continuous nerve impulse
Myelin sheath
Myelin sheath
Axon
Na+ channels
A
B
FIGURE 436-2  Nerve conduction in myelinated and demyelinated axons. 
A. Saltatory nerve conduction in myelinated axons occurs with the nerve impulse 
jumping from one node of Ranvier to the next. Sodium channels (shown as breaks 
in the solid black line) are concentrated at the nodes where axonal depolarization 
occurs. B. Following demyelination, additional sodium channels are redistributed 
along the axon itself, thereby allowing continuous propagation of the nerve action 
potential despite the absence of myelin.


--- PDF PAGE 3238 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3192
Serial MRI studies in early relapsing-remitting MS reveal that bursts 
of focal inflammatory disease activity occur far more frequently than 
would have been predicted by the frequency of relapses. Thus, early in 
MS, most disease activity is clinically silent.
The total volume of T2-weighted signal abnormality (the “burden 
of disease”) shows a significant (albeit weak) correlation with clinical 
disability. Quantitative measures of brain and spinal cord atrophy are 
evidence of diffuse tissue injury and correlate more strongly with mea-
sures of disability or progressive MS. Serial MRI studies also indicate 
that progressive whole brain atrophy occurs even in very early MS and 
continues throughout the disease course. Approximately one-third of 
T2-weighted lesions appear as hypointense lesions (black holes) on 
T1-weighted imaging. Black holes may be a marker of irreversible 
demyelination and axonal loss, although even this measure depends 
on the timing of the image acquisition (e.g., most acute Gd-enhancing 
T2 lesions are T1 dark).
Evoked Potentials  EP testing assesses function in afferent (visual, 
auditory, and somatosensory) or efferent (motor) CNS pathways. EPs 
use computer averaging to measure CNS electric potentials evoked 
by repetitive stimulation of selected peripheral nerves or of the brain. 
These tests provide the most information when the pathways studied 
are clinically uninvolved. For example, in a patient with a relapsing 
spinal cord syndrome with sensory deficits in the legs, an abnormal 
somatosensory EP following posterior tibial nerve stimulation pro-
vides little new information. By contrast, an abnormal visual EP in 
this circumstance would permit a diagnosis of clinically definite MS 
(Table 436-3). Abnormalities on one or more EP modalities occur 
in 80–90% of MS patients. EP abnormalities are not specific to MS, 
although a marked delay in the latency of a specific EP component (as 
opposed to a reduced amplitude or distorted wave-shape) is sugges-
tive of demyelination.
Cerebrospinal Fluid  CSF abnormalities found in MS include a 
mononuclear cell pleocytosis and an increased level of intrathecally 
synthesized IgG. The total CSF protein is usually normal or mildly 
elevated. Various formulas distinguish intrathecally synthesized IgG 
from IgG that entered the CNS passively from the serum. One formula, 
the CSF IgG index, expresses the ratio of IgG to albumin in the CSF 
divided by the same ratio in the serum. The IgG synthesis rate uses 
serum and CSF IgG and albumin measurements to calculate the rate of 
CNS IgG synthesis. The measurement of OCBs by agarose gel electro-
phoresis in the CSF also assesses intrathecal production of IgG. Two or 
more discrete OCBs, not present in a paired serum sample, are found in 
>75% of patients with MS. OCBs may be absent at the onset of MS, and 
in individual patients, the number of bands may increase with time.
A mild CSF pleocytosis (>5 cells/μL) is present in ~25% of cases, 
usually in young patients with RMS. A pleocytosis of >75 cells/μL, the 
presence of polymorphonuclear leukocytes, or a protein concentration 
>1 g/L (>100 mg/dL) in CSF should raise concern that the patient may 
not have MS.
■
■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The possibility of an alternative diagnosis should always be considered 
(Table 436-4), particularly when (1) symptoms are localized exclusively 
to the posterior fossa, craniocervical junction, or spinal cord; (2) the 
patient is <15 or >60 years of age; (3) the clinical course is progressive 
from onset; (4) the patient has never experienced visual, sensory, or 
bladder symptoms; or (5) laboratory findings (e.g., MRI, CSF, or EPs) 
are atypical. Similarly, uncommon or rare symptoms in MS (e.g., apha-
sia, parkinsonism, chorea, isolated dementia, severe muscular atrophy, 
peripheral neuropathy, episodic loss of consciousness, fever, headache, 
seizures, or coma) should increase concern about an alternative diag-
nosis. Diagnosis is also difficult in patients with a rapid or explosive 
(stroke-like) onset or with mild symptoms and a normal neurologic 
examination. Rarely, intense inflammation and swelling may produce 
a mass lesion that mimics a primary or metastatic tumor. Disorders 
possibly mistaken for MS include: neuromyelitis optica (Chap. 437), 
sarcoidosis, vascular disorders (antiphospholipid syndrome and vas-
culitis), rarely CNS lymphoma and still more rarely infections such as 
syphilis or Lyme disease. The specific tests required to exclude alterna-
tive diagnoses will vary with each clinical situation; however, an ery-
throcyte sedimentation rate, serum B12 level, anti-nuclear antibodies, 
and treponemal antibody should probably be obtained in all patients 
with suspected MS.
TABLE 436-3  Diagnostic Criteria for Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
ADDITIONAL DATA NEEDED FOR MS DIAGNOSIS
2 or more attacks; 
objective clinical evidence 
of 2 or more lesions or 
objective clinical evidence 
of 1 lesion with reasonable 
historical evidence of a 
prior attack
None
2 or more attacks; 
objective clinical evidence 
of 1 lesion
Dissemination in space, demonstrated by
•  ≥1 T2 lesion on MRI in at least 2 out of 4 
MS-typical regions of the CNS (periventricular, 
juxtacortical, infratentorial, or spinal cord)
OR
•  Await a further clinical attack implicating a 
different CNS site
1 attack; objective clinical 
evidence of 2 or more 
lesions
Dissemination in time, demonstrated by
•  Simultaneous presence of asymptomatic 
gadolinium-enhancing and nonenhancing 
lesions at any time
OR
•  A new T2 and/or gadolinium-enhancing 
lesion(s) on follow-up MRI, irrespective of its 
timing with reference to a baseline scan
OR
•  Await a second clinical attack
1 attack; objective 
clinical evidence of 1 
lesion (clinically isolated 
syndrome)
Dissemination in space and time, demonstrated 
by:
For dissemination in space
•  ≥1 T2 lesion in at least 2 out of 4 MS-typical 
regions of the CNS (periventricular, 
juxtacortical, infratentorial, or spinal cord)
OR
•  Await a second clinical attack implicating a 
different CNS site
AND
For dissemination in time
•  Simultaneous presence of asymptomatic 
gadolinium-enhancing and nonenhancing 
lesions at any time
OR
•  A new T2 and/or gadolinium-enhancing 
lesion(s) on follow-up MRI, irrespective of its 
timing with reference to a baseline scan
OR
•  Await a second clinical attack
Insidious neurologic 
progression suggestive of 
MS (PPMS)
1 year of disease progression (retrospectively or 
prospectively determined)
PLUS
2 out of the 3 following criteria
Evidence for dissemination in space in the brain 
based on ≥1 T2+ lesions in the MS-characteristic 
periventricular, juxtacortical, or infratentorial 
regions
Evidence for dissemination in space in the spinal 
cord based on ≥2 T2+ lesions in the cord
Positive CSF (isoelectric focusing evidence of 
oligoclonal bands and/or elevated IgG index)
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MRI, 
magnetic resonance imaging; PPMS, primary progressive multiple sclerosis.
Source: From CH Polman et al: Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 
Revisions to the “McDonald Criteria.” Ann Neurol 69:292, 2011.


--- PDF PAGE 3239 ---

CHAPTER 436 Multiple Sclerosis
3193
■
■PROGNOSIS
Most patients with clinically evident MS ultimately experience progres-
sive neurologic disability. In older studies conducted before disease-
modifying therapies for MS were available, 15 years after onset, only 
20% of patients had no functional limitation, and between one-third 
and one-half of RMS patients progressed to SPMS and required assis-
tance with ambulation; furthermore, 25 years after onset, ~80% of MS 
patients reached this level of disability. The long-term prognosis for MS 
has improved substantially in recent years, and transition from RMS to 
SPMS now occurs at approximately a 1% annual rate compared with 
2–3% in the pretreatment era. This improvement is almost certainly 
due, at least in part, to widespread use of disease modifying therapies 
for RMS. Although the prognosis in an individual is difficult to estab-
lish, certain clinical features suggest a more favorable prognosis. These 
include ON or sensory symptoms at onset; fewer than two relapses in 
the first year of illness; and minimal impairment after 5 years. By con-
trast, patients with truncal ataxia, action tremor, pyramidal symptoms, 
or a progressive disease course are more likely to become disabled. 
Patients with a long-term favorable course are likely to have developed 
fewer MRI lesions and have less brain atrophy during the early years of 
disease, and vice versa. Importantly, some MS patients have a benign 
variant of MS and never develop neurologic disability. The likelihood 
of having benign MS is thought to be <10%. Patients with benign MS 
15 years after onset who have entirely normal neurologic examinations 
are likely to maintain their benign course.
In patients with their first demyelinating event (i.e., a clinically 
isolated syndrome), the brain MRI provides prognostic information. 
With three or more typical T2-weighted lesions, the risk of developing 
MS after 20 years is ~80%. Conversely, with a normal brain MRI, the 
likelihood of developing MS is <20%. Similarly, the presence of two or 
more Gd-enhancing lesions at baseline is highly predictive of future 
MS, as is the appearance of either new T2-weighted lesions or new Gd 
enhancement ≥3 months after the initial episode.
Effect of Pregnancy  Pregnant MS patients experience fewer 
attacks than expected during gestation (especially in the last trimester), 
but more attacks than expected in the first 3 months postpartum. When 
considering the pregnancy year as a whole (i.e., 9 months of pregnancy 
plus 3 months postpartum), the overall disease course is unaffected. 
Decisions about childbearing should thus be made based on (1) the 
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 436-3  Magnetic resonance imaging findings in multiple sclerosis (MS). A. Axial first-echo image from T2-weighted sequence demonstrates multiple bright 
signal abnormalities in white matter, typical for MS. B. Sagittal T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image in which the high signal of cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) has been suppressed. CSF appears dark, whereas areas of brain edema or demyelination appear high in signal, as shown here in the corpus callosum 
(arrows). Lesions in the anterior corpus callosum are frequent in MS and rare in vascular disease. C. Sagittal T2-weighted fast spin echo image of the thoracic spine 
demonstrates a fusiform high-signal-intensity lesion in the midthoracic spinal cord. D. Sagittal T1-weighted image obtained after the intravenous administration of 
gadolinium DTPA reveals focal areas of blood-brain barrier disruption, identified as high-signal-intensity regions (arrows).


--- PDF PAGE 3240 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3194
TABLE 436-4  Disorders That Can Mimic Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Behçet’s disease
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy, subcortical infarcts, and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL)
Congenital leukodystrophies (e.g., adrenoleukodystrophy, metachromatic 
leukodystrophy)
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
Ischemic optic neuropathy (arteritic and nonarteritic)
Lyme disease
Mitochondrial encephalopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke (MELAS)
Neoplasms (e.g., lymphoma, glioma, meningioma)
Sarcoid
Sjögren’s syndrome
Stroke and ischemic cerebrovascular disease
Syphilis
Systemic lupus erythematosus and related collagen vascular disorders
Tropical spastic paraparesis (HTLV-1/2 infection)
Vascular malformations (especially spinal dural AV fistulas)
Vasculitis (primary CNS or other)
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Abbreviations: AV, arteriovenous; CNS, central nervous system; HTLV, human T cell 
lymphotropic virus.
mother’s physical state, (2) her ability to care for the child, and (3) the 
availability of social support. Disease-modifying therapy is generally 
discontinued during pregnancy, although the actual risk from the inter-
ferons and glatiramer acetate (see below) appears to be low.
TREATMENT
Multiple Sclerosis
Therapy for MS can be divided into several categories: (1) treatment 
of acute attacks, (2) treatment with disease-modifying agents that 
reduce the biologic activity of MS, and (3) symptomatic therapy. 
Treatments that promote remyelination or neural repair do not 
currently exist, but several promising approaches are being actively 
investigated.
The Expanded Disability Status Score (EDSS) is a widely used 
measure of neurologic impairment in MS (Table 436-5). Most 
patients with EDSS scores <3.5 walk normally, and are generally 
not disabled; by contrast, patients with EDSS scores >4.0 have 
progressive MS (SPMS or PPMS), are gait-impaired, and often are 
occupationally disabled.
ACUTE ATTACKS OR INITIAL DEMYELINATING EPISODES
When patients experience acute deterioration, it is important to con-
sider whether this change reflects new disease activity or a “pseu-
doexacerbation” resulting from an increase in ambient temperature, 
fever, or an infection. When the clinical change is thought to reflect 
a pseudoexacerbation, glucocorticoid treatment is inappropriate. 
Glucocorticoids are used to manage either first attacks or acute 
exacerbations. They provide short-term clinical benefit by reducing 
the severity and shortening the duration of attacks. Whether treat-
ment provides any long-term benefit on the course of the illness is 
less clear. Therefore, mild attacks are often not treated. Physical and 
occupational therapy can help with mobility and manual dexterity.
Glucocorticoid treatment is usually administered as intravenous 
methylprednisolone, 500–1000 mg/d for 3–5 days, either without a 
taper or followed by a course of oral prednisone beginning at a dose 
of 60–80 mg/d and gradually tapered over 2 weeks. Orally adminis-
tered methylprednisolone, prednisone, or dexamethasone (in equiv-
alent dosages) can be substituted for the intravenous portion of the 
therapy. Outpatient treatment is almost always possible.
Side effects of short-term glucocorticoid therapy include fluid 
retention, potassium loss, weight gain, gastric disturbances, acne, 
and emotional lability. Concurrent use of a low-salt, potassium-rich 
diet and avoidance of potassium-wasting diuretics are advisable. 
Lithium carbonate (300 mg orally bid) may help manage emo-
tional lability and insomnia associated with glucocorticoid ther-
apy. Patients with a history of peptic ulcer disease may require 
cimetidine (400 mg bid) or ranitidine (150 mg bid). Proton pump 
inhibitors such as pantoprazole (40 mg orally bid) may reduce the 
likelihood of gastritis, especially when large doses are administered 
orally. Plasma exchange (five to seven exchanges: 40–60 mL/kg per 
exchange, every other day for 14 days) may benefit patients with 
fulminant attacks of demyelination that are unresponsive to glu-
cocorticoids. However, the cost is high, and conclusive evidence of 
efficacy is lacking.
DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPIES FOR RELAPSING FORMS OF 
MS (RMS, SPMS WITH EXACERBATIONS)
More than a dozen immunomodulatory and immunosuppressive 
agents are approved by regulatory bodies for treatment of RMS.  
In phase 3 clinical trials, each was shown to reduce the frequency of 
clinical relapses and evolution of new brain MRI lesions in relapsing 
forms of MS (Table 436-6). Each can also be used in SPMS patients 
who continue to experience attacks, both because SPMS can be 
difficult to distinguish from relapsing MS and because the available 
clinical trials, although not definitive, suggest that such patients may 
sometimes derive therapeutic benefit. When considering the data in 
Table 436-6, however, it is important to note that the relative efficacy 
of the different agents has not been directly tested in head-to head 
studies and that cross-trial comparisons are inaccurate. However, 
given the increasingly complex landscape of therapeutics for MS, 
for convenience the discussion of these agents has been divided into 
those used more and less frequently; and also by an estimate of their 
relative (modest, moderate or high) perceived level of efficacy. These 
are meant to serve as only very rough guides, and considerable vari-
ance exists in practice patterns, as well as availability of these agents, 
in different parts of the world.
FREQUENTLY USED AGENTS FOR RMS
Interferon a (Modestly Effective)  Interferon β (IFN-β) is a class I  
interferon originally identified by its antiviral properties. Effi-
cacy in MS probably results from immunomodulatory properties 
including (1) downregulating expression of MHC molecules on 
antigen-presenting cells, (2) reducing proinflammatory and increas-
ing regulatory cytokine levels, (3) inhibiting T-cell proliferation, 
and (4) limiting the trafficking of inflammatory cells in the CNS. 
IFN-β reduces the attack rate and slows accumulation of disability 
and MRI-documented disease burden. IFN-β should be considered 
in patients with either relapsing forms of MS (either RMS or SPMS 
with superimposed relapses). Head-to-head trials suggest that dos-
ing IFN-β more frequently and at higher doses has better efficacy 
but is also more likely to induce neutralizing antibodies (see below). 
IFN-β-1a (Avonex), 30 μg, is administered by intramuscular injec-
tion once every week. IFN-β-1a (Rebif), 44 μg, is administered by 
subcutaneous injection three times per week. IFN-β-1b (Betaseron 
or Extavia), 250 μg, is administered by subcutaneous injection every 
other day. Pegylated IFN-β-1a (Plegridy), 125 μg, is administered 
by subcutaneous injection once every 14 days. Pegylated IFN-β-1a 
is an interferon to which a single, linear 20,000 dalton methoxy  
poly(ethyleneglycol)-O-2-methylpopionaldehyde molecule is cova-
lently attached; the pegylated molecule contributes to reduced in 
vivo clearance allowing less frequent administration.
Common side effects of IFN-β therapy include flulike symp-
toms (e.g., fevers, chills, and myalgias) and mild abnormalities on 
routine laboratory evaluation (e.g., elevated liver function tests or 
lymphopenia). Rarely, more severe hepatotoxicity may occur. Sub-
cutaneous IFN-β also causes reactions at the injection site (e.g., pain, 
redness, induration, or, rarely, skin necrosis). Side effects can usu-
ally be managed with concomitant nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
medications. Depression, increased spasticity, and cognitive changes 
have been reported, although these symptoms can also be due to 


--- PDF PAGE 3241 ---

CHAPTER 436 Multiple Sclerosis
3195
the underlying disease. Side effects due to IFN-β therapy usually 
subside over time.
Approximately 2–10% of IFN-β-1a (Avonex) recipients, 15–25% 
of IFN-β-1a (Rebif) recipients, and 30–40% of IFN-β-1b (Betase-
ron/Extavia) recipients develop neutralizing antibodies to IFN-β, 
which may disappear over time. Less than 1% of patients treated 
with pegylated IFN-β-1a develop neutralizing antibodies. For a 
patient doing well on therapy, the presence of antibodies should not 
affect treatment. Conversely, for a patient doing poorly on therapy, 
alternative treatment should be considered, even if there are no 
detectable antibodies.
Glatiramer Acetate (Modestly Effective)  Glatiramer acetate is 
a synthetic, random polypeptide composed of four amino acids 
(l-glutamic acid, l-lysine, l-alanine, and l-tyrosine). Its mechanism 
of action may include (1) induction of antigen-specific suppressor 
T cells; (2) binding to MHC molecules, thereby displacing bound 
MBP; or (3) altering the balance between proinflammatory and 
regulatory cytokines. Glatiramer acetate reduces the attack rate 
TABLE 436-5  Scoring Systems for Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
Kurtzke Expanded Disability Status Score (EDSS)
0.0 = Normal neurologic examination (all grade 0 in functional status [FS])
1.0 = No disability, minimal signs in one FS (i.e., grade 1)
1.5 = No disability, minimal signs in more than one FS (more than one  
grade 1)
2.0 = Minimal disability in one FS (one FS grade 2, others 0 or 1)
2.5 = Minimal disability in two FS (two FS grade 2, others 0 or 1)
3.0 = Moderate disability in one FS (one FS grade 3, others 0 or 1) or mild 
disability in three or four FS (three/four FS grade 2, others 0 or 1) 
although fully ambulatory
3.5 = Fully ambulatory but with moderate disability in one FS (one grade 3)  
and one or two FS grade 2; or two FS grade 3; or five FS grade 2 
(others 0 or 1)
4.0 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ~500 m
4.5 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ~300 m
5.0 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ~200 m
  5.5 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ~100 m
  6.0 = Unilateral assistance required to walk about 100 m with or without resting
  6.5 = Constant bilateral assistance required to walk about 20 m without resting
  7.0 = Unable to walk beyond about 5 m even with aid; essentially restricted to 
wheelchair; wheels self and transfers alone
  7.5 = Unable to take more than a few steps; restricted to wheelchair; may need 
aid to transfer
  8.0 = Essentially restricted to bed or chair or perambulated in wheelchair, but 
out of bed most of day; retains many self-care functions; generally has 
effective use of arms
  8.5 = Essentially restricted to bed much of the day; has some effective use of 
arm(s); retains some self-care functions
  9.0 = Helpless bed patient; can communicate and eat
  9.5 = Totally helpless bed patient; unable to communicate or eat
10.0 = Death due to MS
Functional Status (FS) Score
A. Pyramidal functions
0 = Normal
1 = Abnormal signs without disability
2 = Minimal disability
3 = Mild or moderate paraparesis or hemiparesis, or severe monoparesis
4 = Marked paraparesis or hemiparesis, moderate quadriparesis, or 
monoplegia
5 = Paraplegia, hemiplegia, or marked quadriparesis
6 = Quadriplegia
B. Cerebellar functions
0 = Normal
1 = Abnormal signs without disability
2 = Mild ataxia
3 = Moderate truncal or limb ataxia
4 = Severe ataxia all limbs
5 = Unable to perform coordinated movements due to ataxia
C. Brainstem functions
0 = Normal
1 = Signs only
2 = Moderate nystagmus or other mild disability
3 = Severe nystagmus, marked extraocular weakness, or moderate disability 
of other cranial nerves
4 = Marked dysarthria or other marked disability
5 = Inability to swallow or speak
D. Sensory functions
0 = Normal
1 = Vibration or figure-writing decrease only, in 1 or 2 limbs
2 = Mild decrease in touch or pain or position sense, and/or moderate 
decrease in vibration in 1 or 2 limbs, or vibratory decrease alone in 3 or 
4 limbs
3 = Moderate decrease in touch or pain or position sense, and/or essentially 
lost vibration in 1 or 2 limbs, or mild decrease in touch or pain, and/or 
moderate decrease in all proprioceptive tests in 3 or 4 limbs
4 = Marked decrease in touch or pain or loss of proprioception, alone or 
combined, in 1 or 2 limbs or moderate decrease in touch or pain and/or 
severe proprioceptive decrease in >2 limbs
5 = Loss (essentially) of sensation in 1 or 2 limbs or moderate decrease in  
touch or pain and/or loss of proprioception for most of the body below  
the head
6 = Sensation essentially lost below the head
E. Bowel and bladder functions
0 = Normal
1 = Mild urinary hesitancy, urgency, or retention
2 = Moderate hesitancy, urgency, retention of bowel or bladder, or rare urinary 
incontinence
3 = Frequent urinary incontinence
4 = In need of almost constant catheterization
5 = Loss of bladder function
6 = Loss of bowel and bladder function
F. Visual (or optic) functions
0 = Normal
1 = Scotoma with visual acuity (corrected) better than 20/30
2 = Worse eye with scotoma with maximal visual acuity (corrected) of 20/30 to 
20/59
3 = Worse eye with large scotoma, or moderate decrease in fields, but with 
maximal visual acuity (corrected) of 20/60 to 20/99
4 = Worse eye with marked decrease of fields and maximal acuity (corrected) of 
20/100 to 20/200; grade 3 plus maximal acuity of better eye of 20/60 or 
less
5 = Worse eye with maximal visual acuity (corrected) <20/200; grade 4 plus 
maximal acuity of better eye of ≤20/60
6 = Grade 5 plus maximal visual acuity of better eye of ≤20/60
G. Cerebral (or mental) functions
0 = Normal
1 = Mood alteration only (does not affect EDSS score)
2 = Mild decrease in mentation
3 = Moderate decrease in mentation
4 = Marked decrease in mentation
5 = Chronic brain syndrome—severe or incompetent
Source: Adapted from JF Kurtzke: Rating neurologic impairment in multiple sclerosis: An expanded disability status scale (EDSS). Neurology 33:1444, 1983.


--- PDF PAGE 3242 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3196
(whether measured clinically or by MRI) in RMS. Glatiramer ace-
tate also benefits disease severity measures, although, for clinical 
disability, this is less well established than for IFN-β. Nevertheless, 
two head-to-head trials demonstrated that the impact of glatiramer 
acetate on clinical relapse rates and disability was comparable to 
high-dose, high-frequency IFN-β. Therefore, glatiramer acetate 
should be considered as an equally effective alternative to IFN-β 
in RMS patients. Its usefulness in progressive disease is unknown.  
Glatiramer acetate is administered by subcutaneous injection of 
either 20 mg every day or 40 mg thrice weekly. Injection-site 
reactions also occur with glatiramer acetate. In addition, ~15% 
of patients experience one or more episodes of flushing, chest 
tightness, dyspnea, palpitations, and anxiety after injection. This 
systemic reaction is unpredictable, brief (duration <1 h), and tends 
not to recur. Finally, some patients experience lipoatrophy, which, 
on occasion, can be disfiguring and require cessation of treatment. 
Recently, glatiramer acetate was U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) approved as a biosimilar medication (Glatopa) and is 
dosed at 20 mg every day. Although clinical trials were not per-
formed with biosimilar glatiramer acetate, the efficacy and safety 
are presumed to be similar to the branded product.
Fingolimod (Moderately Effective)  Fingolimod is a sphingosine-1-
phosphate (S1P) inhibitor that prevents the egress of lymphocytes 
from secondary lymphoid organs such as the lymph nodes and 
spleen. Its mechanism of action is probably due to sequestration of 
lymphocytes in the periphery, thereby inhibiting their trafficking 
to the CNS. Fingolimod reduces the attack rate and significantly 
improves all measures of disease severity in MS. It is well tolerated, 
and the daily oral dosing schedule makes it convenient for patients. 
A head-to-head phase 3 randomized study demonstrated the supe-
riority of fingolimod over low-dose (weekly) IFN-β-1a.
Fingolimod, 0.5 mg, is administered orally each day. Treatment 
with fingolimod is well tolerated. Mild abnormalities on routine 
laboratory evaluation (e.g., elevated liver function tests or lymp-
hopenia) are more common than in controls, sometimes requiring 
discontinuation of the medication. First- and second-degree heart 
block and bradycardia can also occur when fingolimod therapy is 
initiated. A 6-h period of observation (including electrocardiogram 
monitoring) is recommended for all patients receiving their first 
dose. Other side effects include macular edema and, rarely, dissemi-
nated varicella-zoster virus (VZV) and cryptococcal infections; prior 
to initiating therapy with fingolimod, an ophthalmic examination 
and VZV vaccination for seronegative individuals are indicated. 
Fingolimod can also cause QT prolongation with the potential for 
drug-drug interactions with other medications that also prolong the 
QT interval.
Dimethyl Fumarate (DMF) (Moderately Effective)  DMF is a small 
molecule and is a Krebs cycle metabolite with anti-inflammatory 
effects in psoriasis. Although the precise mechanisms of action of 
DMF are not fully understood, it seems to modulate the expres-
sion of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Also, 
DMF inhibits the ubiquitylation and degradation of nuclear factor  
E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)—a transcription factor that binds to the 
antioxidant response elements (AREs) located on the DNA and 
thereby induces the transcription of several antioxidant proteins. 
DMF reduces the attack rate and significantly improves all measures 
of disease severity in MS patients. However, its twice-daily oral dos-
ing schedule makes it somewhat less convenient for patients than 
daily oral therapies. In addition, compliance is likely to be less with 
a twice-daily dosing regimen—a factor that could be of concern 
given the observation (in a small clinical trial) that once-daily DMF 
lacks efficacy. A head-to-head trial provided evidence that DMF was 
superior to glatiramer acetate on some outcome measures.
DMF, 240 mg, is administered orally twice each day. Gastrointes-
tinal side effects (abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, flushing, 
and diarrhea) are common at the start of therapy but generally sub-
side with continued administration. Other adverse events include 
flushing mild decreases in neutrophil and lymphocyte counts and 
elevations in liver enzymes. Nevertheless, in general, treatment with 
DMF is well tolerated after an initial period of adjustment. Follow-
ing the release of DMF, several cases of progressive multifocal leuko-
encephalopathy (PML) were reported in patients receiving products 
that contained DMF. Most of these patients were lymphopenic and 
monitoring for lymphopenia every 6 months is recommended. 
Patients who are persistently lympopenic (lymphocyte count  
<500 cells/mL) are recommended to consider alternate treatments 
TABLE 436-6  Outcomes for FDA-Approved Therapies for Multiple Sclerosis (MS)a
RELAPSING MS
CLINICAL OUTCOMESb
MRI OUTCOMESc
DOSE, ROUTE, AND 
SCHEDULE
STUDY DURATION 
WEEKS
COMPARATOR
ATTACK RATE, 
MEAN
CHANGE IN DISEASE 
SEVERITY
NEW T2 LESIONSd
TOTAL BURDEN 
OF DISEASE
IFN-β-1b, 250 μg SC qod
96
PBO
–34%e
–29% (NS)
–83%f
–17%e
IFN-β-1a, 30 μg IM qw
96
PBO
–18%g
–37%g
–36%f
NS
IFN-β-1a, 44 μg SC tiw
96
PBO
–32%e
–30%g
–78%e
–15%e
Peg- IFN-β-1a, 125 μg SC q2w
48
PBO
–36%e
–38%g
–67%e
–2%e
GA, 20 mg SC qd
96
PBO
–29%f
–12% (NS)
–38%f
–8%f
MTX, 12 mg/m2 IV q3mo
96
PBO
–66%e
–75%g
–79%g
NR
NTZ, 300 mg IV qmo
96
PBO
–68%e
–42%e
–83%e
–18%e
FNG, 0.5 mg PO qd
96
PBO
–55%e
–34%f
–74%e
–23%e
DMF, 240 mg PO bid
96
PBO
–52%e
–40%f
–71%e
NR
TF, 14 mg PO qd
96
PBO
–31%e
–26%g
–70%e
–20%g
FNG, 0.5 mg PO qd
48
IFN-β-1a, 30 μg IM qw
–52%e
NS
–35%e
NS
ALEM, 12 mg/m2 IV/5 d
104
IFN-β-1a, 44 μg SC tiw
–49%e
–42%f
–32%e
NS
OCR, 600 mg IV, Q6 mo
96
IFN-β-1a, 44 μg SC tiw
–46%e,h
–33%e,h
–80%e,h
NR
Primary Progressive MS
OCR, 600 mg IV, Q6 mo
96
PBO
–NR
–24%
–92%
–11%
aPercentage reductions (or increases) have been calculated by dividing the reported rates in the treated group by the comparable rates in the placebo group, except 
for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) disease burden, which was calculated as the difference in the median percent change between the treated and placebo groups. 
bSeverity = 1 point Expanded Disability Status Score progression, sustained for 3 months (in the IFN-β-1a 30 μg qw trial, this change was sustained for 6 months; in 
the IFN-β-1b trial, this was over 3 years). cDifferent studies measured these MRI measures differently, making comparisons difficult (numbers for new T2 represent the 
best case scenario for each trial). dNew lesions seen on T2-weighted MRI. ep = .001. fp = .01. gp = .05. hPooled analysis from OPERA 1 and 2 studies.
Abbreviations: DMF, dimethyl fumarate; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; FNG, fingolimod; GA, glatiramer acetate; IFN-β, interferon β; IM, intramuscular; IV, 
intravenous; MTX, mitoxantrone; NR, not reported; NS, not significant; NTZ, natalizumab; PO, oral; q3mo, once every 3 months; qd, daily; qmo, once per month; qod, 
every other day; qw, once per week; qyr, once per year; SC, subcutaneous; TF, teriflunomide; tiw, three times per week.


--- PDF PAGE 3243 ---

CHAPTER 436 Multiple Sclerosis
3197
due to the PML risk. Clinically significant liver injury has been 
reported with DMF treatment. Liver function tests should be assessed 
before treatment and when clinically indicated. Elevations in liver 
function tests resolve the following treatment discontinuation.
Natalizumab (Highly Effective)  Natalizumab is a humanized 
monoclonal antibody directed against the α4 subunit of α4β1 inte-
grin, a cellular adhesion molecule expressed on the surface of lym-
phocytes. It prevents lymphocytes from binding to endothelial cells, 
thereby preventing lymphocytes from penetrating the BBB and 
entering the CNS. Natalizumab is highly effective in reducing the 
attack rate and significantly improves all measures of disease sever-
ity in MS (both clinical and MRI). Moreover, it is well-tolerated, 
and the dosing schedule of monthly intravenous infusions makes 
it very convenient for patients. Natalizumab, 300 mg, is adminis-
tered by IV infusion each month. Treatment with natalizumab is, 
in general, well tolerated. A small percentage (<10%) of patients 
experience hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylaxis), and 
~6% develop neutralizing antibodies to the molecule (only half of 
which persist).
The major concern with long-term treatment is the risk of PML, 
a life-threatening condition resulting from infection by the John  
Cunningham (JC) virus. PML has occurred in ~0.4% of patients 
treated with natalizumab. The incidence of PML is very low in the 
first year of treatment but then rises in subsequent years of treatment 
to reach a level of about 2 cases per 1000 patients per year. Never-
theless, the measurement of antibodies against the JC virus in the 
serum can be used to stratify this risk. Approximately half of the 
adult population is JC antibody positive, indicating that they expe-
rienced an asymptomatic infection with the JC virus at some time 
in the past. Thus, in patients who do not have these antibodies, the 
risk of PML is minimal (<1:10,000 as long as they remain JC antibody 
free). Conversely, in patients who have these antibodies (especially 
those who have them in high titer), the risk may be as high as ≥1.1%. 
Up to 2% of seronegative MS patients undergoing treatment with 
natalizumab seroconvert annually; thus, it is recommended that 
JC antibody status be assessed at 6-month intervals in all patients 
receiving natalizumab treatment. In antibody-positive patients, a 
change to another disease-modifying therapy should be strongly 
considered. The risk of PML is also high in patients who previously 
received immunosuppressive therapy. Natalizumab is generally rec-
ommended only for JC antibody–negative patients, unless they have 
failed alternative therapies or if they have a particularly aggressive 
disease course.
Ocrelizumab (Highly Effective)  Ocrelizumab is a humanized mono-
clonal antibody directed against the CD20 molecule present on the 
surface of mature B cells. CD20 is not expressed on early B-cell 
precursors or on antibody-producing plasma cells, thus treat-
ment with ocrelizumab selectively depletes mature B cells while 
preserving preexisting humoral immunity and the capacity for 
B-cell reconstitution by lymphoid stem cells. Ocrelizumab rapidly 
depletes circulating B cells through antibody-dependent cellular 
toxicity and complement-dependent cytotoxicity. The beneficial 
effects of B-cell depletion in MS are not fully understood but may 
involve interruption in trafficking of B cells from the periphery to 
the CNS and through reduction in antigen presentation and/or 
modulation of cytokine secretion by B cells. Ocrelizumab targets 
the same molecule as rituximab, a monoclonal antibody indicated 
for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and rheumatoid arthritis, and ofatu-
mumab, indicated for treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. 
In two phase 3 trials, ocrelizumab demonstrated a high degree of 
efficacy against RMS, reducing annualized relapse rates by 47%, 
reducing new MRI lesions by 95%, and improving other measures 
of inflammatory and degenerative disease activity, compared with 
three times per week interferon β-1a (Rebif). Ocrelizumab 600 mg 
is administered by intravenous infusion every 24 weeks (admin-
istered as two 300-mg infusions spaced 2 weeks apart for the first 
dose, and as a single 600-mg infusion thereafter); intravenous meth-
ylprednisolone 100 mg is given prior to each infusion and optional 
prophylaxis with analgesics/antipyretics and antihistamines are 
recommended, along with adjustment of the infusion rate to man-
age infusion-related reactions.
Ocrelizumab is generally well tolerated with infusion-related 
reactions occurring in a minority of patients; these are most often 
observed with the first infusion and are usually mild in degree. 
Rituximab is associated with a very small risk of PML (estimated at 
<1:25,000/year), thus it is possible that ocrelizumab will also carry 
a nonzero risk. Ocrelizumab may also carry some risk of increased 
malignancies including breast cancer, although rituximab is not 
associated with an increased risk of malignancy. Additional study 
of ocrelizumab in the postmarketing setting is needed to determine 
whether there is in fact a fractional increased malignancy risk asso-
ciated with ocrelizumab.
LESS COMMONLY USED AGENTS FOR RMS
Teriflunomide (Modestly Effective)  Teriflunomide inhibits the 
mitochondrial enzyme dihydro-orotate dehydrogenase, which is a 
key part of the pathway for de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis from 
carbamoyl phosphate and aspartate. It is the active metabolite of the 
drug leflunomide (FDA-approved for rheumatoid arthritis), and it 
exerts its anti-inflammatory effects by limiting the proliferation of 
rapidly dividing T and B cells. This enzyme is not involved in the 
so-called “salvage pathway,” by which existing pyrimidine pools 
are recycled for DNA and RNA synthesis in resting and homeo-
statically proliferating cells. Consequently, teriflunomide is consid-
ered to be cytostatic rather than cytotoxic. Teriflunomide reduces 
the attack rate and significantly improves all measures of disease 
severity in MS patients. It is well tolerated, and its daily oral dosing 
schedule makes it very convenient for patients. A head-to-head trial 
suggested the equivalence, but not superiority, of teriflunomide 
and thrice-weekly IFN-β-1a. Teriflunomide, either 7 or 14 mg, is 
administered orally each day. In the pivotal clinical trials, mild 
hair thinning and gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea and diarrhea) 
were more common than in controls, but in general, treatment 
with teriflunomide was well tolerated. Teriflunomide rarely causes 
toxic epidermal necrolysis or Stevens-Johnson syndrome. A major 
limitation, especially in women of childbearing age, is its possible 
teratogenicity (pregnancy category X); teriflunomide can remain 
in the bloodstream for 2 years due to hepatobiliary reabsorption. 
Therefore, it is recommended that exposed men and women who 
wish to conceive receive cholestyramine or activated charcoal to 
eliminate residual drug.
Alemtuzumab (Highly Effective)  Alemtuzumab is a humanized 
monoclonal antibody directed against the CD52 antigen that is 
expressed on both monocytes and lymphocytes. It causes lympho-
cyte depletion (of both B and T cells) and a change in the compo-
sition of lymphocyte subsets. Both of these changes, particularly 
the impact on lymphocyte subsets, are long lasting. In two phase 
3 trials, which used the active comparator of thrice-weekly, high-
dose IFN-β-1a, alemtuzumab markedly reduced the attack rate and 
significantly improved measures of disease severity in MS patients 
although its impact on clinical disability was found in only one of 
the two trials. The European and Canadian drug agencies were the 
first to approve this agent for use in RMS; the FDA has also approved 
alemtuzumab, but only after an appeal following initial disapproval.  
The reasons for the initial disapproval were based on a perceived 
lack of a convincing disability effect and concerns over potential 
toxicity. The toxicities of concern were the occurrence of (1) auto-
immune diseases including thyroiditis, Graves’ disease, throm-
bocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, pancytopenia, antiglomerular 
basement membrane disease, and membranous glomerulonephritis;  
(2) malignancies including thyroid cancer, melanoma, breast cancer, 
human papillomavirus (HPV)–related cancers, and lymphoprolifer-
ative disorders including lymphoma; (3) serious infections; and (4) 
infusion reactions. Because of its toxicity profile, the FDA indicated 
alemtuzumab only in patients who have tried and failed at least 
two other DMTs.


--- PDF PAGE 3244 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3198
Mitoxantrone Hydrochloride (Highly Effective)  Mitoxantrone, an 
anthracenedione, exerts its antineoplastic action by (1) intercalat-
ing into DNA and producing both strand breaks and interstrand 
cross-links, (2) interfering with RNA synthesis, and (3) inhibiting 
topoisomerase II (involved in DNA repair). The FDA approved 
mitoxantrone on the basis of a single phase 3 clinical trial in Europe, 
in addition to an even smaller phase 2 studies. Mitoxantrone is 
indicated for use in patients with rapidly worsening MS (defined 
as patients whose neurologic status remains significantly abnormal 
between MS attacks). Despite this broad indication, however, data 
supporting its efficacy are less robust compared to other approved 
therapies.
Mitoxantrone is cardiotoxic (e.g., cardiomyopathy, reduced left 
ventricular ejection fraction, and irreversible congestive heart fail-
ure). As a result, a cumulative dose >140 mg/m2 is not recom-
mended. At currently approved doses (12 mg/m2 every 3 months), 
the maximum duration of therapy can be only 2–3 years. Further-
more, >40% of women will experience amenorrhea, which may 
be permanent. Finally, there is risk of acute leukemia from mitox-
antrone, estimated as at least a 1.4% lifetime risk. Because of these 
risks, and the availability of alternative therapies, mitoxantrone is 
now rarely used for MS.
Daclizumab, a monoclonal antibody against CD25, the α subunit 
of the interleukin 2 receptor, was removed from the market in 
2018 because of reports of brain inflammation; it was previously 
approved for patients who had failed at least two other therapies.
Initiating and Changing Treatment  Previously, most patients 
with relapsing forms of MS received injectable agents (IFN-β 
or glatiramer acetate) as first-line therapy. However, with the 
introduction of effective oral agents that include dimethyl fuma-
rate, fingolimod, and teriflunomide, this has begun to change. 
In addition, the monthly infusion therapy natalizumab, which is 
highly effective, well tolerated, and apparently safe in JC antibody– 
negative patients, provides an attractive option for many patients. 
Ocrelizumab can also be used first-line; the combination of high 
efficacy, infrequently administered infusions, and a favorable safety 
profile make its use an attractive option. With the exception of the 
first-generation injectable agents, mitoxantrone and natalizumab 
long-term (>10 year) safety data are not available for the newer 
therapies, and in many cases comparative data are lacking. The 
value of combination therapy is also largely unknown, although a 
clinical trial demonstrated no added benefit to the combination of 
glatiramer acetate with once-weekly IFN-β-1a.
Despite these unknowns, clinicians need to make decisions based 
on the best available evidence, coupled with practical consider-
ations. One reasonable approach stratifies initial decision-making 
based on two levels of disease aggressiveness (Fig. 436-4).
Mild Initial Course  In the case of recent onset, normal examination 
or minimal impairment (EDSS ≤2.5 or less), or low disease activity, 
either an injectable (IFN-β or glatiramer acetate) or an oral (DMF, 
fingolimod, or teriflunomide) agent is reasonable. Although head-
to-head comparisons are not available, natalizumab is thought to be 
more effective than these other agents, and, therefore, this therapy can 
be considered even in minimally affected, JCV antibody–seronegative 
patients. Ocrelizumab is more effective than IFN-β-1a TIW and 
appears to be safe although long-term data are not available. There-
fore, this therapy can also be considered in recent onset MS patients 
regardless of JCV serology status. The injectable agents (IFN-β and 
glatiramer acetate) have a superb track record for safety but have 
a high nuisance factor due to the need for frequent injections, as 
well as bothersome side effects that contribute to noncompliance. 
Some of the oral agents (DMF and fingolimod) are probably more 
effective than the injectables, but long-term risks are still unknown; 
DMF produces flushing and bothersome gastrointestinal symptoms 
in many patients at least initially (can be mitigated by beginning at 
one-quarter strength and gradually advancing to full dose), and fin-
golimod can lead to bradycardia and other cardiac conduction dis-
turbances of unclear clinical significance. Teriflunomide may be less 
effective than the other oral agents, and there are concerns about its 
possible long-lasting pregnancy risks as well as its association with 
toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Never-
theless, its long-term safety is likely known because teriflunomide 
Treatment
naïve
JCV (+)
IFN
GA
TER1
DMF
FNG
NTZ2
OCR
IFN
GA
TER
FNG3
DMF4
OCR
Active MS on
treatment with
IFN, GA, TER
JCV (+)
DMF
FNG
NTZ
OCR
FNG
DMF
ALEM5
OCR
Active MS on
treatment with
DMF, FNG
JCV (–)
JCV (–)
JCV (–)
JCV (+)
NTZ
ALEM5
OCR
ALEM5
OCR
MITO6
On NTZ
FNG
DMF
ALEM5
OCR
MITO6
1. Carries low but unpredictable risk of toxic epidermal necrolysis
2. Restricted to treatment-naïve patients with high disease activity in some areas
3. Has low but unpredictable risk of PML
4. Has low risk of PML that may be possible to mitigate
5. Has risk of de novo autoimmunity
6. Carries risk of cardiomyopathy and promyelocytic leukemia
JCV (+)
POSSIBLE THERAPEUTIC ALGORITHM FOR RELAPSING MS
FIGURE 436-4  Therapeutic decision-making for relapsing MS. Options are shown for different clinical scenarios and based on JCV status. Active MS is defined by 
clinical relapses or the development of new focal MRI white matter lesions. Treatment options can also include trials of different preparations of interferon β (IFN-β), 
particularly advancing from once-weekly (Avonex) to a more frequent (e.g., Rebif, Betaseron/Extavia) dosing regimen, as well as use of natalizumab in JC virus–positive 
patients.


--- PDF PAGE 3245 ---

CHAPTER 436 Multiple Sclerosis
3199
is the active metabolite of leflunomide—a drug long approved by 
the FDA for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
Moderate or Severe Initial Course  In highly active disease or 
moderate impairment (EDSS >2.5), either a highly effective oral 
agent (DMF or fingolimod) or ocrelizumab or, if the patient is JC 
virus antibody seronegative, infusion therapy with natalizumab is 
recommended.
Regardless of which agent is chosen first, treatment should 
probably be changed in patients who continue to have relapses, 
progressive neurologic impairment or, arguably, ongoing evidence 
of subclinical MRI activity (Fig. 436-4).
The long-term impact of these treatments on the disease course 
remains controversial, although several recent observational studies 
showed that these agents improve the long-term outcome of MS 
including a prolongation of the time to reach certain disability out-
comes (e.g., SPMS and requiring assistance to ambulate) and reduc-
tion in MS-related mortality. These benefits seem most conspicuous 
when treatment begins early in the relapsing stage of the illness. 
Unfortunately, however, already established progressive symptoms 
do not respond well to treatment with these disease-modifying 
therapies. Because progressive symptoms are likely to result from 
accumulated axonal and neuronal loss, many experts now believe 
that very early treatment with a disease-modifying drug is appropri-
ate for most MS patients. It may also be reasonable to delay initiating 
treatment in patients with (1) normal neurologic examinations, (2) a 
single attack or a low attack frequency, and (3) a low burden of dis-
ease as assessed by brain MRI. Untreated patients, however, should 
be followed closely with periodic brain MRI scans; the need for 
therapy is reassessed if scans reveal evidence of ongoing, subclini-
cal disease. Finally, vitamin D deficiency should be corrected in all 
patients with MS, and generally this requires oral supplementation 
with vitamin D3, 4000–5000 IU daily. Several clinical trials showed 
that supplementation with vitamin D in relapsing MS patients 
reduces MRI measures of disease activity and may also reduce the 
relapse frequency in patients actively treated with either interferon 
or glatiramer acetate.
DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPIES FOR PROGRESSIVE MS
SPMS  High-dose IFN-β probably has a beneficial effect in patients 
with SPMS with active disease (see above). IFN-β is probably inef-
fective in patients with SPMS who do not have active disease. All 
of the other agents have not yet been studied in this patient popu-
lation. Although mitoxantrone was approved for patients with pro-
gressive MS, this is not the population studied in the pivotal trial. 
Therefore, no evidence-based recommendation can be made with 
regard to its use in this setting.
PPMS  Ocrelizumab (see above), a humanized monoclonal anti-
body that targets CD20 B-cells, was shown in a single phase 3 trial 
to reduce progression of clinical disability in PPMS by 24%, and also 
to improve other clinical and MRI markers of inflammatory and 
degenerative disease activity, compared with placebo treatment. 
Ocrelizumab represents the first agent to convincingly modify the 
course of PPMS. The dosing of ocrelizumab for PPMS is identical as 
for RMS (above).
OFF-LABEL TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR RMS AND SPMS
Azathioprine (2–3 mg/kg per day) has been used primarily in relaps-
ing MS. Meta-analysis of published trials suggests that azathioprine 
is marginally effective at lowering relapse rates, although a benefit 
on disability progression has not been demonstrated.
Methotrexate (7.5–20 mg/week) was shown in one study to slow 
the progression of upper extremity dysfunction in SPMS. Because of 
the possibility of developing irreversible liver damage, some experts 
recommend a blind liver biopsy after 2 years of therapy.
Cyclophosphamide (700 mg/m2, every other month) may be help-
ful for treatment-refractory patients who are (1) otherwise in good 
health, (2) ambulatory, and (3) <40 years of age. Because cyclophos-
phamide can be used for periods in excess of 3 years, it may be 
preferable to mitoxantrone in these circumstances.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), administered in monthly 
pulses (up to 1 g/kg) for up to 2 years, appears to reduce annual 
exacerbation rates. However, its use is limited because of its high 
cost, questions about optimal dose, and uncertainty about its having 
any impact on long-term disability.
Methylprednisolone in one study, administered as monthly high-
dose intravenous pulses, reduced disability progression (see above).
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation appears to be highly effec-
tive in reducing the occurrence of relapses and may improve dis-
ability in relapsing MS. However, this procedure carries a significant 
mortality risk. Randomized trials with appropriate comparators are 
needed in order to position this procedure with respect to available 
pharmacological interventions.
OTHER THERAPEUTIC CLAIMS
Many purported treatments for MS have never been subjected to sci-
entific scrutiny. These include dietary therapies (e.g., the Swank diet, 
the Paleo Diet, the Wahls diet), megadose vitamins, calcium orotate, 
bee stings, cow colostrum, hyperbaric oxygen, procarin (a combina-
tion of histamine and caffeine), chelation, acupuncture, acupressure, 
various Chinese herbal remedies, and removal of mercury-amalgam 
tooth fillings, among many others. Patients should avoid costly or 
potentially hazardous unproven treatments. Many such treatments 
lack biologic plausibility. For example, no reliable case of mercury 
poisoning resembling typical MS has ever been described, therefore 
challenging the notion that removal of mercury-amalgam tooth fill-
ings would be beneficial.
Although potential roles for EBV, human herpesvirus (HHV) 6, 
or chlamydia have been suggested for MS, these reports are uncon-
firmed, and treatment with antiviral agents or antibiotics is not 
recommended.
Recently, chronic cerebrospinal insufficiency (CCSVI) was pro-
posed as a cause of MS with vascular-surgical intervention recom-
mended. However, multiple independent studies have subsequently 
failed to even approximate the initial claims, and patients should 
be strongly advised to avoid diagnostic procedures and potentially 
dangerous surgery for this condition.
SYMPTOMATIC THERAPY
For all patients, it is useful to encourage attention to a healthy life-
style, including maintaining an optimistic outlook, a healthy diet, 
and regular exercise as tolerated (swimming is often well-tolerated 
because of the cooling effect of cold water). It is reasonable also to 
correct vitamin D deficiency with oral vitamin D.
Ataxia/tremor is often intractable. Clonazepam, 1.5–20 mg/d; pri-
midone, 50–250 mg/d; propranolol, 40–200 mg/d; or ondansetron, 
8–16 mg/d, may help. Wrist weights occasionally reduce tremor in 
the arm or hand. Thalamotomy and deep-brain stimulation have 
been tried with mixed success.
Spasticity and spasms may improve with physical therapy, regular 
exercise, and stretching. Avoidance of triggers (e.g., infections, fecal 
impactions, bed sores) is extremely important. Effective medications 
include baclofen (20–120 mg/d), diazepam (2–40 mg/d), tizanidine 
(8–32 mg/d), dantrolene (25–400 mg/d), and cyclobenzaprine hydro-
chloride (10–60 mg/d). For severe spasticity, a baclofen pump (deliv-
ering medication directly into the CSF) can provide substantial relief.
Weakness can sometimes be improved with the use of potas-
sium channel blockers such as 4-aminopyridine (20 mg/d) and 
3,4-di-aminopyridine (40–80 mg/d), particularly in the setting 
where lower extremity weakness interferes with the patient’s ability 
to ambulate. The FDA approved extended release 4-aminopyridine 
(at 10 mg twice daily), and this can be obtained either as dalfampri-
dine (Ampyra) or through a compounding pharmacy. The principal 
concern with the use of these agents is the possibility of inducing 
seizures at high doses.
Pain is treated with anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, 100–1000 
mg/d; phenytoin, 300–600 mg/d; gabapentin, 300–3600 mg/d; or 
pregabalin, 50–300 mg/d), antidepressants (amitriptyline, 25–150 
mg/d; nortriptyline, 25–150 mg/d; desipramine, 100–300 mg/d; or 


--- PDF PAGE 3246 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3200
venlafaxine, 75–225 mg/d), or antiarrhythmics (mexiletine, 300–900 
mg/d). If these approaches fail, patients should be referred to a 
comprehensive pain management program.
Bladder dysfunction management is best guided by urodynamic 
testing. Evening fluid restriction or frequent voluntary voiding 
may help detrusor hyperreflexia. If these methods fail, propantheline  
bromide (10–15 mg/d), oxybutynin (5–15 mg/d), hyoscyamine 
sulfate (0.5–0.75 mg/d), tolterodine tartrate (2–4 mg/d), or solifena-
cin (5–10 mg/d) may help. Coadministration of pseudoephedrine 
(30–60 mg) is sometimes beneficial.
Detrusor/sphincter dyssynergia may respond to phenoxybenzamine 
(10–20 mg/d) or terazosin hydrochloride (1–20 mg/d). Loss of reflex 
bladder wall contraction may respond to bethanechol (30–150 mg/d). 
However, both conditions often require catheterization.
Urinary tract infections should be treated promptly. Patients with 
postvoid residual urine volumes >200 mL are predisposed to infec-
tions. Prevention by urine acidification (with cranberry juice or 
vitamin C) inhibits some bacteria. Prophylactic administration of 
antibiotics is sometimes necessary but may lead to colonization by 
resistant organisms. Intermittent catheterization may help to pre-
vent recurrent infections and reduce overflow incontinence.
Treatment of constipation includes high-fiber diets and fluids. 
Natural or other laxatives may help. Fecal incontinence may respond 
to a reduction in dietary fiber.
Depression should be treated. Useful drugs include the selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (fluoxetine, 20–80 mg/d, or sertraline, 
50–200 mg/d), the tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, 25–150 
mg/d; nortriptyline, 25–150 mg/d; or desipramine, 100–300 mg/d), 
and the nontricyclic antidepressants (venlafaxine, 75–225 mg/d).
Fatigue may improve with assistive devices, help in the home, or 
successful management of spasticity. Patients with frequent nocturia 
may benefit from anticholinergic medication at bedtime. Excessive 
daytime somnolence caused by MS may respond to amantadine 
(200 mg/d), methylphenidate (5–25 mg/d), modafinil (100–400 
mg/d), or armodafinil (150–250 mg/d).
Cognitive problems may respond marginally to lisdexamfetamine 
(40 mg/d).
Paroxysmal symptoms respond dramatically to low-dose anticon-
vulsants (acetazolamide, 200–600 mg/d; carbamazepine, 50–400 
mg/d; phenytoin, 50–300 mg/d; or gabapentin, 600–1800 mg/d).
Heat sensitivity may respond to heat avoidance, air-conditioning, 
or cooling garments.
Sexual dysfunction may be helped by lubricants to aid in genital 
stimulation and sexual arousal. Management of pain, spasticity, 
fatigue, and bladder/bowel dysfunction may also help. Sildenafil 
(50–100 mg), tadalafil (5–20 mg), or vardenafil (5–20 mg), taken  
1–2 h before sex, are standard treatments for erectile dysfunction.
PROMISING EXPERIMENTAL THERAPIES
Numerous clinical trials are currently under way. These include 
studies on (1) selective oral sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor antag-
onists to sequester lymphocytes in secondary lymphoid organs; 
(2) high dose biotin to improve disability in progressive forms of 
MS; (3) molecules to promote remyelination; and (4) bone marrow 
transplantation.
■
■CLINICAL VARIANTS OF MS
Acute MS (Marburg’s variant) is a fulminant demyelinating process that 
in some cases progresses inexorably to death within 1–2 years. Typ-
ically, there are no remissions. When acute MS presents as a solitary, 
usually cavitary, lesion, a brain tumor is often suspected (Fig. 436-5). In 
such cases, a brain biopsy is usually required to establish the diagnosis. 
Marburg’s variant does not seem to follow infection or vaccination, and 
it is unclear whether this syndrome represents an extreme form of MS 
or another disease altogether.
Balo’s concentric sclerosis is another fulminant demyelinating syn-
drome characterized by concentric brain or spinal cord lesions with 
alternating spheres of demyelination and remyelination (Fig. 436-
5). For these fulminant demyelinating states, no controlled trials of 
therapy exist; high-dose glucocorticoids, plasma exchange, and cyclo-
phosphamide have been tried, with uncertain benefit.
ACUTE DISSEMINATED 
ENCEPHALOMYELITIS (ADEM)
ADEM has a monophasic course and is most frequently associated 
with an antecedent infection (postinfectious encephalomyelitis); ~5% 
of ADEM cases follow immunization (postvaccinal encephalomyelitis). 
ADEM is far more common in children than adults, and many adult 
cases initially thought to represent ADEM subsequently experience 
late relapses qualifying as either MS or another chronic inflammatory 
disorder such as vasculitis, sarcoid, or lymphoma. The hallmark of 
ADEM is the presence of widely scattered foci of perivenular inflam-
mation and demyelination that can involve both white matter and grey 
matter structures, in contrast to larger confluent white matter lesions 
typical of MS. In the most explosive form of ADEM, acute hemorrhagic 
leukoencephalitis, the lesions are vasculitic and hemorrhagic, and the 
clinical course is devastating.
Postinfectious encephalomyelitis is most frequently associated 
with the viral exanthems of childhood. Infection with measles virus 
is the most common antecedent (1 in 1000 cases). Worldwide, measles 
encephalomyelitis is still common, although use of the live measles 
vaccine has dramatically reduced its incidence in developed countries. 
An ADEM-like illness rarely follows vaccination with live measles 
vaccine (1–2 in 106 immunizations). ADEM is now most frequently 
associated with varicella (chickenpox) infections (1 in 4000–10,000 
cases). It may also follow infection with rubella, mumps, influenza, 
parainfluenza, EBV, HHV-6, HIV, dengue, Zika, other viruses, and 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Some patients may have a nonspecific upper 
respiratory infection or no known antecedent illness. In addition to 
measles, postvaccinal encephalomyelitis may also follow the adminis-
tration of vaccines for smallpox (5 cases per million), the Semple rabies, 
and Japanese encephalitis. Modern vaccines that do not require viral 
culture in CNS tissue have reduced the ADEM risk.
All forms of ADEM presumably result from a cross-reactive immune 
response to the infectious agent or vaccine that then triggers an inflam-
matory demyelinating response. Autoantibodies to MBP and to other 
myelin antigens have been detected in the CSF from some patients with 
ADEM. Attempts to demonstrate direct viral invasion of the CNS have 
been unsuccessful.
■
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
In severe cases, onset is abrupt and progression rapid (hours to days). 
In postinfectious ADEM, the neurologic syndrome generally begins late 
in the course of the viral illness as the exanthem is fading. Fever reap-
pears, and headache, meningismus, and lethargy progressing to coma 
may develop. Seizures are common. Signs of disseminated neurologic 
disease are consistently present (e.g., hemiparesis or quadriparesis, 
extensor plantar responses, lost or hyperactive tendon reflexes, sen-
sory loss, and brainstem involvement). In ADEM due to chickenpox, 
cerebellar involvement is often conspicuous. CSF protein is modestly 
elevated (0.5–1.5 g/L [50–150 mg/dL]). Lymphocytic pleocytosis, gen-
erally ≥200 cells/μL, occurs in 80% of patients. Occasional patients have 
higher counts or a mixed polymorphonuclear-lymphocytic pattern 
during the initial days of the illness. Transient CSF oligoclonal banding 
has been reported. MRI usually reveals extensive changes in the brain 
and spinal cord, consisting of white matter hyperintensities on T2 
and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences with Gd 
enhancement on T1-weighted sequences.
■
■DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis is most reliably established when there is a history 
of recent vaccination or viral exanthematous illness. In severe cases 
with predominantly cerebral involvement, acute encephalitis due to 
infection with herpes simplex or other viruses including HIV may be 
difficult to exclude (Chap. 132); other considerations include hyper-
coagulable states including the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, 
vasculitis, neurosarcoid, primary CNS lymphoma, or metastatic cancer. 
An explosive presentation of MS can mimic ADEM, and, especially 


--- PDF PAGE 3247 ---

CHAPTER 436 Multiple Sclerosis
3201
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 436-5  Magnetic resonance imaging findings in variants of MS. A and B. Acute tumefactive MS. In A, a sagittal T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery 
(FLAIR) image of a large solitary right parieto-occipital white matter lesion is shown, with effacement of overlying cortical sulci consistent with mass effect. In B, 
T1-weighted image obtained after the intravenous administration of gadolinium DTPA reveals a large serpiginous area of blood-brain barrier disruption consistent with 
acute inflammation. C and D. Balo’s concentric sclerosis. In C, an axial T2-weighted sequence shows multiple areas of abnormal ovoid bright signal in the supratentorial 
white matter bilaterally; some lesions reveal concentric layers, typical of Balo’s concentric sclerosis. In D, T1-weighted MR images postgadolinium demonstrate 
abnormal enhancement of all lesions with some lesions demonstrating concentric ring enhancement.
in adults, it may not be possible to distinguish these conditions at 
onset. The simultaneous onset of disseminated symptoms and signs 
is common in ADEM and rare in MS. Similarly, meningismus, drows-
iness, coma, and seizures suggest ADEM rather than MS. Unlike MS, 
in ADEM, optic nerve involvement is generally bilateral and trans-
verse myelopathy complete. MRI findings that favor ADEM include 
extensive and relatively symmetric white matter abnormalities, basal 
ganglia or cortical gray matter lesions, and Gd enhancement of all 
abnormal areas. By contrast, OCBs in the CSF are more common in MS. 
In one study of adult patients initially thought to have ADEM, 30% 
experienced additional relapses over a follow-up period of 3 years, and 
they were reclassified as having MS. Other patients initially classified 


================================================================================
Ch437 Neuromyelitis Optica
Pages 3248-3249
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3248 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3202 as ADEM are subsequently found to have neuromyelitis optica spec-
trum disorder (Chap. 437). Occasional patients with “recurrent ADEM” 
have also been reported, especially children; however, it is not possible 
to distinguish this entity from atypical MS. Because of the clinical over-
lap at presentation between ADEM and MS, it is crucial that routine 
surveillance imaging be performed following recovery from ADEM 
so that subclinical disease activity due to MS can be recognized and 
treatment for MS initiated.
TREATMENT
Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis
Initial treatment is with high-dose glucocorticoids; depending on the 
response, treatment may need to be continued for 8 weeks. Patients 
who fail to respond within a few days may benefit from a course of 
plasma exchange or intravenous immunoglobulin. The prognosis 
reflects the severity of the underlying acute illness. In recent case 
series of presumptive ADEM in adults, mortality rates of 5–20% are 
reported, and many survivors have permanent neurologic sequelae.
Acknowledgment
The authors want to thank Douglas E. Goodin for his contributions to 
previous editions of this chapter.
■
■FURTHER READING
Arnold DL et al: Peginterferon beta-1a improves MRI measures and 
increases the proportion of patients with no evidence of disease activ-
ity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: 2-Year results from the 
advance randomized controlled trial. BMC Neurol 17:29, 2017.
Correale J et al: Progressive multiple sclerosis: From pathogenic 
mechanisms to treatment. Brain 140:527, 2017.
Giovannoni G et al: Alemtuzumab improves preexisting disability in 
active relapsing-remitting MS patients. Neurology 87:1985, 2016.
Hauser SL et al: Ocrelizumab versus interferon beta-1a in relapsing 
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 376:221, 2017.
Mahad DH et al: Pathological mechanisms in progressive multiple 
sclerosis. Lancet Neurol 14:183, 2015.
Montalban X et al: Ocrelizumab versus placebo in primary progres-
sive multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 376:209, 2017.
Pohl D et al: Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis: Updates on an 
inflammatory CNS syndrome. Neurology 87(9 Suppl 2):S38, 2016.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO; Devic’s disease) is an aggressive inflam-
matory disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of ON and myelitis; 
the more inclusive term NMO Spectrum Disorder (NMOSD) has been 
proposed to incorporate individuals with partial forms, and also those 
with involvement of additional structures in the central nervous sys-
tem (Table 437-1). NMO is more frequent in women than men (>3:1), 
and typically begins in adulthood but can arise at any age. An impor-
tant consideration, especially early in its presentation, is distinguishing 
between NMO and multiple sclerosis (MS; Chap. 436). In patients with 
NMO, attacks of ON can be bilateral and produce severe visual loss 
(uncommon in MS); myelitis can be severe and transverse (rare in MS) 
and is typically longitudinally extensive (Fig. 437-1) involving three or 
more contiguous vertebral segments. Also in contrast to MS, progres-
sive symptoms typically do not occur in NMO. The brain MRI was 
earlier thought to be normal in NMO, but it is now recognized that in 
many cases brain lesions are present, including areas of nonspecific sig-
nal change as well as lesions associated with specific syndromes such 
as the hypothalamus causing an endocrinopathy; the area postrema in 
Neuromyelitis Optica
Bruce A. C. Cree, Stephen L. Hauser 
437
TABLE 437-1  Diagnostic Criteria for Neuromyelitis Optica  
Spectrum Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria for NMOSA with AQP4-IgG
1.  At least 1 core clinical characteristic
2.  Positive test for AQP4-IgG using best available detection method  
(cell-based assay strongly recommended)
3.  Exclusion of alternative diagnoses
Diagnostic Criteria for NMOSA Without AQP4-IgG or NMOSD with 
Unknown AQP4-IgG Status
1.  At least 2 core clinical characteristics occurring as a result of one or more 
clinical attacks and meeting all of the following requirements:
a.  At least 1 core clinical characteristic must be optic neuritis, acute 
myelitis with LETM, or area postrema syndrome
b.  Dissemination in space (2 or more different clinical characteristics)
c.  Fulfillment of additional MRI requirements, as applicable
2.  Negative test for AQP4-IgG using best available detection method or testing 
unavailable
3.  Exclusion of alternative diagnoses
Core Clinical Characteristics
1.  Optic neuritis
2.  Acute myelitis
3.  Area postrema syndrome: episode of otherwise unexplained hiccups or 
nausea or vomiting
4.  Acute brainstem syndrome
5.  Symptomatic narcolepsy or acute diencephalic clinical syndrome with 
NMOSD-typical diencephalic MRI lesions
6.  Symptomatic cerebral syndrome with NMOSD-typical brain lesions
Additional MRI Requirements for NMOSD Without AQP4-IgG and 
NMOSD with Unknown AQP4-IgG Status
1.  Acute optic neuritis: requires brain MRI showing (a) normal findings 
or only nonspecific white matter lesions, OR (b) optic nerve MRI with 
T2-hyperintense lesion of T1-weighted gadolinium-enhancing lesion 
extending over >1/2 optic nerve length or involving optic chiasm
2.  Acute myelitis: requires associated intramedullary NMRI lesion extending 
≥3 contiguous segments (LETM) OR ≥3 contiguous segments of focal 
spinal cord atrophy in patients with history compatible with acute myelitis
3.  Area postrema syndrome requires associated dorsal medulla/area 
postrema lesions
4.  Acute brainstem syndrome requires periependymal brainstem lesions
Source: Adapted from DM Wingerchuk et al: Neurology 85:177–189, 2015.
the lower medulla presenting as intractable hiccoughs or vomiting; or 
the cerebral hemispheres producing focal symptoms, encephalopathy, 
or seizures. Large MRI lesions in the cerebral hemispheres can be 
asymptomatic, sometimes have a “cloud-like” appearance and, unlike 
MS lesions, are often not destructive, and can resolve completely. 
Spinal cord MRI lesions typically consist of focal enhancing areas of 
swelling and tissue destruction, extending over three or more spinal 
cord segments, and on axial sequences, these are centered on the gray 
matter of the cord. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) findings include pleocyto-
sis greater than that observed in MS, with neutrophils and eosinophils 
present in many acute cases; OCBs are uncommon, occurring in <20% 
of NMO patients. The pathology of NMO is a distinctive astrocytopa-
thy with inflammation, loss of astrocytes, and an absence of staining of 
the water channel protein AQP4 by immunohistochemistry, plus thick-
ened blood vessel walls, demyelination, and deposition of antibody 
and complement.
■
■IMMUNOLOGY
NMO is an autoimmune disease associated with a highly specific 
autoantibody directed against aquaporin-4 (AQP4) that is present in 
the sera of ~70% of patients with a clinical diagnosis of NMO. AQP4 
is localized to the foot processes of astrocytes in close apposition to 
endothelial surfaces, as well as at paranodal regions near nodes of 
Ranvier. It is likely that AQP4 antibodies are pathogenic because 
passive transfer of AQP4 antibodies into laboratory animals can 
reproduce histologic features of the disease; complement fixation is 
thought to mediate astrocyte injury. During acute attacks of myelitis, 


--- PDF PAGE 3249 ---

CHAPTER 437 Neuromyelitis Optica
3203
failure from cervical myelitis was present in one-third of patients, and 
8 years after onset, 60% of patients were blind and more than half 
had permanent paralysis of one or more limbs. There is limited data 
indicating that the long-term course of NMO has been substantially 
improved with the development of therapies to treat acute attacks and 
prevent relapses.
■
■GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
The incidence and prevalence of NMO shows considerable 
variation between populations and geographic regions, with 
prevalence estimates that range from <1 to > 4 per 100,000. 
Although NMO can occur in people of any ethnic background, individ-
uals of Asian and African origin are disproportionately affected. The 
highest reported prevalence is from Martinique. Among white popula-
tions, MS (Chap. 436) is far more common than NMO.
CSF levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6; a proinflammatory cytokine) and glial 
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) levels are markedly elevated, consis-
tent with active inflammation and astrocyte injury. Proinflammatory 
T-lymphocytes of the Th17 type recognize an immunodominant 
epitope of AQP4 and may also contribute to pathogenesis. Because 
of the high specificity of the antibody, its presence is considered to 
be diagnostic when found in conjunction with a typical clinical pre-
sentation. Anti-AQP4 seropositive patients have a high risk for future 
relapses; more than half will relapse within 1 year if untreated.
■
■CLINICAL COURSE
NMO is typically a recurrent disease; the course is monophasic in fewer 
than 10% of patients. Individuals who test negative for AQP-4 antibod-
ies are somewhat more likely to have a monophasic course. Untreated 
NMO is usually quite disabling over time; in one series, respiratory 
FIGURE 437-1  Imaging findings in neuromyelitis optica: longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis, optic neuritis, and brainstem involvement. A. Sagittal fluid 
attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR) cervical-spine MRI showing an area of increased signal change on T2-weighted imaging spanning >3 vertebral segments in 
length. B. Sagittal T1-weighted cervical-spine MRI following gadolinium-diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (DPTA) infusion showing enhancement. C. Coronal brain 
MRI shows hyperintense signal on FLAIR imaging within the left optic nerve. D. Coronal T1-weighted brain MRI following gadolinium-DPTA infusion shows enhancement 
of the left optic nerve. E. Axial brain MRI shows an area of hyperintense signal on T2-weighted imaging within the area postrema (arrow). F. Axial T1-weighted brain MRI 
following gadolinium-DPTA infusion shows punctate enhancement of the area postrema (arrow).
A
B
C
D
E
F


================================================================================
Ch438 Peripheral Neuropathy
Pages 3250-3270
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3250 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3204
Interestingly, when MS affects individuals of African or Asian 
ancestry, there is a propensity for demyelinating lesions to involve 
predominantly the optic nerve and spinal cord, an MS subtype termed 
opticospinal MS. Some individuals with opticospinal MS are seropositive 
for AQP-4 antibodies, indicating that such cases represent NMOSD.
■
■ASSOCIATED CONDITIONS
Up to 40% of NMO patients have a systemic autoimmune disorder, 
such as systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren’s syndrome, peri-
nuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA)–associated 
vasculitis, myasthenia gravis, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, or mixed con-
nective tissue disease. In others, onset may be associated with acute 
infection with varicella zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV, or tuber-
culosis. Rare cases appear to be paraneoplastic and associated with 
breast, lung, or other cancers.
TREATMENT
Neuromyelitis Optica
Disease-modifying therapies have not been rigorously studied in 
NMO. Acute attacks are usually treated with high-dose glucocorti-
coids (e.g., methylprednisolone 1 g/d for 5–10 days followed by a 
prednisone taper). Plasma exchange (typically 5–7 exchanges of 1.5 
plasma volumes/exchange) is used empirically for acute episodes 
that do not respond to glucocorticoids. Given the unfavorable 
natural history of untreated NMO, prophylaxis against relapses 
is recommended for most patients using one of the following reg-
imens: mycophenolate mofetil (1000 mg bid); rituximab a B cell 
depleting anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (2 g IV Q 6 months); 
or a combination of glucocorticoids (500 mg IV methylpredniso-
lone daily for 5 days; then oral prednisone 1 mg/kg per day for  
2 months, followed by slow taper) plus azathioprine (2 mg/kg per 
day started on week 3). Some therapies with proven efficacy in MS 
do not appear to be useful for NMO. Available evidence suggests 
that interferon beta is ineffective and paradoxically may increase the 
risk of NMO relapses, and based on limited data glatiramer acetate, 
fingolimod, natalizumab, and alemtuzumab also appear to be inef-
fective. That therapies not commonly used in MS are empirically 
used in NMOSD highlight the need for efficient diagnosis of this 
disorder. Clinical trials with the B-cell depleting anti-CD19 mono-
clonal antibody (inebilizumab), the terminal complement inhibitor 
(eculizumab), and an IL-6 receptor blocking antibody (SA-237) are 
ongoing.
■
■DEMYELINATION ASSOCIATED WITH  
ANTI-MOG ANTIBODIES
Although long considered to be a likely target for antibody- 
mediated demyelination, anti-MOG antibodies detected by a cell-based 
assay that enables recognition of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
(MOG) epitopes in a lipid bilayer were only recently found to be asso-
ciated with cases of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) 
(Chap. 436) in children, and then with cases of AQP4 seronegative 
NMO. Further studies showed that patients who are seropositive 
for anti-MOG antibodies are at risk for bilateral, synchronous optic 
neuritis and myelitis. A clinical feature that can help distinguish ON 
associated with anti-MOG antibodies from NMO or MS is the presence 
of papillitis seen by funduscopy or orbital MRI. ON associated with 
anti-MOG antibodies is typically longitudinally extensive on MRI, 
and brain MRI can be normal or show fluffy areas of increased signal 
change in white or grey matter structures, similar to NMO. MRI lesions 
that are typical for MS, including finger-like lesions oriented perpen-
dicular to the ventricular surface (Dawson fingers) and T1 hypointense 
lesions (Chap. 436), are uncommon. Spinal cord lesions can be longi-
tudinally extensive or short. Demyelination associated with anti-MOG 
antibodies is sometimes monophasic, as in ADEM, but can also be 
recurrent. Acute episodes are managed with high dose glucocorticoids 
followed by a prednisone taper and sometimes by plasmapheresis, as 
with NMO. Brain lesions associated with anti-MOG antibodies often 
respond rapidly to treatment with glucocorticoids and may resolve 
entirely. Some patients experience disease recurrence following dis-
continuation of prednisone and can become glucocorticoid dependent. 
Clinical trials have not been undertaken and there is limited data on 
use of other immune-suppressing medications typically used in NMO.
■
■FURTHER READING
Cree BA: Placebo controlled trials in neuromyelitis optica are needed 
and ethical. Mult Scler Relat Disord 4:536, 2015.
Hinson SR et al: Autoimmune AQP4 channelopathies and neuro­
myelitis optica spectrum disorders. Handb Clin Neurol 133:377, 2016.
Peschl P et al: Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein: Deciphering a 
target in inflammatory demyelinating diseases. Front Immunol 8:529, 
2017.
Wingerchuk DM et al: International consensus diagnostic criteria for 
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders. Neurology 85:177, 2015.
Section 3	 Nerve and Muscle Disorders
Peripheral nerves are composed of sensory, motor, and autonomic ele-
ments. Diseases can affect the cell body of a neuron or its peripheral pro-
cesses, namely the axons or the encasing myelin sheaths. Most peripheral 
nerves are mixed and contain sensory and motor as well as autonomic 
fibers. Nerves can be subdivided into three major classes: large myeli-
nated, small myelinated, and small unmyelinated. Motor axons are usu-
ally large myelinated fibers that conduct rapidly (~50 m/s). Sensory fibers 
may be any of the three types. Large-diameter sensory fibers conduct 
proprioception and vibratory sensation to the brain, while the smaller- 
diameter myelinated and unmyelinated fibers transmit pain and tem-
perature sensation. Autonomic nerves are also small in diameter. Thus, 
peripheral neuropathies can impair sensory, motor, or autonomic func-
tion, either singly or in combination. Peripheral neuropathies are further 
classified into those that primarily affect the cell body (e.g., neuronopathy 
or ganglionopathy), myelin (myelinopathy), and the axon (axonopathy). 
These different classes of peripheral neuropathies have distinct clini-
cal and electrophysiologic features. This chapter discusses the clinical 
approach to a patient suspected of having a peripheral neuropathy, as 
well as specific neuropathies, including hereditary and acquired neurop-
athies. The inflammatory neuropathies are discussed in Chap. 439.
GENERAL APPROACH
In approaching a patient with a neuropathy, the clinician has three 
main goals: (1) identify where the lesion is, (2) identify the cause, and 
(3) determine the proper treatment. The first goal is accomplished by 
obtaining a thorough history, neurologic examination, and electrodi-
agnostic and other laboratory studies (Fig. 438-1). While gathering 
this information, seven key questions are asked (Table 438-1), the 
answers to which help identify the pattern of involvement and the cause 
of the neuropathy (Table 438-2). Despite an extensive evaluation, in 
approximately half of patients no etiology is ever found; these patients 
typically have a predominately sensory polyneuropathy and have been 
labeled as having idiopathic or cryptogenic sensory polyneuropathy 
(CSPN).
■
■INFORMATION FROM THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL 
EXAMINATION: SEVEN KEY QUESTIONS (TABLE 438-1)
1. What Systems Are Involved?  It is important to determine 
if the patient’s symptoms and signs are motor, sensory, autonomic, 
or a combination of these. If the patient has only weakness without 
Peripheral Neuropathy
Anthony A. Amato, Richard J. Barohn 
438


--- PDF PAGE 3251 ---

CHAPTER 438 Peripheral Neuropathy
3205
any evidence of sensory or autonomic dysfunction, a motor neur-
opathy, neuromuscular junction abnormality, or myopathy should 
be considered. Some peripheral neuropathies are associated with 
significant autonomic nervous system dysfunction. Symptoms of 
Patient Complaint: ? Neuropathy
History and examination compatible with neuropathy?
Mononeuropathy
Mononeuropathy multiplex
Polyneuropathy
Evaluation of other
 disorder or
 reassurance and
 follow-up
EDx
Is the lesion axonal
 or demyelinating?
Is entrapment or
 compression present?
Is a contributing systemic 
  disorder present?
Axonal
Demyelinating
 with focal
 conduction block
Axonal
Demyelinating
Consider
 vasculitis or 
 other multifocal
 process
Consider
 multifocal
 form of
 CIDP
Subacute
 course (months)
Chronic
 course (years)
Uniform slowing,
 chronic
Nonuniform slowing,
conduction block
Decision on need
 for surgery (nerve repair,
 transposition, or release
 procedure)
Possible
 nerve
 biopsy
Test for paraprotein,
 HIV, Lyme disease
Review history for toxins;
 test for associated
 systemic disease or
 intoxication
Test for paraprotein,
   if negative
Review family
 history; examine
 family members;
 genetic testing
If chronic or
 subacute: CIDP
If acute: GBS
Treatment appropriate
 for specific diagnosis
If tests are
 negative, consider
 treatment for
 CIDP
Treatment appropriate
 for specific diagnosis
Genetic counseling if appropriate
Treatment
  for CIDP;
  see Ch. 439
IVIg or
 plasmapheresis;
 supportive
 care including
 respiratory assistance
EDx
EDx
No
Yes
FIGURE 438-1  Approach to the evaluation of peripheral neuropathies. CIDP, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy; EDx, electrodiagnostic; 
GBS, Guillain-Barré syndrome; IVIg, intravenous immunoglobulin. 
autonomic involvement include fainting spells or orthostatic lighthead-
edness; heat intolerance; or any bowel, bladder, or sexual dysfunction 
(Chap. 432). There will typically be an orthostatic fall in blood pressure 
without an appropriate increase in heart rate. Autonomic dysfunction 
in the absence of diabetes should alert the clinician to the possibility of 
amyloid polyneuropathy. Rarely, a pandysautonomic syndrome can be 
the only manifestation of a peripheral neuropathy without other motor 
or sensory findings. The majority of neuropathies are predominantly 
sensory in nature.
2. What Is the Distribution of Weakness?  Delineating the 
pattern of weakness, if present, is essential for diagnosis, and in this 
regard two additional questions should be answered: (1) Does the 
weakness only involve the distal extremity, or is it both proximal 
and distal? and (2) Is the weakness focal and asymmetric, or is it 
symmetric? Symmetric proximal and distal weakness is the hallmark 
of acquired immune demyelinating polyneuropathies, both the acute 
form (Guillain-Barré syndrome [GBS]) and the chronic form (chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy [CIDP]) (Chap. 439). The 
importance of finding symmetric proximal and distal weakness in a 
patient who presents with both motor and sensory symptoms cannot 
be overemphasized because this identifies the important subset of 
patients who may have a treatable acquired demyelinating neuropathic 
disorder (i.e., GBS or CIDP).
Findings of an asymmetric or multifocal pattern of weakness narrow 
the differential diagnosis. Some neuropathic disorders may present 
with unilateral extremity weakness. In the absence of sensory symp-
toms and signs, such weakness evolving over weeks or months would 
be worrisome for motor neuron disease (e.g., amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis [ALS]), but it would be important to exclude multifocal motor 
neuropathy that may be treatable (Chap. 439). In a patient presenting 
with asymmetric subacute or acute sensory and motor symptoms and 
signs, radiculopathies, plexopathies, compressive mononeuropathies, 
or multiple mononeuropathies (e.g., mononeuropathy multiplex) must 
be considered.
TABLE 438-1  Approach to Neuropathic Disorders:  
Seven Key Questions
1.  What systems are involved?
•  Motor, sensory, autonomic, or combinations
2.  What is the distribution of weakness?
•  Only distal versus proximal and distal
•  Focal/asymmetric versus symmetric
3.  What is the nature of the sensory involvement?
•  Temperature loss or burning or stabbing pain (e.g., small fiber)
•  Vibratory or proprioceptive loss (e.g., large fiber)
4.  Is there evidence of upper motor neuron involvement?
•  Without sensory loss
•  With sensory loss
5.  What is the temporal evolution?
•  Acute (days to 4 weeks)
•  Subacute (4–8 weeks)
•  Chronic (>8 weeks)
•  Monophasic, progressive, or relapsing-remitting
6.  Is there evidence for a hereditary neuropathy?
•  Family history of neuropathy
•  Lack of sensory symptoms despite sensory signs
7.  Are there any associated medical conditions?
•  Cancer, diabetes mellitus, connective tissue disease or other 
autoimmune diseases, infection (e.g., HIV, Lyme disease, leprosy)
•  Medications including over-the-counter drugs that may cause a toxic 
neuropathy
•  Preceding events, drugs, toxins


--- PDF PAGE 3252 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3206
TABLE 438-2  Patterns of Neuropathic Disorders
Pattern 1: Symmetric proximal and distal weakness with sensory loss
  Consider: inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (GBS and CIDP)
Pattern 2: Symmetric distal sensory loss with or without distal weakness
  Consider: cryptogenic or idiopathic sensory polyneuropathy (CSPN), 
diabetes mellitus and other metabolic disorders, drugs, toxins, familial 
(HSAN), CMT, amyloidosis, and others
Pattern 3: Asymmetric distal weakness with sensory loss
  With involvement of multiple nerves
    Consider: multifocal CIDP, vasculitis, cryoglobulinemia, amyloidosis, 
sarcoid, infectious (leprosy, Lyme, hepatitis B, C, or E, HIV, CMV), HNPP, 
tumor infiltration
  With involvement of single nerves/regions
    Consider: may be any of the above but also could be compressive 
mononeuropathy, plexopathy, or radiculopathy
Pattern 4: Asymmetric proximal and distal weakness with sensory loss
  Consider: polyradiculopathy or plexopathy due to diabetes mellitus, 
meningeal carcinomatosis or lymphomatosis, sarcoid, amyloid, hereditary 
plexopathy (HNPP, HNA), idiopathic
Pattern 5: Asymmetric distal weakness without sensory loss
  With upper motor neuron findings
    Consider: motor neuron disease
  Without upper motor neuron findings
    Consider: progressive muscular atrophy, juvenile monomelic amyotrophy 
(Hirayama’s disease), multifocal motor neuropathy, multifocal acquired 
motor axonopathy
Pattern 6: Symmetric sensory loss and distal areflexia with upper motor 
neuron findings
  Consider: Vitamin B12, vitamin E, and copper deficiency with combined 
system degeneration with peripheral neuropathy, chronic liver disease, 
hereditary leukodystrophies (e.g., adrenomyeloneuropathy) HSP-plus
Pattern 7: Symmetric weakness without sensory loss
  With proximal and distal weakness
    Consider: SMA
  With distal weakness
    Consider: hereditary motor neuropathy (“distal” SMA) or atypical CMT
Pattern 8: Focal midline proximal symmetric weakness
  Neck extensor weakness
    Consider: ALS
  Bulbar weakness
    Consider: ALS/PLS, isolated bulbar ALS (IBALS), Kennedy’s syndrome 
(X-linked, bulbospinal SMA), bulbar presentation GBS
  Diaphragm weakness (SOB)
    Consider: ALS
Pattern 9: Asymmetric proprioceptive sensory loss without weakness
  Consider causes of a sensory neuronopathy (ganglionopathy):
  Cancer (paraneoplastic)
  Sjögren’s syndrome
  Idiopathic sensory neuronopathy (possible GBS variant)
  Cisplatin and other chemotherapeutic agents
  Vitamin B6 toxicity
  HIV-related sensory neuronopathy
Pattern 10: Autonomic symptoms and signs
  Consider neuropathies associated with prominent autonomic dysfunction:
  Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
  Amyloidosis (familial and acquired)
  Diabetes mellitus
  Idiopathic pandysautonomia (may be a variant of Guillain-Barré syndrome)
  Porphyria
  HIV-related autonomic neuropathy
  Vincristine and other chemotherapeutic agents
Abbreviations: CIDP, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy; CMT, 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease; CMV, cytomegalovirus; GBS, Guillain-Barré syndrome; 
HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HNA, hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy; 
HNPP, hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies; HSAN, hereditary 
sensory and autonomic neuropathy; HSP-plus, hereditary spastic paraplegia plus 
neuropathy; SMA, spinal muscular atrophy; SOB, shortness of breath.
ALS can produce prominent neck extensor weakness (head drop), 
tongue and pharyngeal weakness (dysarthia and dysphagia), or 
shortness of breath. These focal symmetric weakness patterns can 
also be seen in neuromuscular junction disorders (myasthenia gravis, 
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome [LEMS] [Chap. 440]) and 
some myopathies, particularly isolated neck extensor myopathy 
(Chap. 441).
3. What Is the Nature of the Sensory Involvement?  The 
patient may have loss of sensation (numbness), altered sensation to 
touch (hyperpathia or allodynia), or uncomfortable spontaneous sen-
sations (tingling, burning, or aching) (Chap. 22). Neuropathic pain can 
be burning, dull, and poorly localized (protopathic pain), presumably 
transmitted by polymodal C nociceptor fibers, or sharp and lancinat-
ing (epicritic pain), relayed by A-delta fibers. If pain and temperature 
perception are lost, while vibratory and position sense are preserved 
along with muscle strength, deep tendon reflexes, and normal nerve 
conduction studies (NCS), a small-fiber neuropathy is likely. This is 
important, because the most likely cause of small-fiber neuropathies, 
when one is identified, is diabetes mellitus (DM) or glucose intoler-
ance. Amyloid neuropathy should be considered as well in such cases, 
but most of these small-fiber neuropathies remain idiopathic despite 
extensive evaluation.
Severe proprioceptive loss also narrows the differential diagnosis. 
Affected patients will note imbalance, especially in the dark. A neu-
rologic examination revealing a dramatic loss of proprioception with 
vibration loss and normal strength should alert the clinician to consider 
a sensory neuronopathy/ganglionopathy (Table 438-2, Pattern 9). In 
particular, if this loss is asymmetric or affects the arms more than the 
legs, this pattern suggests a non-length-dependent process as seen in 
sensory neuronopathies.
4. Is There Evidence of Upper Motor Neuron Involvement?  
If the patient presents with symmetric distal sensory symptoms and 
signs suggestive of a distal sensory neuropathy, but there is additional 
evidence of symmetric upper motor neuron involvement (Chap. 21), 
the physician should consider a combined system degeneration with 
neuropathy. The most common cause for this pattern is vitamin B12 
deficiency, but other etiologies should also be considered (e.g., copper 
deficiency, human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection, severe 
hepatic disease, adrenomyeloneuropathy [AMN]), and hereditary 
spastic paraplegia plus a neuropathy.
5. What Is the Temporal Evolution?  It is important to deter-
mine the onset, duration, and evolution of symptoms and signs. Does 
the disease have an acute (days to 4 weeks), subacute (4–8 weeks), or 
chronic (>8 weeks) course? Is the course monophasic, progressive, or 
relapsing? Most neuropathies are insidious and slowly progressive in 
nature. Neuropathies with acute and subacute presentations include 
GBS, vasculitis, and radiculopathies related to diabetes or Lyme 
disease. A relapsing course can be present in CIDP and porphyria.
6. Is There Evidence for a Hereditary Neuropathy?  In 
patients with slowly progressive distal weakness over many years 
with few sensory symptoms yet significant sensory deficits on clinical 
examination, the clinician should consider a hereditary neuropathy 
(e.g., Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease [CMT]). On examination, the feet 
may show high or flat arches or hammer toes, and scoliosis may be 
present. In suspected cases, it may be necessary to perform neurologic 
and electrophysiologic studies on family members in addition to the 
patient.
7. Does the Patient Have Any Other Medical Conditions?  
It is important to inquire about associated medical conditions (e.g., 
DM, systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE]); preceding or concurrent 
infections (e.g. diarrheal illness preceding GBS); surgeries (e.g., gastric 
bypass and nutritional neuropathies); medications (toxic neuropathy), 
including over-the-counter vitamin preparations (B6); alcohol; dietary 
habits; and use of dentures (e.g., fixatives contain zinc that can lead to 
copper deficiency).


--- PDF PAGE 3253 ---

CHAPTER 438 Peripheral Neuropathy
3207
■
■PATTERN RECOGNITION APPROACH TO 
NEUROPATHIC DISORDERS
Based on the answers to the seven key questions, neuropathic disor-
ders can be classified into several patterns based on the distribution or 
pattern of sensory, motor, and autonomic involvement (Table 438-2). 
Each pattern has a limited differential diagnosis, and information from 
laboratory studies usually permits a final diagnosis to be established.
■
■ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
The electrodiagnostic (EDx) evaluation of patients with a suspected 
peripheral neuropathy consists of NCS and needle electromyography 
(EMG). In addition, studies of autonomic function can be valuable. The 
electrophysiologic data can confirm whether the neuropathic disorder 
is a mononeuropathy, multiple mononeuropathy (mononeuropathy 
multiplex), radiculopathy, plexopathy, or generalized polyneuropathy. 
Similarly, EDx evaluation can ascertain whether the process involves 
only sensory fibers, motor fibers, autonomic fibers, or a combination 
of these. Finally, the electrophysiologic data can help distinguish 
axonopathies from myelinopathies as well as axonal degeneration sec-
ondary to ganglionopathies from the more common length-dependent 
axonopathies.
NCS are most helpful in classifying a neuropathy as due to axonal 
degeneration or segmental demyelination (Table 438-3). In general, 
low-amplitude potentials with relatively preserved distal latencies, 
conduction velocities, and late potentials, along with fibrillations on 
needle EMG, suggest an axonal neuropathy. On the other hand, slow 
conduction velocities, prolonged distal latencies and late potentials, 
relatively preserved amplitudes, and the absence of fibrillations on 
needle EMG imply a primary demyelinating neuropathy. The presence 
of nonuniform slowing of conduction velocity, conduction block, or 
temporal dispersion further suggests an acquired demyelinating neu-
ropathy (e.g., GBS or CIDP) as opposed to a hereditary demyelinating 
neuropathy (e.g., CMT type 1).
Autonomic studies are used to assess small myelinated (A-delta) 
or unmyelinated (C) nerve fiber involvement. Such testing includes 
heart rate response to deep breathing, heart rate, and blood pressure 
response to both the Valsalva maneuver and tilt-table testing and 
quantitative sudomotor axon reflex testing (Chap. 432). These studies 
are particularly useful in patients who have pure small-fiber neuropa-
thy or autonomic neuropathy in which routine NCS are normal.
■
■OTHER IMPORTANT LABORATORY INFORMATION
In patients with generalized symmetric peripheral neuropathy, a stan-
dard laboratory evaluation should include a complete blood count, 
basic chemistries including serum electrolytes and tests of renal and 
hepatic function, fasting blood glucose (FBS), hemaglobin (Hb) A1c, 
urinalysis, thyroid function tests, B12, folate, erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR), rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), serum 
protein electrophoresis (SPEP) and immunoelectrophoresis or immu-
nofixation, and urine for Bence Jones protein. Quantification of the 
concentration of serum-free light chains and the kappa/lambda ratio is 
more sensitive than SPEP, immunoelectrophoresis, or immunofixation 
to detect a monoclonal gammopathy and therefore should be done if 
amyloidosis is suspected. A skeletal survey should be performed in 
patients with acquired demyelinating neuropathies and M-spikes to 
look for osteosclerotic or lytic lesions. Patients with monoclonal gam-
mopathy should also be referred to a hematologist for consideration 
of a bone marrow biopsy. An oral glucose tolerance test is indicated in 
patients with painful sensory neuropathies even if FBS and HbA1c are 
normal, as the test is abnormal in about one-third of such patients. In 
addition to the above tests, patients with a mononeuropathy multiplex 
pattern of involvement should have a vasculitis workup, including 
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), cryoglobulins, hepa-
titis serology, Western blot for Lyme disease, HIV, and occasionally a 
cytomegalovirus (CMV) titer.
There are many autoantibody panels (various antiganglioside 
antibodies) marketed for screening routine neuropathy patients for a 
treatable condition. These autoantibodies have no proven clinical util-
ity or added benefit beyond the information obtained from a complete 
clinical examination and detailed EDx. A heavy metal screen is also 
not necessary as a screening procedure, unless there is a history of 
possible exposure or suggestive features on examination (e.g., severe 
painful sensorimotor and autonomic neuropathy and alopecia— 
thallium; severe painful sensorimotor neuropathy with or without 
gastrointestinal [GI] disturbance and Mee’s lines—arsenic; wrist or 
finger extensor weakness and anemia with basophilic stippling of red 
blood cells—lead).
In patients with suspected GBS or CIDP, a lumbar puncture is 
indicated to look for an elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein. In 
idiopathic cases of GBS and CIDP, CSF pleocytosis is usually absent. 
If cells are present, one should consider HIV infection, Lyme disease, 
sarcoidosis, or lymphomatous or leukemic infiltration of nerve roots. 
Some patients with GBS and CIDP have abnormal liver function 
tests. In these cases, it is important to also check for hepatitis B and 
C, HIV, CMV, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. In patients 
with an axonal GBS (by EMG/NCS) or those with a suspicious 
coinciding history (e.g., unexplained abdominal pain, psychiatric 
illness, significant autonomic dysfunction), it is reasonable to screen 
for porphyria.
In patients with a severe sensory ataxia, a sensory ganglionopathy 
or neuronopathy should be considered. The most common causes of 
sensory ganglionopathies are Sjögren’s syndrome (Chap. 354) and a 
paraneoplastic neuropathy (Chap. 90). Neuropathy can be the initial 
manifestation of Sjögren’s syndrome. Thus, one should always inquire 
about dry eyes and mouth in patients with sensory signs and symp-
toms. Further, some patients can manifest sicca complex without other 
manifestations of Sjögren’s syndrome. Thus, patients with sensory 
ataxia should be tested for antibodies to SS-A/Ro and SS-B/La, in 
addition to the routine ANA. To evaluate a possible paraneoplastic 
sensory ganglionopathy, antineuronal nuclear antibodies (e.g., anti-Hu 
antibodies) should be obtained. These antibodies are most commonly 
seen in patients with small-cell carcinoma of the lung but are also 
present with breast, ovarian, lymphoma, and other cancers. Impor-
tantly, the paraneoplastic neuropathy can precede the detection of the 
cancer, and detection of these autoantibodies should lead to a search 
for malignancy.
TABLE 438-3  Electrophysiologic Features: Axonal Degeneration 
versus Segmental Demyelination
AXONAL 
DEGENERATION
SEGMENTAL 
DEMYELINATION
Motor Nerve Conduction Studies
CMAP amplitude
Decreased
Normal (except with CB 
or distal dispersion)
Distal latency
Normal
Prolonged
Conduction velocity
Normal
Slow
Conduction block
Absent
Present
Temporal dispersion
Absent
Present
F wave
Normal or absent
Prolonged or absent
H reflex
Normal or absent
Prolonged or absent
Sensory Nerve Conduction Studies
SNAP amplitude
Decreased
Normal or decreased
Distal latency
Normal
Prolonged
Conduction velocity
Normal
Slow
Needle EMG
Spontaneous activity
  Fibrillations
Present
Absent
  Fasciculations
Present
Absent
Motor unit potentials
  Recruitment
Decreased
Decreased
  Morphology
Long duration, large 
amplitude, polyphasic (if 
there is reinnervation)
Normal
Abbreviations: CB, conduction block; CMAP, compound motor action potential; 
EMG, electromyography; SNAP, sensory nerve action potential.


--- PDF PAGE 3254 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3208
■
■NERVE BIOPSIES
Nerve biopsies are now rarely performed in the evaluation of neu-
ropathies. The primary indication for nerve biopsy is suspicion for 
amyloid neuropathy or vasculitis. In most instances, the abnormali-
ties present on biopsies do not help distinguish one form of periph-
eral neuropathy from another (beyond what is already apparent by 
clinical examination and the NCS). Nerve biopsies should only be 
performed when the NCS are abnormal. The sural nerve is most 
commonly biopsied because it is a pure sensory nerve and biopsy 
will not result in loss of motor function. In suspected vasculitis, a 
combination biopsy of a superficial peroneal nerve (pure sensory) 
and the underlying peroneus brevis muscle obtained from a single 
small incision increases the diagnostic yield. Tissue can be analyzed 
to assess for evidence of inflammation, vasculitis, or amyloid deposi-
tion. Semithin plastic sections, teased fiber preparations, and electron 
microscopy are used to assess the morphology of the nerve fibers and 
to distinguish axonopathies from myelinopathies.
■
■SKIN BIOPSIES
Skin biopsies are sometimes used to diagnose a small-fiber neuropathy. 
Following a punch biopsy of the skin in the distal lower extremity, 
immunologic staining can be used to measure the density of small 
unmyelinated fibers. The density of these nerve fibers is reduced in 
patients with small-fiber neuropathies in whom NCS and routine nerve 
biopsies are often normal. This technique may allow for an objective 
measurement in patients with mainly subjective symptoms. How-
ever, it often adds little to what one already knows from the clinical 
examination and EDx.
SPECIFIC DISORDERS
■
■HEREDITARY NEUROPATHIES
CMT disease is the most common type of hereditary neuropathy 
(Pattern 2, Table 438-2). Rather than one disease, CMT is a syndrome of 
many genetically distinct disorders (Table 438-4). The various subtypes 
of CMT are classified according to the nerve conduction velocities 
(NCVs) and predominant pathology (e.g., demyelination or axonal 
degeneration), inheritance pattern (autosomal dominant, recessive, 
or X-linked), and the specific mutated genes. Type 1 CMT (or CMT1) 
refers to inherited demyelinating sensorimotor neuropathies, whereas 
the axonal sensory neuropathies are classified as CMT2. By defini-
tion, motor conduction velocities in the arms are slowed to <38 m/s 
in CMT1 and are >38 m/s in CMT2. However, most cases of CMT1 
actually have motor NCVs between 20 and 25 m/s. CMT1 and CMT2 
usually begin in childhood or early adult life; however, onset later in 
life can occur, particularly in CMT2. Both are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant fashion, with a few exceptions. CMT3 is an autosomal dom-
inant neuropathy that appears in infancy and is associated with severe 
demyelination or hypomyelination. CMT4 is an autosomal recessive 
neuropathy that typically begins in childhood or early adult life. 
There are no medical therapies for any of the CMTs, but physical and 
occupational therapy can be beneficial, as can bracing (e.g., ankle-foot 
orthotics for footdrop) and other orthotic devices.
■
■CMT1
CMT1 is the most common form of hereditary neuropathy. Affected 
individuals usually present in the first to third decade of life with distal 
leg weakness (e.g., foot drop), although patients may remain asymp-
tomatic even late in life. People with CMT generally do not complain 
of numbness or tingling, which can be helpful in distinguishing CMT 
from acquired forms of neuropathy in which sensory symptoms usu-
ally predominate. Although usually asymptomatic, reduced sensation 
to all modalities is apparent on examination. Muscle stretch reflexes are 
unobtainable or reduced throughout. There is often atrophy of the mus-
cles below the knee (particularly the anterior compartment), leading to 
so-called inverted champagne bottle legs.
Motor NCVs are generally in the 20–25 m/s range. Nerve biopsies 
usually are not performed on patients suspected of having CMT1, 
because the diagnosis usually can be made by less invasive testing 
(e.g., NCS and genetic studies). However, when done, the biopsies 
reveal reduced numbers of myelinated nerve fibers with a predilection 
for loss of large-diameter fibers and Schwann cell proliferation around 
thinly or demyelinated fibers, forming so-called onion bulbs.
CMT1A is the most common subtype of CMT1, representing 70% of 
cases, and is caused by a 1.5-megabase (Mb) duplication within chro-
mosome 17p11.2-12 encoding the gene for peripheral myelin protein-22 
(PMP-22). This results in patients having three copies of the PMP-22 
gene rather than two. This protein accounts for 2–5% of myelin protein 
and is expressed in compact regions of the peripheral myelin sheath. 
Approximately 20% of patients with CMT1 have CMT1B, caused by 
mutations in the myelin protein zero (MPZ). CMT1B is for the most 
part clinically, electrophysiologically, and histologically indistinguish-
able from CMT1A. MPZ is an integral myelin protein and accounts for 
more than half of the myelin protein in peripheral nerves. Other forms 
of CMT1 are much less common and also indistinguishable from one 
another clinically and electrophysiologically.
■
■CMT2
CMT2 occurs approximately half as frequently as CMT1 and CMT2 
tends to present later in life. Affected individuals usually become 
symptomatic in the second decade; some cases present earlier in 
childhood, whereas others remain asymptomatic into late adult life. 
Clinically, CMT2 is for the most part indistinguishable from CMT1. 
NCS are helpful in this regard; in contrast to CMT1, the velocities are 
normal or only slightly slowed. The most common cause of CMT2 is 
a mutation in the gene for mitofusin 2 (MFN2), which accounts for 
approximately 20–30% of CMT2 cases overall. MFN2 localizes to the 
outer mitochondrial membrane, where it regulates the mitochondrial 
network architecture by participating in mitochondrial fusion. The 
other genes associated with CMT2 are much less common.
■
■CMTDI
In dominant-intermediate CMTs (CMTDIs), the NCVs are faster than 
usually seen in CMT1 (e.g., >38 m/s) but slower than in CMT2.
■
■CMT3
CMT3 was originally described by Dejerine and Sottas as a hereditary 
demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy presenting in infancy or 
early childhood. Affected children are severely weak. Motor NCVs are 
markedly slowed, typically ≤5–10 m/s. Most cases of CMT3 are caused 
by point mutations in the genes for PMP-22, MPZ, or ERG-2, which are 
also the genes responsible for CMT1.
■
■CMT4
CMT4 is extremely rare and is characterized by a severe, childhood- 
onset sensorimotor polyneuropathy that is usually inherited in an 
autosomal recessive fashion. Electrophysiologic and histologic evalua-
tions can show demyelinating or axonal features. CMT4 is genetically 
heterogeneous (Table 438-4).
■
■CMT1X
CMT1X is an X-linked dominant disorder with clinical features similar 
to CMT1 and CMT2, except that the neuropathy is much more severe 
in males than in females. CMT1X accounts for ~10–15% of CMT overall. 
Males usually present in the first two decades of life with atrophy and 
weakness of the distal arms and legs, areflexia, pes cavus, and hammer 
toes. Obligate female carriers are frequently asymptomatic, but can 
develop signs and symptoms of CMT. Onset in females is usually after 
the second decade of life, and the neuropathy is milder in severity.
NCS reveal features of both demyelination and axonal degeneration. 
In males, motor NCVs in the arms and legs are moderately slowed (in 
the low to mid 30-m/s range). About 50% of males with CMT1X have 
motor NCVs between 15 and 35 m/s with about 80% of these falling 
between 25 and 35 m/s (intermediate slowing). In contrast, about 80% 
of females with CMT1X have NCVs in the normal range and 20% have 
NCVs in the intermediate range. CMT1X is caused by mutations in the 


--- PDF PAGE 3255 ---

CHAPTER 438 Peripheral Neuropathy
3209
TABLE 438-4  Classification of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease and Related Neuropathies
NAME
INHERITANCE
GENE LOCATION
GENE PRODUCT
CMT1
  CMT1A
AD
17p11.2
PMP-22 (usually duplication of gene)
  CMT1B
AD
1q21-23
MPZ
  CMT1C
AD
16p13.1-p12.3
LITAF
  CMT1D
AD
10q21.1-22.1
ERG2
  CMT1E (with deafness)
AD
17p11.2
Point mutations in PMP 22 gene
  CMT1F
AD
8p13-21
Neurofilament light chain
  CMT1G
AD
14q32.33
INF2
  CMT1X
X-linked dominant
Xq13
Connexin-32
HNPP
AD
17p11.2
PMP-22
1q21-23
MPZ
CMT dominant-intermediate (CMTD1)
  CMTD1A
AD
10q24.1-25.1
?
  CMTD1B
AD
19.p12-13.2
Dynamin 2
  CMTD1C
AD
1p35
YARS
  CMTD1D
AD
1q22
MPZ
CMT2
  CMT2A2 (allelic to HMSN VI with optic  
atrophy)
AD
1p36.2
MFN2
  CMT2B
AD
3q13-q22
RAB7
  CMT2B1 (allelic to LGMD 1B)
AR
1q21.2
Lamin A/C
  CMT2B2
AR and AD
19q13
MED25 for AR; Unknown for AD
  CMT2C (with vocal cord and diaphragm  
paralysis)
AD
12q23-24
TRPV4
  CMT2D (allelic to distal SMA5)
AD
7p14
Glycine tRNA synthetase
  CMT2E (allelic to CMT 1F)
AD
8p21
Neurofilament light chain
  CMT2F
AD
7q11-q21
Heat-shock 27-kDa protein-1
  CMT2G
AD
9q31.3-34.2
LRSAM1
  CMT2I (allelic to CMT1B)
AD
1q22
MPZ
  CMT2J
AD
1q22
MPZ
  CMT2H, CMT2K (allelic to CMT4A)
AD
8q13-q21
GDAP1
  CMT2L (allelic to distal hereditary motor  
neuropathy type 2)
AD
12q24
Heat-shock protein 8
  CMT2M
AD
16q22
Dynamin-2
  CMT2N
AD
16q22.1
AARS
  CMT2O
AD
14q32.31
DYNC1H1
  CMT2P
AD
9q31.3-34.2
LRSAM1
  CMT2P-Okinawa (HSMN2P)
AD
3q13-q14
TFG
  CMT2X
X-linked
Xq22-24
PRPS1
CMT3
AD
17p11.2
PMP-22
  (Dejerine-Sottas disease, congenital  
hypomyelinating neuropathy)
AD
1q21-23
MPZ
AR
10q21.1-22.1
ERG2
AR
19q13
Periaxon
CMT4
  CMT4A
AR
8q13-21.1
GDAP1
  CMT4B1
AR
11q23
MTMR2
  CMT4B2
AR
11p15
MTMR13
  CMT4C
AR
5q23-33
SH3TC2
  CMT4D (HMSN-Lom)
AR
8q24
NDRG1
  CMT4E (congenital hypomyelinating  
neuropathy)
AR
Multiple
Includes PMP22, MPZ, and ERG-2
  CMT4F
AR
19q13.1-13.3
Periaxin
  CMT4G
AR
10q23.2
HK1
  CMT4H
AR
12q12-q13
Frabin
  CMT4J
AR
6q21
FIG4
HNA
AD
17q24
SEPT9
HSAN1A
AD
9q22
SPTLC1
HSAN1B
AD
3q21
RAB7
HSAN1C
AD
14q24.3
SPTLC2
(Continued)


--- PDF PAGE 3256 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3210
connexin 32 gene. Connexins are gap junction structural proteins that 
are important in cell-to-cell communication.
Hereditary Neuropathy with Liability to Pressure Palsies 
(HNPP) 
HNPP is an autosomal dominant disorder related to 
CMT1A. While CMT1A is usually associated with a 1.5-Mb duplica-
tion in chromosome 17p11.2 that results in an extra copy of PMP-22 
gene, HNPP is caused by inheritance of the chromosome with the 
corresponding 1.5-Mb deletion of this segment, and thus affected 
individuals have only one copy of the PMP-22 gene. Patients usually 
manifest in the second or third decade of life with painless numbness 
and weakness in the distribution of single peripheral nerves, although 
multiple mononeuropathies can occur (Pattern 3, Table 438-2). Symp-
tomatic mononeuropathy or multiple mononeuropathies are often pre-
cipitated by trivial compression of nerve(s) as can occur with wearing 
a backpack, leaning on the elbows, or crossing one’s legs for even a 
short period of time. These pressure-related mononeuropathies may 
take weeks or months to resolve. In addition, some affected individuals 
manifest with a progressive or relapsing, generalized and symmetric, 
sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy that resembles CMT.
Hereditary Neuralgic Amyotrophy (HNA)  HNA is an auto-
somal dominant disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of pain, 
weakness, and sensory loss in the distribution of the brachial plexus 
often beginning in childhood (Pattern 4, Table 438-2). These attacks 
are similar to those seen with idiopathic brachial plexitis (see below). 
Attacks may occur in the postpartum period, following surgery, or 
at other times of stress. Most patients recover over several weeks or 
months. Slightly dysmorphic features, including hypotelorism, epican-
thal folds, cleft palate, syndactyly, micrognathia, and facial asymmetry, 
are evident in some individuals. EDx demonstrate an axonal process. 
HNA is genetically heterogeneous but can be caused by mutations in 
septin 9 (SEPT9). Septins may be important in formation of the neu-
ronal cytoskeleton and have a role in cell division, but it is not known 
how mutations in SEPT9 lead to HNA.
Hereditary Sensory and Autonomic Neuropathy (HSAN)  
The HSANs are a very rare group of hereditary neuropathies in which 
sensory and autonomic dysfunction predominates over muscle weak-
ness, unlike CMT, in which motor findings are most prominent (Pat-
tern 2, Table 438-2; Table 438-4). Nevertheless, affected individuals can 
develop motor weakness and there can be overlap with CMT. There are 
no medical therapies available to treat these neuropathies, other than 
prevention and treatment of mutilating skin and bone lesions.
Of the HSANs, only HSAN1 typically presents in adults. HSAN1 
is the most common of the HSANs and is inherited in an autosomal 
dominant fashion. Affected individuals usually manifest in the second 
through fourth decades of life. HSAN1 is associated with the degen-
eration of small myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers leading to 
severe loss of pain and temperature sensation, deep dermal ulcerations, 
recurrent osteomyelitis, Charcot joints, bone loss, gross foot and hand 
deformities, and amputated digits. Although most people with HSAN1 
do not complain of numbness, they often describe burning, aching, or 
lancinating pains. Autonomic neuropathy is not a prominent feature, 
but bladder dysfunction and reduced sweating in the feet may occur. 
HSAN1A, which is most common, is caused by mutations in the serine 
palmitoyltransferase long-chain base 1 (SPTLC1) gene.
OTHER HEREDITARY NEUROPATHIES  
(TABLE 438-5)
■
■FABRY’S DISEASE
Fabry’s disease (angiokeratoma corporis diffusum) is an X-linked 
dominant disorder. Although men are more commonly and severely 
affected, women can also manifest symptoms and signs of the disease. 
Angiokeratomas are reddish-purple maculopapular lesions that are 
usually found around the umbilicus, scrotum, inguinal region, and 
perineum. Burning or lancinating pain in the hands and feet often 
develops in males in late childhood or early adult life (Pattern 2, 
Table 438-2). However, the neuropathy is usually overshadowed by 
complications arising from an associated premature atherosclerosis 
(e.g., hypertension, renal failure, cardiac disease, and stroke) that often 
lead to death by the fifth decade of life. Some patients also manifest 
primarily with a dilated cardiomyopathy.
Fabry’s disease is caused by mutations in the a-galactosidase gene 
that leads to the accumulation of ceramide trihexoside in nerves and 
blood vessels. A decrease in a-galactosidase activity is evident in leu-
kocytes and cultured fibroblasts. Glycolipid granules may be appre-
ciated in ganglion cells of the peripheral and sympathetic nervous 
systems and in perineurial cells. Enzyme replacement therapy with 
a-galactosidase B can improve the neuropathy if patients are treated 
early, before irreversible nerve fiber loss develops.
TABLE 438-4  Classification of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease and Related Neuropathies
NAME
INHERITANCE
GENE LOCATION
GENE PRODUCT
HSAN1D
AD
14q21.3
ATL1
HSAN1E
AD
19p13.2
DNMT1
HSAN2A
AR
12p13.33
PRKWNK1
HSAN2B
AR
5p15.1
FAM134B
HSAN2C
AR
12q13.13
KIF1A
HSAN2D
AR
2q24.3
SCN9A
HSAN3A
AR
9q21
IKAP
HSAN3B
AR
6p12.1
Dystonin
HSAN4
AR
3q
trkA/NGF receptor
HSAN5
AD or AR
1p11.2-p13.2
2q24.3
3p22.2
NGFb
SCN9A
SCN11A
HSAN6
AR
6p12.1
Dystonin
Abbreviations: AARS, alanyl-tRNA synthetase; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ATL, atlastin; CMT, Charcot-Marie-Tooth; DNMT1, DNA 
methyltransferase 1; DYNC1HI, cytoplasmic dynein 1 heavy chain 1; ERG2, early growth response-2 protein; FAM134B, family with sequence similarity 134, member B; 
FIG4, FDG1-related F actin-binding protein; GDAP1, ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein-1; HK1, hexokinase 1; HMSN-P, hereditary motor and sensory 
neuropathyproximal; HNA, hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy; HNPP, hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies; HSAN; hereditary sensory and autonomic 
neuropathy; IFN2, inverted formin-2; IKAP, kB kinase complex-associated protein; LGMD, limb girdle muscular dystrophy; LITAF, lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis 
factor α factor; LRSAM1, E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase; MED25, mediator 25; MFN2, mitochondrial fusion protein mitofusin 2 gene; MPZ, myelin protein zero protein; 
MTMR2, myotubularin-related protein-2; NDRG1, N-myc downstream regulated 1; PMP-22, peripheral myelin protein-22; PRKWNK1, protein kinase, lysine deficient 1; 
PRPS1, phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase 1; RAB7, Ras-related protein 7; SEPT9, Septin 9; SH3TC2, SH3 domain and tetratricopeptide repeats 2; SMA, spinal 
muscular atrophy; SPTLC, serine palmitoyltransferase long-chain base; TFG, TRK-fused gene; TrkA/NGF, tyrosine kinase A/nerve growth factor; tRNA, transfer ribonucleic 
acid; TRPV4, transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily V, member 4; WNK1, WNK lysine deficient; YARS, tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase.
Source: Modified from AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Table 11-1, pp 265–266.
(Continued)


--- PDF PAGE 3257 ---

CHAPTER 438 Peripheral Neuropathy
3211
TABLE 438-5  Rare Hereditary Neuropathies
Hereditary Disorders of Lipid Metabolism
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Krabbe’s disease (globoid cell leukodystrophy)
Fabry’s disease
Adrenoleukodystrophy/adrenomyeloneuropathy
Refsum’s disease
Tangier disease
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis
Hereditary Ataxias with Neuropathy
Friedreich’s ataxia
Vitamin E deficiency
Spinocerebellar ataxia
Abetalipoproteinemia (Bassen-Kornzweig disease)
Disorders of Defective DNA Repair
Ataxia-telangiectasia
Cockayne’s syndrome
Giant Axonal Neuropathy
Porphyria
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP)
Hereditary coproporphyria (HCP)
Variegate porphyria (VP)
Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy (FAP)
Transthyretin-related
Gelsolin-related
Apolipoprotein A1-related
Source: Modified from AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed.  
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Table 12-1, p. 299.
■
■ADRENOLEUKODYSTROPHY/
ADRENOMYELONEUROPATHY
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) and AMN are allelic X-linked dominant 
disorders caused by mutations in the peroxisomal transmembrane ade-
nosine triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) transporter gene. Patients 
with ALD manifest with central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities. 
However, ~30% of patients with mutations in this gene present with 
the AMN phenotype that typically manifests in the third to fifth decade 
of life as mild to moderate peripheral neuropathy combined with pro-
gressive spastic paraplegia (Pattern 6, Table 438-2) (Chap. 434). Rare 
patients present with an adult-onset spinocerebellar ataxia or only with 
adrenal insufficiency.
EDx is suggestive of a primary axonopathy with secondary demy-
elination. Nerve biopsies demonstrate a loss of myelinated and 
unmyelinated nerve fibers with lamellar inclusions in the cytoplasm 
of Schwann cells. Very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) levels (C24, C25, 
and C26) are increased in the urine. Laboratory evidence of adrenal 
insufficiency is evident in approximately two-thirds of patients. The 
diagnosis can be confirmed by genetic testing.
Adrenal insufficiency is managed by replacement therapy; however, 
there is no proven effective therapy for the neurologic manifestations of 
ALD/AMN. Diets low in VLCFAs and supplemented with Lorenzo’s 
oil (erucic and oleic acids) reduce the levels of VLCFAs and increase 
the levels of C22 in serum, fibroblasts, and liver; however, several large, 
open-label trials of Lorenzo’s oil failed to demonstrate efficacy.
■
■REFSUM’S DISEASE
Refsum’s disease can manifest in infancy to early adulthood with the 
classic tetrad of (1) peripheral neuropathy, (2) retinitis pigmentosa, 
(3) cerebellar ataxia, and (4) elevated CSF protein concentration. 
Most affected individuals develop progressive distal sensory loss 
and weakness in the legs leading to foot drop by their 20 s (Pattern 2, 
Table 438-2). Subsequently, the proximal leg and arm muscles may 
become weak. Patients may also develop sensorineural hearing loss, 
cardiac conduction abnormalities, ichthyosis, and anosmia.
Serum phytanic acid levels are elevated. Sensory and motor NCS 
reveal reduced amplitudes, prolonged latencies, and slowed conduc-
tion velocities. Nerve biopsy demonstrates a loss of myelinated nerve 
fibers, with remaining axons often thinly myelinated and associated 
with onion bulb formation.
Refsum’s disease is genetically heterogeneous but autosomal reces-
sive in nature. Classical Refsum’s disease with childhood or early adult 
onset is caused by mutations in the gene that encodes for phytanoyl-
CoA α-hydroxylase (PAHX). Less commonly, mutations in the gene 
encoding peroxin 7 receptor protein (PRX7) are responsible. These 
mutations lead to the accumulation of phytanic acid in the central and 
peripheral nervous systems. Treatment is removal of phytanic precur-
sors (phytols: fish oils, dairy products, and ruminant fats) from the diet.
■
■TANGIER DISEASE
Tangier disease is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that can pres-
ent as (1) asymmetric multiple mononeuropathies, (2) a slowly pro-
gressive symmetric polyneuropathy predominantly in the legs, or 
(3) a pseudo-syringomyelia pattern with dissociated sensory loss 
(i.e., abnormal pain/temperature perception but preserved position/
vibration in the arms [Chap. 434]). The tonsils may appear swollen and 
yellowish-orange in color, and there may also be splenomegaly and 
lymphadenopathy.
Tangier disease is caused by mutations in the ATP-binding cassette 
transporter 1 (ABC1) gene, which leads to markedly reduced levels of 
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels, whereas triacylglyc-
erol levels are increased. Nerve biopsies reveal axonal degeneration 
with demyelination and remyelination. Electron microscopy demon-
strates abnormal accumulation of lipid in Schwann cells, particularly 
those encompassing umyelinated and small myelinated nerves. There 
is no specific treatment.
■
■PORPHYRIA
Porphyria is a group of inherited disorders caused by defects in heme 
biosynthesis (Chap. 409). Three forms of porphyria are associated with 
peripheral neuropathy: acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), hereditary 
coproporphyria (HCP), and variegate porphyria (VP). The acute neu-
rologic manifestations are similar in each, with the exception that a 
photosensitive rash is seen with HCP and VP but not in AIP. Attacks of 
porphyria can be precipitated by certain drugs (usually those metab-
olized by the P450 system), hormonal changes (e.g., pregnancy, men-
strual cycle), and dietary restrictions.
An acute attack of porphyria may begin with sharp abdominal 
pain. Subsequently, patients may develop agitation, hallucinations, 
or seizures. Several days later, back and extremity pain followed by 
weakness ensues, mimicking GBS (Pattern 1, Table 438-2). Weakness 
can involve the arms or the legs and can be asymmetric, proximal, or 
distal in distribution, as well as affecting the face and bulbar muscula-
ture. Dysautonomia and signs of sympathetic overactivity are common 
(e.g., pupillary dilation, tachycardia, and hypertension). Constipation, 
urinary retention, and incontinence can also be seen.
The CSF protein is typically normal or mildly elevated. Liver 
function tests and hematologic parameters are usually normal. Some 
patients are hyponatremic due to inappropriate secretion of antidi-
uretic hormone (Chap. 371). The urine may appear brownish in color 
secondary to the high concentration of porphyrin metabolites. Accu-
mulation of intermediary precursors of heme (i.e., d-aminolevulinic 
acid, porphobilinogen, uroporphobilinogen, coproporphyrinogen, and 
protoporphyrinogen) is found in urine. Specific enzyme activities can 
also be measured in erythrocytes and leukocytes. The primary abnor-
malities on EDx are marked reductions in compound motor action 
potential (CMAP) amplitudes and signs of active axonal degeneration 
on needle EMG.
The porphyrias are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. 
AIP is associated with porphobilinogen deaminase deficiency, HCP 
is caused by defects in coproporphyrin oxidase, and VP is associated 
with protoporphyrinogen oxidase deficiency. The pathogenesis of the 
neuropathy is not completely understood. Treatment with glucose and 
hematin may reduce the accumulation of heme precursors. Intravenous 


--- PDF PAGE 3258 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3212 glucose is started at a rate of 10–20 g/h. If there is no improvement 
within 24 h, intravenous hematin 2–5 mg/kg per day for 3–14 days 
should be administered.
■
■FAMILIAL AMYLOID POLYNEUROPATHY
Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is phenotypically and genet-
ically heterogeneous and is caused by mutations in the genes for 
transthyretin (TTR), apolipoprotein A1, or gelsolin (Chap. 108). The 
majority of patients with FAP have mutations in the TTR gene. Amy-
loid deposition may be evident in abdominal fat pad, rectal, or nerve 
biopsies. The clinical features, histopathology, and EDx reveal abnor-
malities consistent with a generalized or multifocal, predominantly 
axonal but occasionally demyelinating, polyneuropathy.
Patients with TTR-related FAP usually develop insidious onset of 
numbness and painful paresthesias in the distal lower limbs in the 
third to fourth decade of life, although some patients develop the disor-
der later in life (Pattern 2, Table 438-2). Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) 
is common. Autonomic involvement can be severe, leading to postural 
hypotension, constipation or persistent diarrhea, erectile dysfunction, 
and impaired sweating (Pattern 10, Table 438-2). Amyloid deposition 
also occurs in the heart, kidneys, liver, and corneas. Patients usually 
die 10–15 years after the onset of symptoms from cardiac failure or 
complications from malnutrition. Because the liver produces much of 
the body’s TTR, liver transplantation has been used to treat FAP related 
to TTR mutations. Serum TTR levels decrease after transplantation, 
and improvement in clinical and EDx features has been reported. Both 
tafamidis meglumine (20 mg daily) and diflunisal (250 mg twice daily), 
which prevent misfolding and deposition of mutated TTR, appear to 
slow the rate of deterioration patients with TTR-related FAP. Recent 
studies have shown very promising results with gene therapy.
Patients with apolipoprotein A1-related FAP (Van Allen type) usu-
ally present in the fourth decade with numbness and painful dyses-
thesias in the distal limbs. Gradually, the symptoms progress, leading 
to proximal and distal weakness and atrophy. Although autonomic 
neuropathy is not severe, some patients develop diarrhea, constipa-
tion, or gastroparesis. Most patients die from systemic complications 
of amyloidosis (e.g., renal failure) 12–15 years after the onset of the 
neuropathy.
Gelsolin-related amyloidosis (Finnish type) is characterized by the 
combination of lattice corneal dystrophy and multiple cranial neu-
ropathies that usually begin in the third decade of life. Over time, a 
mild generalized sensorimotor polyneuropathy develops. Autonomic 
dysfunction does not occur.
ACQUIRED NEUROPATHIES
■
■PRIMARY OR AL AMYLOIDOSIS (SEE CHAP. 108)
Besides FAP, amyloidosis can also be acquired. In primary or AL 
amyloidosis, the abnormal protein deposition is composed of immuno-
globulin light chains. AL amyloidosis occurs in the setting of multiple 
myeloma (MM), Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia, lymphoma, other 
plasmacytomas, or lymphoproliferative disorders, or without any 
other identifiable disease.
Approximately 30% of patients with AL primary amyloidosis pres-
ent with a polyneuropathy, most typically painful dysesthesias and 
burning sensations in the feet (Pattern 2, Table 438-2). However, the 
trunk can be involved, and some patients manifest with a mononeur-
opathy multiplex pattern. CTS occurs in 25% of patients and may be the 
initial manifestation. The neuropathy is slowly progressive, and even-
tually weakness develops along with large-fiber sensory loss. Most 
patients develop autonomic involvement with postural hypertension, 
syncope, bowel and bladder incontinence, constipation, impotence, 
and impaired sweating (Pattern 10, Table 438-2). Patients generally die 
from their systemic illness (renal failure, cardiac disease).
The monoclonal protein may be composed of IgG, IgA, IgM, or only 
free light chain. Lambda (λ) is more common than κ light chain (>2:1) 
in AL amyloidosis. The CSF protein is often increased (with normal cell 
count), and thus the neuropathy may be mistaken for CIDP (Chap. 439). 
Nerve biopsies reveal axonal degeneration and amyloid deposition 
in either a globular or diffuse pattern infiltrating the perineurial, 
epineurial, and endoneurial connected tissue and in blood vessel walls.
The median survival of patients with primary amyloidosis is 
<2 years, with death usually from progressive congestive heart fail-
ure or renal failure. Chemotherapy with melphalan, prednisone, 
and colchicine, to reduce the concentration of monoclonal proteins, 
and autologous stem cell transplantation may prolong survival, but 
whether the neuropathy improves is controversial.
■
■DIABETIC NEUROPATHY
DM is the most common cause of peripheral neuropathy in developed 
countries. DM is associated with several types of polyneuropathy: 
distal symmetric sensory or sensorimotor polyneuropathy, autonomic 
neuropathy, diabetic neuropathic cachexia, polyradiculoneuropathies, 
cranial neuropathies, and other mononeuropathies. Risk factors for the 
development of neuropathy include long-standing, poorly controlled 
DM and the presence of retinopathy and nephropathy.
Diabetic Distal Symmetric Sensory and Sensorimotor 
Polyneuropathy (DSPN)  DSPN is the most common form of 
diabetic neuropathy and manifests as sensory loss beginning in the 
toes that gradually progresses over time up the legs and into the fingers 
and arms (Pattern 2, Table 438-2). When severe, a patient may develop 
sensory loss in the trunk (chest and abdomen), initially in the midline 
anteriorly and later extending laterally. Tingling, burning, deep aching 
pains may also be apparent. NCS usually show reduced amplitudes 
and mild to moderate slowing of conduction velocities. Nerve biopsy 
reveals axonal degeneration, endothelial hyperplasia, and, occasion-
ally, perivascular inflammation. Tight control of glucose can reduce the 
risk of developing neuropathy or improve the underlying neuropathy. 
A variety of medications have been used with variable success to treat 
painful symptoms associated with DSPN, including antiepileptic medi-
cations, antidepressants, sodium channel blockers, and other analgesics 
(Table 438-6).
Diabetic Autonomic Neuropathy  Autonomic neuropathy is 
typically seen in combination with DSPN. The autonomic neuropathy 
can manifest as abnormal sweating, dysfunctional thermoregulation, 
dry eyes and mouth, pupillary abnormalities, cardiac arrhythmias, pos-
tural hypotension, GI abnormalities (e.g., gastroparesis, postprandial 
bloating, chronic diarrhea, or constipation), and genitourinary dys-
function (e.g., impotence, retrograde ejaculation, incontinence) (Pattern 
10, Table 438-2). Tests of autonomic function are generally abnormal, 
including sympathetic skin responses and quantitative sudomotor 
axon reflex testing. Sensory and motor NCS generally demonstrate 
features described above with DSPN.
Diabetic Radiculoplexus Neuropathy (Diabetic Amyotrophy 
or Bruns-Garland Syndrome)  Diabetic radiculoplexus neurop-
athy is the presenting manifestation of DM in approximately one-third 
of patients. Typically, patients present with severe pain in the low back, 
hip, and thigh in one leg. Rarely, the diabetic polyradiculoneuropathy 
begins in both legs at the same time (Pattern 4, Table 438-2). Atrophy 
and weakness of proximal and distal muscles in the affected leg become 
apparent within a few days or weeks. The neuropathy is often accom-
panied or heralded by severe weight loss. Weakness usually progresses 
over several weeks or months, but can continue to progress for 18 
months or more. Subsequently, there is slow recovery but many are left 
with residual weakness, sensory loss, and pain. In contrast to the more 
typical lumbosacral radiculoplexus neuropathy, some patients develop 
thoracic radiculopathy or, even less commonly, a cervical polyradicu-
loneuropathy. CSF protein is usually elevated, while the cell count is 
normal. ESR is often increased. EDx reveals evidence of active dener-
vation in affected proximal and distal muscles in the affected limbs and 
in paraspinal muscles. Nerve biopsies may demonstrate axonal degen-
eration along with perivascular inflammation. Patients with severe 
pain are sometimes treated in the acute period with glucocorticoids, 
although a randomized controlled trial has yet to be performed, and 
the natural history of this neuropathy is gradual improvement.


--- PDF PAGE 3259 ---

CHAPTER 438 Peripheral Neuropathy
3213
Diabetic Mononeuropathies or Multiple Mononeuropathies  
The most common mononeuropathies are median neuropathy at the 
wrist and ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, but peroneal neuropathy 
at the fibular head, and sciatic, lateral femoral, cutaneous, or cranial 
neuropathies also occur (Pattern 3, Table 438-2). In regard to cranial 
mononeuropathies, seventh nerve palsies are relatively common but 
may have other, nondiabetic etiologies. In diabetics, a third nerve 
palsy is most common, followed by sixth nerve, and, less frequently, 
fourth nerve palsies. Diabetic third nerve palsies are characteristically 
pupil-sparing (Chap. 28).
■
■HYPOTHYROIDISM
Hypothyroidism is more commonly associated with a proximal myo-
pathy, but some patients develop a neuropathy, most typically CTS. 
Rarely, a generalized sensory polyneuropathy characterized by painful 
paresthesias and numbness in both the legs and hands can occur. Treat-
ment is correction of the hypothyroidism.
■
■SJÖGREN’S SYNDROME
Sjögren’s syndrome, characterized by the sicca complex of xeroph-
thalmia, xerostomia, and dryness of other mucous membranes, can 
be complicated by neuropathy (Chap. 354). Most common is a length- 
dependent axonal sensorimotor neuropathy characterized mainly by 
sensory loss in the distal extremities (Pattern 2, Table 438-2). A pure 
small-fiber neuropathy or a cranial neuropathy, particularly involving 
the trigeminal nerve, can also be seen. Sjögren’s syndrome is also asso-
ciated with sensory neuronopathy/ganglionopathy. Patients with sen-
sory ganglionopathies develop progressive numbness and tingling of 
the limbs, trunk, and face in a non-length-dependent manner such that 
symptoms can involve the face or arms more than the legs. The onset 
can be acute or insidious. Sensory examination demonstrates severe 
vibratory and proprioceptive loss leading to sensory ataxia.
Patients with neuropathy due to Sjögren’s syndrome may have 
ANAs, SS-A/Ro, and SS-B/La antibodies in the serum, but most 
do not. NCS demonstrate reduced amplitudes of sensory studies in 
the affected limbs. Nerve biopsy demonstrates axonal degeneration. 
Nonspecific perivascular inflammation may be present, but only 
rarely is there necrotizing vasculitis. There is no specific treatment 
for neuropathies related to Sjögren’s syndrome. When vasculitis is 
suspected, immunosuppressive agents may be beneficial. Occasionally, 
the sensory neuronopathy/ganglionopathy stabilizes or improves with 
immunotherapy, such as IVIg.
■
■RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Peripheral neuropathy occurs in at least 50% of patients with rheu-
matoid arthritis (RA) and may be vasculitic in nature (Chap. 351). 
Vasculitic neuropathy can present with a mononeuropathy multiplex 
(Pattern 3, Table 438-2), a generalized symmetric pattern of involve-
ment (Pattern 2, Table 438-2), or a combination of these patterns 
(Chap. 356). Neuropathies may also result from drugs used to treat RA 
(e.g., tumor necrosis blockers, leflunomide). Nerve biopsy often reveals 
thickening of the epineurial and endoneurial blood vessels as well as 
perivascular inflammation or vasculitis, with transmural inflammatory 
cell infiltration and fibrinoid necrosis of vessel walls. The neuropathy 
is usually responsive to immunomodulating therapies.
■
■SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Between 2 and 27% of individuals with SLE develop a peripheral neu-
ropathy (Chap. 349). Affected patients typically present with a slowly 
progressive sensory loss beginning in the feet. Some patients develop 
burning pain and paresthesias with normal reflexes, and NCS suggest 
a pure small-fiber neuropathy (Pattern 2, Table 438-2). Less common 
are multiple mononeuropathies presumably secondary to necrotizing 
vasculitis (Pattern 3, Table 438-2). Rarely, a generalized sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy meeting clinical, laboratory, electrophysiologic, and 
histologic criteria for either GBS or CIDP may occur. Immunosuppres-
sive therapy may be beneficial in SLE patients with neuropathy due to 
vasculitis. Immunosuppressive agents are less likely to be effective in 
patients with a generalized sensory or sensorimotor polyneuropathy 
without evidence of vasculitis. Patients with a GBS or CIDP-like neur-
opathy should be treated accordingly (Chap. 439).
■
■SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS (SCLERODERMA)
A distal symmetric, mainly sensory, polyneuropathy complicates 
5–67% of scleroderma cases (Pattern 2, Table 438-2) (Chap. 353). Cranial 
mononeuropathies can also develop, most commonly of the trigeminal 
nerve, producing numbness and dysesthesias in the face. Multiple 
mononeuropathies also occur (Pattern 3, Table 438-2). The EDx and his-
tologic features of nerve biopsy are those of an axonal sensory greater 
than motor polyneuropathy.
TABLE 438-6  Treatment of Painful Sensory Neuropathies
THERAPY
ROUTE
DOSE
SIDE EFFECTS
First-Line
Lidoderm 5% patch
Apply to painful area
Up to 3 patches qd
Skin irritation
Tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., 
amitriptyline, nortriptyline)
PO
10–100 mg qhs
Cognitive changes, sedation, dry eyes and mouth, urinary retention, 
constipation
Gabapentin
PO
300–1200 mg tid
Cognitive changes, sedation, peripheral edema
Pregabalin
PO
50–100 mg tid
Cognitive changes, sedation, peripheral edema
Duloxetine
PO
30–60 mg qd
Cognitive changes, sedation, dry eyes, diaphoresis, nausea, diarrhea, 
constipation
Second-Line
Carbamazepine
PO
200–400 mg q 6–8 h
Cognitive changes, dizziness, leukopenia, liver dysfunction
Phenytoin
PO
200–400 mg qhs
Cognitive changes, dizziness, liver dysfunction
Venlafaxine
PO
37.5–150 mg/d
Asthenia, sweating, nausea, constipation, anorexia, vomiting, 
somnolence, dry mouth, dizziness, nervousness, anxiety, tremor, and 
blurred vision as well as abnormal ejaculation/orgasm and impotence
Tramadol
PO
50 mg qid
Cognitive changes, gastrointestinal upset
Third-Line
Mexiletine
PO
200–300 mg tid
Arrhythmias
Other Agents
EMLA cream
Apply cutaneously
qid
Local erythema
2.5% lidocaine
2.5% prilocaine
Capsaicin 0.025–0.075% cream
Apply cutaneously
qid
Painful burning skin
Source: Modified from AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Table 22-3, p 485.


--- PDF PAGE 3260 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3214
■
■MIXED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE (MCTD)
A mild distal axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy occurs in ~10% of 
patients with MCTD.
■
■SARCOIDOSIS
The peripheral or CNS is involved in about 5% of patients with sar-
coidosis (Chap. 360). The most common cranial nerve involved is the 
seventh nerve, which can be affected bilaterally. Some patients develop 
radiculopathy or polyradiculopathy (Pattern 4, Table 438-2). With a 
generalized root involvement, the clinical presentation can mimic GBS 
or CIDP. Patients can also present with multiple mononeuropathies 
(Pattern 3, Table 438-2) or a generalized, slowly progressive, sensory 
greater than motor polyneuropathy (Pattern 2, Table 438-2). Some have 
features of a pure small-fiber neuropathy. EDx reveals an axonal neur-
opathy. Nerve biopsy can reveal noncaseating granulomas infiltrating 
the endoneurium, perineurium, or epineurium along with lymphocytic 
necrotizing angiitis. Neurosarcoidosis may respond to treatment with 
glucocorticoids or other immunosuppressive agents.
■
■HYPEREOSINOPHILIC SYNDROME
Hypereosinophilic syndrome is characterized by eosinophilia associ-
ated with various skin, cardiac, hematologic, and neurologic abnor-
malities. A generalized peripheral neuropathy or a mononeuropathy 
multiplex occurs in 6–14% of patients (Pattern 2, Table 438-2).
■
■CELIAC DISEASE (GLUTEN-INDUCED ENTEROPATHY 
OR NONTROPICAL SPRUE)
Neurologic complications, particularly ataxia and peripheral neur-
opathy, are estimated to occur in 10% of patients with celiac disease 
(Chap. 318). A generalized sensorimotor polyneuropathy, pure motor 
neuropathy, multiple mononeuropathies, autonomic neuropathy, 
small-fiber neuropathy, and neuromyotonia have all been reported 
in association with celiac disease or antigliadin/antiendomysial anti-
bodies (Patterns 2, 3, and 9; Table 438-2). Nerve biopsy may reveal a 
loss of large myelinated fibers. The neuropathy may be secondary to 
malabsorption of vitamins B12 and E. However, some patients have no 
appreciable vitamin deficiencies. The pathogenic basis for the neurop-
athy in these patients is unclear but may be autoimmune in etiology. 
The neuropathy does not appear to respond to a gluten-free diet. In 
patients with vitamin B12 or vitamin E deficiency, replacement therapy 
may improve or stabilize the neuropathy.
■
■INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease may be complicated by GBS, 
CIDP, generalized axonal sensory or sensorimotor polyneuropa-
thy, small-fiber neuropathy, or mononeuropathy (Patterns 2 and 3, 
Table 438-2) (Chap. 319). These neuropathies may be autoimmune, 
nutritional (e.g., vitamin B12 deficiency), treatment related (e.g., met-
ronidazole), or idiopathic in nature. An acute neuropathy with demy-
elination resembling GBS, CIDP, or multifocal motor neuropathy may 
occur in patients treated with tumor necrosis factor α blockers.
■
■UREMIC NEUROPATHY
Approximately 60% of patients with renal failure develop a polyneu-
ropathy characterized by length-dependent numbness, tingling, allo-
dynia, and mild distal weakness (Pattern 2, Table 438-2). Rarely, a 
rapidly progressive weakness and sensory loss very similar to GBS can 
occur that improves with an increase in the intensity of renal dialysis 
or with transplantation (Pattern 1, Table 438-2). Mononeuropathies can 
also occur, the most common of which is CTS. Ischemic monomelic 
neuropathy (see below) can complicate arteriovenous shunts created 
in the arm for dialysis (Pattern 3, Table 438-2). EDx in uremic patients 
reveals features of a length-dependent, primarily axonal, sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy. Sural nerve biopsies demonstrate a loss of nerve fibers 
(particularly large myelinated nerve fibers), active axonal degenera-
tion, and segmental and paranodal demyelination. The sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy can be stabilized by hemodialysis and improved with 
successful renal transplantation.
■
■CHRONIC LIVER DISEASE
A generalized sensorimotor neuropathy characterized by numbness, 
tingling, and minor weakness in the distal aspects of primarily the 
lower limbs commonly occurs in patients with chronic liver failure. 
EDx studies are consistent with a sensory greater than motor axonopa-
thy. Occasionally patients with severe liver disease develop a combined 
neuropathy and myopathy. Sural nerve biopsy reveals both segmental 
demyelination and axonal loss. It is not known if hepatic failure in 
isolation can cause peripheral neuropathy, as the majority of patients 
have liver disease secondary to other disorders, such as alcoholism or 
viral hepatitis, which can also cause neuropathy.
■
■CRITICAL ILLNESS POLYNEUROPATHY
The most common causes of acute generalized weakness leading to 
admission to a medical intensive care unit (ICU) are GBS and myas-
thenia gravis (Pattern 1, Table 438-2) (Chaps. 439 and 440). However, 
weakness developing in critically ill patients while in the ICU is usually 
caused by critical illness polyneuropathy (CIP) or critical illness myo-
pathy (CIM) or, much less commonly, by prolonged neuromuscular 
blockade. From a clinical and EDx standpoint, it can be quite difficult 
to distinguish these disorders. Most specialists believe that CIM is more 
common. Both CIM and CIP develop as a complication of sepsis and 
multiple organ failure. They usually present as an inability to wean a 
patient from a ventilator. A coexisting encephalopathy may limit the 
neurologic examination, in particular the sensory examination. Muscle 
stretch reflexes are absent or reduced.
Serum creatine kinase (CK) is usually normal; an elevated serum CK 
would point to CIM as opposed to CIP. NCS reveal absent or markedly 
reduced amplitudes of motor and sensory studies in CIP, whereas 
sensory studies are relatively preserved in CIM. Needle EMG usually 
reveals profuse positive sharp waves and fibrillation potentials, and it 
is not unusual in patients with severe weakness to be unable to recruit 
motor unit action potentials. The pathogenic basis of CIP is not known. 
Perhaps circulating toxins and metabolic abnormalities associated with 
sepsis and multiorgan failure impair axonal transport or mitochondrial 
function, leading to axonal degeneration.
■
■LEPROSY (HANSEN’S DISEASE)
Leprosy, caused by the acid-fast bacteria Mycobacterium leprae, 
is the most common cause of peripheral neuropathy in 
Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America (Chap. 174). Clini-
cal manifestations range from tuberculoid leprosy at one end of the 
spectrum to lepromatous leprosy at the other end, with borderline 
leprosy in between. Neuropathies are most common in patients with 
borderline leprosy. Superficial cutaneous nerves of the ears and distal 
limbs are commonly affected. Mononeuropathies, multiple mononeu-
ropathies, or a slowly progressive symmetric sensorimotor polyneur-
opathy may develop (Patterns 2 and 3, Table 438-2). Sensory NCS are 
usually absent in the lower limb and are reduced in amplitude in the 
arms. Motor NCS may demonstrate reduced amplitudes in affected 
nerves but occasionally can reveal demyelinating features. Leprosy is 
usually diagnosed by skin lesion biopsy. Nerve biopsy can also be 
diagnostic, particularly when there are no apparent skin lesions. The 
tuberculoid form is characterized by granulomas, and bacilli are not 
seen. In contrast, with lepromatous leprosy, large numbers of infiltrat-
ing bacilli, TH2 lymphocytes, and organism-laden, foamy macrophages 
with minimal granulomatous infiltration are evident. The bacilli are 
best appreciated using the Fite stain, where they can be seen as 
red-staining rods often in clusters free in the endoneurium, within 
macrophages, or within Schwann cells.
Patients are generally treated with multiple drugs: dapsone, 
rifampin, and clofazimine. Other medications that are used include 
thalidomide, pefloxacin, ofloxacin, sparfloxacin, minocycline, and 
clarithromycin. Patients are generally treated for 2 years. Treatment is 
sometimes complicated by the so-called reversal reaction, particularly 
in borderline leprosy. The reversal reaction can occur at any time during 
treatment and develops because of a shift to the tuberculoid end of the 
spectrum, with an increase in cellular immunity during treatment. The 
cellular response is upregulated as evidenced by an increased release of 


--- PDF PAGE 3261 ---

CHAPTER 438 Peripheral Neuropathy
3215
tumor necrosis factor α, interferon γ, and interleukin 2, with new gran-
uloma formation. This can result in an exacerbation of the rash and the 
neuropathy as well as in appearance of new lesions. High-dose gluco-
corticoids blunt this adverse reaction and may be used prophylactically 
at treatment onset in high-risk patients. Erythema nodosum leprosum 
(ENL) is also treated with glucocorticoids or thalidomide.
■
■LYME DISEASE
Lyme disease is caused by infection with Borrelia burgdorferi, a spiro-
chete usually transmitted by the deer tick Ixodes dammini (Chap. 181). 
Neurologic complications may develop during the second and third 
stages of infection. Facial neuropathy is most common and is bilateral 
in about half of cases, which is rare for idiopathic Bell’s palsy. Involve-
ment of nerves is frequently asymmetric. Some patients present with a 
polyradiculoneuropathy or multiple mononeuropathies (Pattern 3 or 4, 
Table 438-2). EDx is suggestive of a primary axonopathy. Nerve biop-
sies can reveal axonal degeneration with perivascular inflammation. 
Treatment is with antibiotics (Chap. 181).
■
■DIPHTHERITIC NEUROPATHY
Diphtheria is caused by the bacteria Corynebacterium diphtheriae 
(Chap. 145). Infected individuals present with flulike symptoms of gen-
eralized myalgias, headache, fatigue, low-grade fever, and irritability 
within a week to 10 days of the exposure. About 20–70% of patients 
develop a peripheral neuropathy caused by a toxin released by the bac-
teria. Three to four weeks after infection, patients may note decreased 
sensation in their throat and begin to develop dysphagia, dysarthria, 
hoarseness, and blurred vision due to impaired accommodation. A 
generalized polyneuropathy may manifest 2 or 3 months following the 
initial infection, characterized by numbness, paresthesias, and weak-
ness of the arms and legs and occasionally ventilatory failure (Pattern 1, 
Table 438-2). CSF protein can be elevated with or without lymphocytic 
pleocytosis. EDx suggests a diffuse axonal sensorimotor polyneuropa-
thy. Antitoxin and antibiotics should be given within 48 h of symptom 
onset. Although early treatment reduces the incidence and severity of 
some complications (i.e., cardiomyopathy), it does not appear to alter 
the natural history of the associated peripheral neuropathy. The neur-
opathy usually resolves after several months.
■
■HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS
HIV infection can result in a variety of neurologic complications, 
including peripheral neuropathies (Chap. 197). Approximately 20% of 
HIV-infected individuals develop a neuropathy either as a direct result 
of the virus itself, other associated viral infections (e.g., CMV), or neu-
rotoxicity secondary to antiviral medications (see below). The major 
presentations of peripheral neuropathy associated with HIV infection 
include (1) distal symmetric polyneuropathy (DSP), (2) inflamma-
tory demyelinating polyneuropathy (including both GBS and CIDP), 
(3) multiple mononeuropathies (e.g., vasculitis, CMV-related), 
(4) polyradiculopathy (usually CMV-related), (5) autonomic neuropa-
thy, and (6) sensory ganglionitis.
HIV-Related Distal Symmetric Polyneuropathy  DSP is the 
most common form of peripheral neuropathy associated with HIV 
infection and usually is seen in patients with AIDS. It is characterized 
by numbness and painful paresthesias involving the distal extremities 
(Pattern 2, Table 438-2). The pathogenic basis for DSP is unknown but 
is not due to actual infection of the peripheral nerves. The neuropathy 
may be immune mediated, perhaps caused by the release of cytokines 
from surrounding inflammatory cells. Vitamin B12 deficiency may 
contribute in some instances but is not a major cause of most cases 
of DSP. Older antiretroviral agents (e.g., dideoxycytidine, dideoxy-
inosine, stavudine) are also neurotoxic and can cause a painful sensory 
neuropathy.
HIV-Related Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculo-
neuropathy  Both acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneurop-
athy (AIDP) and CIDP can occur as a complication of HIV infection 
(Pattern 1, Table 438-2). AIDP usually develops at the time of serocon-
version, whereas CIDP can occur any time in the course of the infection. 
Clinical and EDx features are indistinguishable from idiopathic AIDP 
or CIDP (Chap. 439). In addition to elevated protein levels, lympho-
cytic pleocytosis is evident in the CSF, a finding that helps distin-
guish this HIV-associated polyradiculoneuropathy from idiopathic 
AIDP/CIDP.
HIV-Related Progressive Polyradiculopathy  An acute, 
progressive lumbosacral polyradiculoneuropathy usually secondary 
to CMV infection can develop in patients with AIDS (Pattern 4, 
Table 438-2). Patients present with severe radicular pain, numbness, 
and weakness in the legs, which is usually asymmetric. CSF is abnor-
mal, demonstrating a high protein level, along with a reduced glucose 
concentration and notably a neutrophilic pleocytosis. EDx studies 
reveal features of active axonal degeneration. The polyradiculoneurop-
athy may improve with antiviral therapy.
HIV-Related Multiple Mononeuropathies  Multiple monon-
europathies can also develop in patients with HIV infection, usually in 
the context of AIDS. Weakness, numbness, paresthesias, and pain occur 
in the distribution of affected nerves (Pattern 3, Table 438-2). Nerve 
biopsies can reveal axonal degeneration with necrotizing vasculitis or 
perivascular inflammation. Glucocorticoid treatment is indicated for 
vasculitis directly due to HIV infection.
HIV-Related Sensory Neuronopathy/Ganglionopathy  
Dorsal root ganglionitis is a very rare complication of HIV infection, 
and neuronopathy can be the presenting manifestation. Patients 
develop sensory ataxia similar to idiopathic sensory neuronopathy/
ganglionopathy (Pattern 9, Table 438-2). NCS reveal reduced ampli-
tudes or absence of sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs).
■
■HERPES VARICELLA-ZOSTER VIRUS
Peripheral neuropathy from herpes varicella-zoster (HVZ) infection 
results from reactivation of latent virus or from a primary infection 
(Chap. 188). Two-thirds of infections in adults are characterized by 
dermal zoster in which severe pain and paresthesias develop in a 
dermatomal region followed within a week or two by a vesicular rash 
in the same distribution (Pattern 3, Table 438-2). Weakness in muscles 
innervated by roots corresponding to the dermatomal distribution of 
skin lesions occurs in 5–30% of patients. Approximately 25% of affected 
patients have continued pain (postherpetic neuralgia [PHN]). A large 
clinical trial demonstrated that vaccination against zoster reduces 
the incidence of HVZ among vaccine recipients by 51% and reduces 
the incidence of PHN by 67%. Treatment of PHN is symptomatic 
(Table 438-6).
■
■CYTOMEGALOVIRUS
CMV can cause an acute lumbosacral polyradiculopathy and multiple 
mononeuropathies in patients with HIV infection and in other immune 
deficiency conditions (Pattern 4, Table 438-2) (Chap. 190).
■
■EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS
EBV infection has been associated with GBS, cranial neuropathies, 
mononeuropathy multiplex, brachial plexopathy, lumbosacral radic-
uloplexopathy, and sensory neuronopathies (Patterns 1, 3, 4, and 9, 
Table 438-2) (Chap. 189).
■
■HEPATITIS VIRUSES
Hepatitis B and C can cause multiple mononeuropathies related to 
vasculitis, AIDP, or CIDP (Patterns 1 and 3, Table 438-2) (Chap. 334).
NEUROPATHIES ASSOCIATED  
WITH MALIGNANCY
Patients with malignancy can develop neuropathies due to (1) a 
direct effect of the cancer by invasion or compression of the nerves, 
(2) remote or paraneoplastic effect, (3) a toxic effect of treatment, or 
(4) as a consequence of immune compromise caused by immunosup-
pressive medications. The most common associated malignancy is 
lung cancer, but neuropathies also complicate carcinoma of the breast, 
ovaries, stomach, colon, rectum, and other organs, including the lym-
phoproliferative system.


--- PDF PAGE 3262 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3216
■
■PARANEOPLASTIC SENSORY NEURONOPATHY/
GANGLIONOPATHY
Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis/sensory neuronopathy (PEM/SN) 
usually complicates small-cell lung carcinoma (Chap. 90). Patients 
usually present with numbness and paresthesias in the distal extrem-
ities that are often asymmetric. The onset can be acute or insidiously 
progressive. Prominent loss of proprioception leads to sensory ataxia 
(Pattern 9; Table 438-2). Weakness can be present, usually secondary 
to an associated myelitis, motor neuronopathy, or concurrent LEMS. 
Many patients also develop confusion, memory loss, depression, hal-
lucinations or seizures, or cerebellar ataxia. Polyclonal antineuronal 
antibodies (IgG) directed against a 35- to 40-kDa protein or complex 
of proteins, the so-called Hu antigen, are found in the sera or CSF in 
the majority of patients with paraneoplastic PEM/SN. CSF may be 
normal or may demonstrate mild lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated 
protein. PEM/SN is probably the result of antigenic similarity between 
proteins expressed in the tumor cells and neuronal cells, leading to an 
immune response directed against both cell types. Treatment of the 
underlying cancer generally does not affect the course of PEM/SN. 
However, occasional patients may improve following treatment of the 
tumor. Unfortunately, plasmapheresis, intravenous immunoglobulin, 
and immunosuppressive agents have not shown benefit.
■
■NEUROPATHY SECONDARY TO  
TUMOR INFILTRATION
Malignant cells, in particular leukemia and lymphoma, can infiltrate 
cranial and peripheral nerves, leading to mononeuropathy, mononeu-
ropathy multiplex, polyradiculopathy, plexopathy, or even a general-
ized symmetric distal or proximal and distal polyneuropathy (Patterns 
1, 2, 3, and 4; Table 438-2). Neuropathy related to tumor infiltration is 
often painful; it can be the presenting manifestation of the cancer or 
the heralding symptom of a relapse. The neuropathy may improve 
with treatment of the underlying leukemia or lymphoma or with 
glucocorticoids.
■
■NEUROPATHY AS A COMPLICATION OF BONE 
MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
Neuropathies may develop in patients who undergo bone marrow 
transplantation (BMT) because of the toxic effects of chemotherapy, 
radiation, infection, or an autoimmune response directed against the 
peripheral nerves. Peripheral neuropathy in BMT is often associated 
with graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). Chronic GVHD shares many 
features with a variety of autoimmune disorders, and it is possible that 
an immune-mediated response directed against peripheral nerves is 
responsible. Patients with chronic GVHD may develop cranial neurop-
athies, sensorimotor polyneuropathies, multiple mononeuropathies, 
and severe generalized peripheral neuropathies resembling AIDP or 
CIDP (Patterns 1, 2, and 3; Table 438-2). The neuropathy may improve 
by increasing the intensity of immunosuppressive or immunomodulat-
ing therapy and resolution of the GVHD.
■
■LYMPHOMA
Lymphomas may cause neuropathy by infiltration or direct compres-
sion of nerves or by a paraneoplastic process. The neuropathy can be 
purely sensory or motor, but most commonly is sensorimotor. The 
pattern of involvement may be symmetric, asymmetric, or multifocal, 
and the course may be acute, gradually progressive, or relapsing and 
remitting (Patterns 1, 2, and 3; Table 438-2). EDx can be compatible 
with either an axonal or demyelinating process. CSF may reveal 
lymphocytic pleocytosis and an elevated protein. Nerve biopsy may 
demonstrate endoneurial inflammatory cells in both the infiltrative and 
the paraneoplastic etiologies. A monoclonal population of cells favors 
lymphomatous invasion. The neuropathy may respond to treatment of 
the underlying lymphoma or immunomodulating therapies.
■
■MULTIPLE MYELOMA
MM usually presents in the fifth to seventh decade of life with fatigue, 
bone pain, anemia, and hypercalcemia (Chap. 107). Clinical and EDx 
features of neuropathy occur in as many as 40% of patients. The most 
common pattern is that of a distal, axonal, sensory, or sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy (Pattern 2; Table 438-2). Less frequently, a chronic 
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy may develop (Pattern 1; 
Table 438-2) (see POEMS, Chap. 439). MM can be complicated by 
amyloid polyneuropathy and should be considered in patients with 
painful paresthesias, loss of pinprick and temperature discrimination, 
and autonomic dysfunction (suggestive of a small-fiber neuropathy) 
and CTS. Expanding plasmacytomas can compress cranial nerves and 
spinal roots as well. A monoclonal protein, usually composed of γ or μ 
heavy chains or κ light chains, may be identified in the serum or urine. 
EDx usually shows reduced amplitudes with normal or only mildly 
abnormal distal latencies and conduction velocities. A superimposed 
median neuropathy at the wrist is common. Abdominal fat pad, rectal, 
or sural nerve biopsy can be performed to look for amyloid deposition. 
Unfortunately, the treatment of the underlying MM does not usually 
affect the course of the neuropathy.
■
■NEUROPATHIES ASSOCIATED WITH MONOCLONAL 
GAMMOPATHY OF UNCERTAIN SIGNIFICANCE (SEE 
CHAP. 439)
Toxic Neuropathies Secondary to Chemotherapy  Many of 
the commonly used chemotherapy agents can cause a toxic neuropa-
thy (Table 438-7). The mechanisms by which these agents cause toxic 
neuropathies vary, as does the specific type of neuropathy produced. 
The risk of developing a toxic neuropathy or more severe neuropathy 
appears to be greater in patients with a preexisting neuropathy (e.g., 
CMT disease, diabetic neuropathy) and those who also take other 
potentially neurotoxic drugs (e.g., nitrofurantoin, isoniazid, disulfiram, 
pyridoxine). Chemotherapeutic agents usually cause a sensory greater 
than motor length-dependent axonal neuropathy or neuronopathy/
ganglionopathy (Patterns 2 and 9; Table 438-2).
OTHER TOXIC NEUROPATHIES
Neuropathies can develop as complications of toxic effects of various 
drugs and other environmental exposures (Table 438-8). The more 
common neuropathies associated with these agents are discussed here.
■
■CHLOROQUINE AND HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine can cause a toxic myopathy 
characterized by slowly progressive, painless, proximal weakness 
and atrophy, which is worse in the legs than the arms. In addition, 
neuropathy can also develop with or without the myopathy leading 
to sensory loss and distal weakness. The “neuromyopathy” usually 
appears in patients taking 500 mg daily for a year or more but has been 
reported with doses as low as 200 mg/d. Serum CK levels are usually 
elevated due to the superimposed myopathy. NCS reveal mild slowing 
of motor and sensory NCVs with a mild to moderate reduction in the 
amplitudes, although NCS may be normal in patients with only the 
myopathy. EMG demonstrates myopathic muscle action potentials 
(MUAPs), increased insertional activity in the form of positive sharp 
waves, fibrillation potentials, and occasionally myotonic potentials, 
particularly in the proximal muscles. Neurogenic MUAPs and reduced 
recruitment are found in more distal muscles. Nerve biopsy demon-
strates autophagic vacuoles within Schwann cells. Vacuoles may also 
be evident in muscle biopsies. The pathogenic basis of the neuropathy 
is not known but may be related to the amphiphilic properties of the 
drug. These agents contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions 
that allow them to interact with the anionic phospholipids of cell 
membranes and organelles. The drug-lipid complexes may be resis-
tant to digestion by lysosomal enzymes, leading to the formation of 
autophagic vacuoles filled with myeloid debris that may in turn cause 
degeneration of nerves and muscle fibers. The signs and symptoms 
of the neuropathy and myopathy are usually reversible following 
discontinuation of medication.
■
■AMIODARONE
Amiodarone can cause a neuromyopathy similar to chloroquine and 
hydroxychloroquine. The neuromyopathy typically appears after 
patients have taken the medication for 2–3 years. Nerve biopsy 


--- PDF PAGE 3263 ---

CHAPTER 438 Peripheral Neuropathy
3217
TABLE 438-7  Toxic Neuropathies Secondary to Chemotherapy
DRUG
MECHANISM OF 
NEUROTOXICITY
CLINICAL FEATURES
NERVE HISTOPATHOLOGY
EMG/NCS
Vinca alkaloids 
(vincristine, 
vinblastine, 
vindesine, 
vinorelbine)
Interfere with axonal 
microtubule assembly; impairs 
axonal transport
Symmetric, S-M, large-/small-
fiber PN; autonomic symptoms 
common; infrequent cranial 
neuropathies
Axonal degeneration of myelinated 
and unmyelinated fibers; 
regenerating clusters, minimal 
segmental demyelination
Axonal sensorimotor PN; distal 
denervation on EMG; abnormal QST, 
particularly vibratory perception
Cisplatin
Preferential damage to dorsal 
root ganglia:
? binds to and cross-links DNA
? inhibits protein synthesis
? impairs axonal transport
Predominant large-fiber 
sensory neuronopathy; 
sensory ataxia
Loss of large > small myelinated 
and unmyelinated fibers; axonal 
degeneration with small clusters 
of regenerating fibers; secondary 
segmental demyelination
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal CMAPs and EMG; 
abnormal QST, particularly vibratory 
perception
Taxanes 
(paclitaxel, 
docetaxel)
Promotes axonal microtubule 
assembly; interferes with 
axonal transport
Symmetric, predominantly 
sensory PN; large-fiber 
modalities affected more than 
small-fiber
Loss of large > small myelinated 
and unmyelinated fibers; axonal 
degeneration with small clusters 
of regenerating fibers; secondary 
segmental demyelination
Axonal sensorimotor PN; distal 
denervation on EMG; abnormal QST, 
particularly vibratory perception
Suramin
  Axonal PN
Unknown; ? inhibition of 
neurotrophic growth factor 
binding; ? neuronal lysosomal 
storage
Symmetric, length-dependent, 
sensory-predominant PN
None described
Abnormalities consistent with an 
axonal S-M PN
  Demyelinating 
PN
Unknown; ? 
immunomodulating effects
Subacute, S-M PN with diffuse 
proximal and distal weakness; 
areflexia; increased CSF 
protein
Loss of large and small myelinated 
fibers with primary demyelination 
and secondary axonal degeneration; 
occasional epi- and endoneurial 
inflammatory cell infiltrates
Features suggestive of an acquired 
demyelinating sensorimotor PN (e.g., 
slow CVs, prolonged distal latencies 
and F-wave latencies, conduction 
block, temporal dispersion)
Cytarabine 
(ARA-C)
Unknown; ? selective 
Schwann cell toxicity; ? 
immunomodulating effects
GBS-like syndrome; pure 
sensory neuropathy; brachial 
plexopathy
Loss of myelinated nerve fibers; 
axonal degeneration; segmental 
demyelination; no inflammation
Axonal, demyelinating, or mixed S-M 
PN; denervation on EMG
Etoposide (VP-16)
Unknown; ? selective dorsal 
root ganglia toxicity
Length-dependent, sensory-
predominant PN; autonomic 
neuropathy
None described
Abnormalities consistent with an 
axonal S-M PN
Bortezomib 
(Velcade)
Unknown
Length-dependent, sensory, 
predominantly small-fiber PN
Not reported
Abnormalities consistent with an 
axonal sensory neuropathy with early 
small-fiber involvement (abnormal 
autonomic studies)
Abbreviations: CMAP, compound motor action potential; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CVs, conduction velocities; EMG, electromyography; GBS, Guillain-Barré syndrome;  
NCS, nerve conduction studies; PN, polyneuropathy; QST, quantitative sensory testing; S-M, sensorimotor; SNAP, sensory nerve action potential.
Source: Modified from AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Table 19-3, p. 439.
demonstrates a combination of segmental demyelination and axonal 
loss. Electron microscopy reveals lamellar or dense inclusions in 
Schwann cells, pericytes, and endothelial cells. The inclusions in 
muscle and nerve biopsies have persisted as long as 2 years following 
discontinuation of the medication.
■
■COLCHICINE
Colchicine can also cause a neuromyopathy. Patients usually present 
with proximal weakness and numbness and tingling in the dis-
tal extremities. EDx reveals features of an axonal polyneuropathy. 
Muscle biopsy reveals a vacuolar myopathy, whereas sensory nerves 
demonstrate axonal degeneration. Colchicine inhibits the polymeriza-
tion of tubulin into microtubules. The disruption of the microtubules 
probably leads to defective intracellular movement of important 
proteins, nutrients, and waste products in muscle and nerves.
■
■THALIDOMIDE
Thalidomide is an immunomodulating agent used to treat MM, 
GVHD, leprosy, and other autoimmune disorders. Thalidomide is asso-
ciated with severe teratogenic effects as well as peripheral neuropathy 
that can be dose-limiting. Patients develop numbness, painful tingling, 
and burning discomfort in the feet and hands and less commonly mus-
cle weakness and atrophy. Even after stopping the drug for 4–6 years, 
as many as 50% patients continue to have significant symptoms. NCS 
demonstrate reduced amplitudes or complete absence of SNAPs, with 
preserved conduction velocities when obtainable. Motor NCS are usu-
ally normal. Nerve biopsy reveals a loss of large-diameter myelinated 
fibers and axonal degeneration. Degeneration of dorsal root ganglion 
cells has been reported at autopsy.
■
■PYRIDOXINE (VITAMIN B6) TOXICITY
Pyridoxine is an essential vitamin that serves as a coenzyme for tran-
samination and decarboxylation. However, at high doses (116 mg/d), 
patients can develop a severe sensory neuropathy with dysesthesias 
and sensory ataxia. NCS reveal absent or markedly reduced SNAP 
amplitudes with relatively preserved CMAPs. Nerve biopsy reveals 
axonal loss of fiber at all diameters. Loss of dorsal root ganglion cells 
with subsequent degeneration of both the peripheral and central 
sensory tracts have been reported in animal models.
■
■ISONIAZID
One of the most common side effects of isoniazid (INH) is peripheral 
neuropathy. Standard doses of INH (3–5 mg/kg per day) are associated 
with a 2% incidence of neuropathy, whereas neuropathy develops in 
at least 17% of patients taking in excess of 6 mg/kg per d. The elderly, 
malnourished, and “slow acetylators” are at increased risk for develop-
ing the neuropathy. INH inhibits pyridoxal phosphokinase, resulting in 
pyridoxine deficiency and the neuropathy. Prophylactic administration 
of pyridoxine 100 mg/d can prevent the neuropathy from developing.
■
■ANTIRETROVIRAL AGENTS
The nucleoside analogues zalcitabine (dideoxycytidine or ddC), 
didanosine (dideoxyinosine or ddI), stavudine (d4T), lamivudine 
(3TC), and antiretroviral nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor 
(NRTI) are used to treat HIV infection. One of the major dose-limiting 


--- PDF PAGE 3264 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3218
TABLE 438-8  Toxic Neuropathies
DRUG
MECHANISM OF 
NEUROTOXICITY
CLINICAL FEATURES
NERVE HISTOPATHOLOGY
EMG/NCS
Misonidazole
Unknown
Painful paresthesias and loss of large- 
and small-fiber sensory modalities and 
sometimes distal weakness in length-
dependent pattern
Axonal degeneration of 
large myelinated fibers; 
axonal swellings; segmental 
demyelination
Low-amplitude or unobtainable SNAPs 
with normal or only slightly reduced 
CMAPs amplitudes
Metronidazole
Unknown
Painful paresthesias and loss of large- 
and small-fiber sensory modalities and 
sometimes distal weakness in length-
dependent pattern
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtainable SNAPs 
with normal CMAPs
Chloroquine and 
hydroxychloroquine
Amphiphilic properties 
may lead to drug-lipid 
complexes that are 
indigestible and result 
in accumulation of 
autophagic vacuoles
Loss of large- and small-fiber sensory 
modalities and distal weakness 
in length-dependent pattern; 
superimposed myopathy may lead to 
proximal weakness
Axonal degeneration with 
autophagic vacuoles in nerves 
as well as muscle fibers
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes; distal denervation on 
EMG; irritability and myopathic-
appearing MUAPs proximally in 
patients with superimposed toxic 
myopathy
Amiodarone
Amphiphilic properties 
may lead to drug-lipid 
complexes that are 
indigestible and result 
in accumulation of 
autophagic vacuoles
Paresthesias and pain with loss 
of large- and small-fiber sensory 
modalities and distal weakness 
in length-dependent pattern; 
superimposed myopathy may lead to 
proximal weakness
Axonal degeneration and 
segmental demyelination with 
myeloid inclusions in nerves 
and muscle fibers
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes; can also have prominent 
slowing of CVs; distal denervation 
on EMG; irritability and myopathic-
appearing MUAPs proximally in 
patients with superimposed toxic 
myopathy
Colchicine
Inhibits polymerization 
of tubulin in 
microtubules and 
impairs axoplasmic 
flow
Numbness and paresthesias with loss 
of large-fiber modalities in a length-
dependent fashion; superimposed 
myopathy may lead to proximal in 
addition to distal weakness
Nerve biopsy demonstrates 
axonal degeneration; muscle 
biopsy reveals fibers with 
vacuoles
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes; irritability and myopathic-
appearing MUAPs proximally in 
patients with superimposed toxic 
myopathy
Podophyllin
Binds to microtubules 
and impairs 
axoplasmic flow
Sensory loss, tingling, muscle 
weakness, and diminished muscle 
stretch reflexes in length-dependent 
pattern; autonomic neuropathy
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Thalidomide
Unknown
Numbness, tingling, and burning pain 
and weakness in a length-dependent 
pattern
Axonal degeneration; autopsy 
studies reveal degeneration of 
dorsal root ganglia
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Disulfiram
Accumulation of 
neurofilaments and 
impaired axoplasmic 
flow
Numbness, tingling, and burning pain in 
a length-dependent pattern
Axonal degeneration 
with accumulation of 
neurofilaments in the axons
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Dapsone
Unknown
Distal weakness that may progress to 
proximal muscles; sensory loss
Axonal degeneration and 
segmental demyelination
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
CMAPs with normal or reduced SNAP 
amplitudes
Leflunomide
Unknown
Paresthesias and numbness in a 
length-dependent pattern
Unknown
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Nitrofurantoin
Unknown
Numbness, painful paresthesias, and 
severe weakness that may resemble 
GBS
Axonal degeneration; autopsy 
studies reveal degeneration 
of dorsal root ganglia and 
anterior horn cells
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
Unknown
Dysesthesias and sensory ataxia; 
impaired large-fiber sensory modalities 
on examination
Marked loss of sensory axons 
and cell bodies in dorsal root 
ganglia
Reduced amplitudes or absent SNAPs
Isoniazid
Inhibits pyridoxal 
phosphokinase 
leading to pyridoxine 
deficiency
Dysesthesias and sensory ataxia; 
impaired large-fiber sensory modalities 
on examination
Marked loss of sensory axons 
and cell bodies in dorsal root 
ganglia and degeneration of 
the dorsal columns
Reduced amplitudes or absent SNAPs 
and, to a lesser extent, CMAPs
Ethambutol
Unknown
Numbness with loss of large-fiber 
modalities on examination
Axonal degeneration
Reduced amplitudes or absent SNAPs
Antinucleosides
Unknown
Dysesthesia and sensory ataxia; 
impaired large-fiber sensory modalities 
on examination
Axonal degeneration
Reduced amplitudes or absent SNAPs
Phenytoin
Unknown
Numbness with loss of large-fiber 
modalities on examination
Axonal degeneration and 
segmental demyelination
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Lithium
Unknown
Numbness with loss of large-fiber 
modalities on examination
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
(Continued)


--- PDF PAGE 3265 ---

CHAPTER 438 Peripheral Neuropathy
3219
TABLE 438-8  Toxic Neuropathies
DRUG
MECHANISM OF 
NEUROTOXICITY
CLINICAL FEATURES
NERVE HISTOPATHOLOGY
EMG/NCS
Acrylamide
Unknown; may be 
caused by impaired 
axonal transport
Numbness with loss of large-fiber 
modalities on examination; sensory 
ataxia; mild distal weakness
Degeneration of sensory 
axons in peripheral nerves 
and posterior columns, 
spinocerebellar tracts, 
mammillary bodies, optic 
tracts, and corticospinal tracts 
in the CNS
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Carbon disulfide
Unknown
Length-dependent numbness and 
tingling with mild distal weakness
Axonal swellings with 
accumulation of 
neurofilaments
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Ethylene oxide
Unknown; may act as 
alkylating agent and 
bind DNA
Length-dependent numbness and 
tingling; may have mild distal weakness
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Organophosphates
Bind and inhibit 
neuropathy target 
esterase
Early features are those of 
neuromuscular blockade with 
generalized weakness; later axonal 
sensorimotor PN ensues
Axonal degeneration along 
with degeneration of gracile 
fasciculus and corticospinal 
tracts
Early: repetitive firing of CMAPs and 
decrement with repetitive nerve 
stimulation; late: axonal sensorimotor 
PN
Hexacarbons
Unknown; may lead 
to covalent cross-
linking between 
neurofilaments
Acute, severe sensorimotor PN that 
may resemble GBS
Axonal degeneration and 
giant axons swollen with 
neurofilaments
Features of a mixed axonal and/or 
demyelinating sensorimotor axonal 
PN—reduced amplitudes, prolonged 
distal latencies, conduction block, and 
slowing of CVs
Lead
Unknown; may 
interfere with 
mitochondria
Encephalopathy; motor neuropathy 
(often resembles radial neuropathy 
with wrist and finger drop); autonomic 
neuropathy; bluish-black discoloration 
of gums
Axonal degeneration of motor 
axons
Reduction of CMAP amplitudes with 
active denervation on EMG
Mercury
Unknown; may 
combine with 
sulfhydryl groups
Abdominal pain and nephrotic 
syndrome; encephalopathy; ataxia; 
paresthesias
Axonal degeneration; 
degeneration of dorsal 
root ganglia, calcarine, and 
cerebellar cortex
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Thallium
Unknown
Encephalopathy; painful sensory 
symptoms; mild loss of vibration; 
distal or generalized weakness may 
also develop; autonomic neuropathy; 
alopecia
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Arsenic
Unknown; may 
combine with 
sulfhydryl groups
Abdominal discomfort, burning 
pain, and paresthesias; generalized 
weakness; autonomic insufficiency; can 
resemble GBS
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes; may have demyelinating 
features: prolonged distal latencies 
and slowing of CVs
Gold
Unknown
Distal paresthesias and reduction of all 
sensory modalities
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtainable SNAPs
Abbreviations: CMAP, compound motor action potential; CVs, conduction velocities; EMG, electromyography; GBS, Guillain-Barré syndrome; MUAP, muscle action potential; 
NCS, nerve conduction studies; PN, polyneuropathy; S-M, sensorimotor; SNAP, sensory nerve action potential.
Source: Modified from AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Table 20-1, pp. 449–451.
side effects of these medications is a predominantly sensory, length- 
dependent, symmetrically painful neuropathy (Pattern 2; Table 438-2). 
Zalcitabine (ddC) is the most extensively studied of the nucleoside ana-
logues, and at doses >0.18 mg/kg per d, it is associated with a subacute 
onset of severe burning and lancinating pains in the feet and hands. 
NCS reveal decreased amplitudes of the SNAPs with normal motor 
studies. The nucleoside analogues inhibit mitochondrial DNA poly-
merase, which is the suspected pathogenic basis for the neuropathy. 
Because of a “coasting effect,” patients can continue to worsen even 
2–3 weeks after stopping the medication. Following dose reduction, 
improvement in the neuropathy is seen in most patients after several 
months (mean time about 10 weeks).
■
■HEXACARBONS (n-HEXANE, METHYL n-BUTYL 
KETONE)/GLUE SNIFFER’S NEUROPATHY
n-Hexane and methyl n-butyl ketone are water-insoluble industrial 
organic solvents that are also present in some glues. Exposure through 
inhalation, accidentally or intentionally (glue sniffing), or through 
skin absorption can lead to a profound subacute sensory and motor 
polyneuropathy (Pattern 2; Table 438-2). NCS demonstrate decreased 
amplitudes of the SNAPs and CMAPs with slightly slow CVs. Nerve 
biopsy reveals a loss of myelinated fibers and giant axons that are filled 
with 10-nm neurofilaments. Hexacarbon exposure leads to covalent 
cross-linking between axonal neurofilaments that result in their aggre-
gation, impaired axonal transport, swelling of the axons, and eventual 
axonal degeneration.
■
■LEAD
Lead neuropathy is uncommon, but it can be seen in children who 
accidentally ingest lead-based paints in older buildings and in indus-
trial workers exposed to lead-containing products. The most common 
presentation of lead poisoning is an encephalopathy; however, symp-
toms and signs of a primarily motor neuropathy can also occur. The 
neuropathy is characterized by an insidious and progressive onset of 
weakness usually beginning in the arms, in particular involving the 
wrist and finger extensors, resembling a radial neuropathy. Sensation 
is generally preserved; however, the autonomic nervous system can be 
affected (Patterns 2, 3, and 10; Table 438-2). Laboratory investigation 
can reveal a microcytic hypochromic anemia with basophilic stippling 
of erythrocytes, an elevated serum lead level, and an elevated serum 
coproporphyrin level. A 24-h urine collection demonstrates elevated 
levels of lead excretion. The NCS may reveal reduced CMAP ampli-
tudes, while the SNAPs are typically normal. The pathogenic basis may 
be related to abnormal porphyrin metabolism. The most important 
(Continued)


--- PDF PAGE 3266 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3220 principle of management is to remove the source of the exposure. 
Chelation therapy with calcium disodium ethylene-diaminetetraacetic 
acid (EDTA), British anti-Lewisite (BAL), and penicillamine also dem-
onstrates variable efficacy.
■
■MERCURY
Mercury toxicity may occur as a result of exposure to either organic 
or inorganic mercurials. Mercury poisoning presents with paresthe-
sias in hands and feet that progress proximally and may involve the 
face and tongue. Motor weakness can also develop. CNS symptoms 
often overshadow the neuropathy. EDx shows features of a primarily 
axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. The primary site of neuromus-
cular pathology appears to be the dorsal root ganglia. The mainstay of 
treatment is removing the source of exposure.
■
■THALLIUM
Thallium can exist in a monovalent or trivalent form and is primarily 
used as a rodenticide. The toxic neuropathy usually manifests as burning 
paresthesias of the feet, abdominal pain, and vomiting. Increased thirst, 
sleep disturbances, and psychotic behavior may be noted. Within the 
first week, patients develop pigmentation of the hair, an acne-like rash 
in the malar area of the face, and hyperreflexia. By the second and 
third weeks, autonomic instability with labile heart rate and blood 
pressure may be seen. Hyporeflexia and alopecia also occur but may 
not be evident until the third or fourth week following exposure. 
With severe intoxication, proximal weakness and involvement of the 
cranial nerves can occur. Some patients require mechanical ventilation 
due to respiratory muscle involvement. The lethal dose of thallium is 
variable, ranging from 8 to 15 mg/kg body weight. Death can result in 
<48 h following a particularly large dose. NCS demonstrate features 
of a primarily axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. With acute intoxi-
cation, potassium ferric ferrocyanide II may be effective in preventing 
absorption of thallium from the gut. However, there may be no benefit 
once thallium has been absorbed. Unfortunately, chelating agents are 
not very efficacious. Adequate diuresis is essential to help eliminate 
thallium from the body without increasing tissue availability from the 
serum.
■
■ARSENIC
Arsenic is another heavy metal that can cause a toxic sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy. The neuropathy manifests 5–10 days after ingestion of 
arsenic and progresses for several weeks, sometimes mimicking GBS. 
The presenting symptoms are typically an abrupt onset of abdominal 
discomfort, nausea, vomiting, pain, and diarrhea followed within sev-
eral days by burning pain in the feet and hands. Examination of the skin 
can be helpful in the diagnosis as the loss of the superficial epidermal 
layer results in patchy regions of increased or decreased pigmentation 
on the skin several weeks after an acute exposure or with chronic low 
levels of ingestion. Mee’s lines, which are transverse lines at the base of 
the fingernails and toenails, do not become evident until 1 or 2 months 
after the exposure. Multiple Mee’s lines may be seen in patients with 
long fingernails who have had chronic exposure to arsenic. Mee’s lines 
are not specific for arsenic toxicity as they can also be seen following 
thallium poisoning. Because arsenic is cleared from blood rapidly, the 
serum concentration of arsenic is not diagnostically helpful. However, 
arsenic levels are increased in the urine, hair, and fingernails of patients 
exposed to arsenic. Anemia with stippling of erythrocytes is common, 
and occasionally pancytopenia and aplastic anemia can develop. 
Increased CSF protein levels without pleocytosis can be seen; this can 
lead to misdiagnosis as GBS. NCS are usually suggestive of an axonal 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy; however, demyelinating features can be 
present. Chelation therapy with BAL has yielded inconsistent results; 
therefore, it is not generally recommended.
NUTRITIONAL NEUROPATHIES
■
■COBALAMIN (VITAMIN B12)
Pernicious anemia is the most common cause of cobalamin defi-
ciency. Other causes include dietary avoidance (vegetarians), gastrec-
tomy, gastric bypass surgery, inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatic 
insufficiency, bacterial overgrowth, and possibly histamine-2 blockers 
and proton pump inhibitors. An underappreciated cause of cobalamin 
deficiency is food-cobalamin malabsorption. This typically occurs in 
older individuals and results from an inability to adequately absorb 
cobalamin in food protein. No apparent cause of deficiency is identified 
in a significant number of patients with cobalamin deficiency. The use 
of nitrous oxide as an anesthetic agent or as a recreational drug can 
produce acute cobalamin deficiency neuropathy and subacute com-
bined degeneration.
Complaints of numb hands typically appear before lower extremity 
paresthesias are noted. A preferential large-fiber sensory loss affecting 
proprioception and vibration with sparing of small-fiber modalities 
is present; an unsteady gait reflects sensory ataxia. These features, 
coupled with diffuse hyperreflexia and absent Achilles reflexes, should 
always focus attention on the possibility of cobalamin deficiency 
(Patterns 2 and 6; Table 438-2). Optic atrophy and, in severe cases, 
behavioral changes ranging from mild irritability and forgetful-
ness to severe dementia and frank psychosis may appear. The full 
clinical picture of subacute combined degeneration is uncommon. 
CNS manifestations, especially pyramidal tract signs, may be missing, 
and in fact some patients may only exhibit symptoms of peripheral 
neuropathy.
EDx shows an axonal sensorimotor neuropathy. CNS involvement 
produces abnormal somatosensory and visual evoked potential laten-
cies. The diagnosis is confirmed by finding reduced serum cobalamin 
levels. In up to 40% of patients, anemia and macrocytosis are lacking. 
Serum methylmalonic acid and homocysteine, the metabolites that 
accumulate when cobalamin-dependent reactions are blocked, are ele-
vated. Antibodies to intrinsic factor are present in ~60%, and antiparie-
tal cell antibodies in about 90%, of individuals with pernicious anemia.
Cobalamin deficiency can be treated with various regimens of 
cobalamin. One typical regimen consists of 1000 μg cyanocobalamin IM 
weekly for 1 month and monthly thereafter. Patients with food cobal-
amin malabsorption can absorb free cobalamin and therefore can be 
treated with oral cobalamin supplementation. An oral cobalamin dose 
of 1000 μg per day should be sufficient. Treatment for cobalamin defi-
ciency usually does not completely reverse the clinical manifestations, 
and at least 50% of patients exhibit some permanent neurologic deficit.
■
■THIAMINE DEFICIENCY
Thiamine (vitamin B1) deficiency is an uncommon cause of peripheral 
neuropathy in developed countries. It is now most often seen as a con-
sequence of chronic alcohol abuse, recurrent vomiting, total parenteral 
nutrition, and bariatric surgery. Thiamine deficiency polyneuropathy 
can occur in normal, healthy young adults who do not abuse alco-
hol but who engage in inappropriately restrictive diets. Thiamine is 
water-soluble. It is present in most animal and plant tissues, but the 
greatest sources are unrefined cereal grains, wheat germ, yeast, soy-
bean flour, and pork. Beriberi means “I can’t, I can’t” in Singhalese, 
the language of natives of what was once part of the Dutch East Indies 
(now Sri Lanka). Dry beriberi refers to neuropathic symptoms. The term 
wet beriberi is used when cardiac manifestations predominate (in refer-
ence to edema). Beriberi was relatively uncommon until the late 1800s 
when it became widespread among people for whom rice was a dietary 
mainstay. This epidemic was due to a new technique of processing rice 
that removed the germ from the rice shaft, rendering the so-called pol-
ished rice deficient in thiamine and other essential nutrients.
Symptoms of neuropathy follow prolonged deficiency. These begin 
with mild sensory loss and/or burning dysesthesias in the toes and 
feet and aching and cramping in the lower legs. Pain may be the pre-
dominant symptom. With progression, patients develop features of a 
nonspecific generalized polyneuropathy, with distal sensory loss in the 
feet and hands.
Blood and urine assays for thiamine are not reliable for diagnosis 
of deficiency. Erythrocyte transketolase activity and the percentage 
increase in activity (in vitro) following the addition of thiamine 
pyrophosphate (TPP) may be more accurate and reliable. EDx shows 
nonspecific findings of an axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. When 
a diagnosis of thiamine deficiency is made or suspected, thiamine 


--- PDF PAGE 3267 ---

CHAPTER 438 Peripheral Neuropathy
3221
replacement should be provided until proper nutrition is restored. 
Thiamine is usually given intravenously or intramuscularly at a dose of 
100 mg/d. Although cardiac manifestations show a striking response 
to thiamine replacement, neurologic improvement is usually more 
variable and less dramatic.
■
■VITAMIN E DEFICIENCY
The term vitamin E is usually used for a-tocopherol, the most active 
of the four main types of vitamin E. Because vitamin E is present in 
animal fat, vegetable oils, and various grains, deficiency is usually due 
to factors other than insufficient intake. Vitamin E deficiency usually 
occurs secondary to lipid malabsorption or in uncommon disorders of 
vitamin E transport. One hereditary disorder is abetalipoproteinemia, 
a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by steatorrhea, pig-
mentary retinopathy, acanthocytosis, and progressive ataxia. Patients 
with cystic fibrosis may also have vitamin E deficiency secondary to 
steatorrhea. There are genetic forms of isolated vitamin E deficiency 
not associated with lipid malabsorption. Vitamin E deficiency may 
also occur as a consequence of various cholestatic and hepatobiliary 
disorders as well as short-bowel syndromes resulting from the surgical 
treatment of intestinal disorders.
Clinical features may not appear until many years after the onset 
of deficiency. The onset of symptoms tends to be insidious, and pro-
gression is slow. The main clinical features are spinocerebellar ataxia 
and polyneuropathy, thus resembling Friedreich’s ataxia or other 
spinocerebellar ataxias. Patients manifest progressive ataxia and signs 
of posterior column dysfunction, such as impaired joint position and 
vibratory sensation. Because of the polyneuropathy, there is hypore-
flexia, but plantar responses may be extensor as a result of the spinal 
cord involvement (Patterns 2 and 6; Table 438-2). Other neurologic 
manifestations may include ophthalmoplegia, pigmented retinopathy, 
night blindness, dysarthria, pseudoathetosis, dystonia, and tremor. 
Vitamin E deficiency may present as an isolated polyneuropathy, 
but this is very rare. The yield of checking serum vitamin E levels in 
patients with isolated polyneuropathy is extremely low, and this test 
should not be part of routine practice.
Diagnosis is made by measuring a-tocopherol levels in the serum. 
EDx shows features of an axonal neuropathy. Treatment is replacement 
with oral vitamin E, but high doses are not needed. For patients with 
isolated vitamin E deficiency, treatment consists of 1500–6000 IU/d in 
divided doses.
■
■VITAMIN B6 DEFICIENCY
Vitamin B6, or pyridoxine, can produce neuropathic manifestations 
from both deficiency and toxicity. Vitamin B6 toxicity was discussed 
above. Vitamin B6 deficiency is most commonly seen in patients treated 
with isoniazid or hydralazine. The polyneuropathy of vitamin B6 is non-
specific, manifesting as a generalized axonal sensorimotor polyneur-
opathy. Vitamin B6 deficiency can be detected by direct assay. Vitamin 
B6 supplementation with 50–100 mg/d is suggested for patients being 
treated with isoniazid or hydralazine. This same dose is appropriate for 
replacement in cases of nutritional deficiency.
■
■PELLAGRA (NIACIN DEFICIENCY)
Pellagra is produced by deficiency of niacin. Although pellagra may be 
seen in alcoholics, this disorder has essentially been eradicated in most 
Western countries by means of enriching bread with niacin. Neverthe-
less, pellagra continues to be a problem in a number of underdeveloped 
regions, particularly in Asia and Africa, where corn is the main source 
of carbohydrate. Neurologic manifestations are variable; abnormalities 
can develop in the brain and spinal cord as well as peripheral nerves. 
When peripheral nerves are involved, the neuropathy is usually mild 
and resembles beriberi. Treatment is with niacin 40–250 mg/d.
■
■COPPER DEFICIENCY
A syndrome that has only recently been described is myeloneuropa-
thy secondary to copper deficiency. Most patients present with lower 
limb paresthesias, weakness, spasticity, and gait difficulties (Pattern 6; 
Table 438-2). Large-fiber sensory function is impaired, reflexes are 
brisk, and plantar responses are extensor. In some cases, light touch 
and pinprick sensation are affected, and NCS indicate sensorimotor 
axonal polyneuropathy in addition to myelopathy.
Hematologic abnormalities are a known complication of copper 
deficiency; these can include microcytic anemia, neutropenia, and occa-
sionally pancytopenia. Because copper is absorbed in the stomach and 
proximal jejunum, many cases of copper deficiency occur in the setting 
of prior gastric surgery. Excess zinc is an established cause of copper 
deficiency. Zinc upregulates enterocyte production of metallothionine, 
which results in decreased absorption of copper. Excessive dietary 
zinc supplements or denture cream containing zinc can produce this 
clinical picture. Other potential causes of copper deficiency include 
malnutrition, prematurity, total parenteral nutrition, and ingestion of 
copper-chelating agents.
Following oral or IV copper replacement, some patients show neuro-
logic improvement, but this may take many months or not occur at all. 
Replacement consists of oral copper sulfate or gluconate 2 mg one to 
three times a day. If oral copper replacement is not effective, elemental 
copper in the copper sulfate or copper chloride forms can be given as 
2 mg IV daily for 3–5 days, then weekly for 1–2 months until copper 
levels normalize. Thereafter, oral daily copper therapy can be resumed. 
In contrast to the neurologic manifestations, most of the hematologic 
indices normalize in response to copper replacement therapy.
■
■NEUROPATHY ASSOCIATED WITH GASTRIC SURGERY
Polyneuropathy may occur following gastric surgery for ulcer, cancer, 
or weight reduction. This usually occurs in the context of rapid, sig-
nificant weight loss and recurrent, protracted vomiting. The clinical 
picture is one of acute or subacute sensory loss and weakness. Neur-
opathy following weight loss surgery usually occurs in the first several 
months after surgery. Weight reduction surgical procedures include 
gastrojejunostomy, gastric stapling, vertical banded gastroplasty, and 
gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y anastomosis. The initial manifestations are 
usually numbness and paresthesias in the feet (Pattern 2; Table 438-2). 
In many cases, no specific nutritional deficiency factor is identified.
Management consists of parenteral vitamin supplementation, espe-
cially including thiamine. Improvement has been observed following 
supplementation, parenteral nutritional support, and reversal of the 
surgical bypass. The duration and severity of deficits before identifi-
cation and treatment of neuropathy are important predictors of final 
outcome.
CRYPTOGENIC (IDIOPATHIC) SENSORY AND 
SENSORIMOTOR POLYNEUROPATHY
Cryptogenic (idiopathic) sensory and sensorimotor polyneuropathy 
(CSPN) is a diagnosis of exclusion, established after a careful medical, 
family, and social history; neurologic examination; and directed labora-
tory testing. Despite extensive evaluation, the cause of polyneuropathy 
in as many as 50% of all patients is idiopathic. CSPN should be consid-
ered a distinct diagnostic subset of peripheral neuropathy. The onset 
of CSPN is predominantly in the sixth and seventh decades. Patients 
complain of distal numbness, tingling, and often burning pain that 
invariably begins in the feet and may eventually involve the fingers 
and hands. Patients exhibit a distal sensory loss to pinprick, touch, and 
vibration in the toes and feet, and occasionally in the fingers (Pattern 2; 
Table 438-2). It is uncommon to see significant proprioception deficits, 
even though patients may complain of gait unsteadiness. However, 
tandem gait may be abnormal in a minority of cases. Neither subjec-
tive nor objective evidence of weakness is a prominent feature. Most 
patients have evidence of both large- and small-fiber loss on neuro-
logic examination and EDx. Approximately 10% of patients have only 
evidence of small-fiber involvement. The ankle muscle stretch reflex is 
frequently absent, but in cases with predominantly small-fiber loss, this 
may be preserved. The EDx findings range from isolated SNAP abnor-
malities (usually with loss of amplitude), to evidence for an axonal 
sensorimotor neuropathy, to a completely normal study (if primarily 
small fibers are involved). Therapy primarily involves the control of 
neuropathic pain (Table 438-6) if present. These drugs should not be 
used if the patient has only numbness and tingling but no pain.


--- PDF PAGE 3268 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3222
Although no treatment is available that can reverse an idiopathic 
distal peripheral neuropathy, the prognosis is good. Progression often 
does not occur or is minimal, with sensory symptoms and signs pro-
gressing proximally up to the knees and elbows. The disorder does not 
lead to significant motor disability over time. The relatively benign 
course of this disorder should be explained to patients.
MONONEUROPATHIES/PLEXOPATHIES/
RADICULOPATHIES (PATTERN 3; TABLE 438-2)
■
■MEDIAN NEUROPATHY
CTS is a compression of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel at the 
wrist. The median nerve enters the hand through the carpal tunnel 
by coursing under the transverse carpal ligament. The symptoms 
of CTS consist of numbness and paresthesias variably in the thumb, 
index, middle, and half of the ring finger. At times, the paresthesias 
can include the entire hand and extend into the forearm or upper 
arm or can be isolated to one or two fingers. Pain is another common 
symptom and can be located in the hand and forearm and, at times, 
in the proximal arm. CTS is common and often misdiagnosed as tho-
racic outlet syndrome. The signs of CTS are decreased sensation in the 
median nerve distribution; reproduction of the sensation of tingling 
when a percussion hammer is tapped over the wrist (Tinel’s sign) or 
the wrist is flexed for 30–60 s (Phalen’s sign); and weakness of thumb 
opposition and abduction. EDx is extremely sensitive and shows slow-
ing of sensory and, to a lesser extent, motor median potentials across 
the wrist. Ultrasound can show focal swelling of the median nerve at 
the wrist. Treatment options consist of avoidance of precipitating activ-
ities; control of underlying systemic-associated conditions if present; 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications; neutral (volar) position 
wrist splints, especially for night use; glucocorticoid/anesthetic injec-
tion into the carpal tunnel; and surgical decompression by dividing the 
transverse carpal ligament. The surgical option should be considered 
if there is a poor response to nonsurgical treatments; if there is thenar 
muscle atrophy and/or weakness; and if there are significant denerva-
tion potentials on EMG.
Other proximal median neuropathies are very uncommon and 
include the pronator teres syndrome and anterior interosseous neurop-
athy. These often occur as a partial form of brachial plexitis.
■
■ULNAR NEUROPATHY AT THE ELBOW—“CUBITAL 
TUNNEL SYNDROME”
The ulnar nerve passes through the condylar groove between the 
medial epicondyle and the olecranon. Symptoms consist of paresthe-
sias, tingling, and numbness in the medial hand and half of the fourth 
and the entire fifth fingers, pain at the elbow or forearm, and weakness. 
Signs consist of decreased sensation in an ulnar distribution, Tinel’s 
sign at the elbow, and weakness and atrophy of ulnar-innervated 
hand muscles. The Froment sign indicates thumb adductor weakness 
and consists of flexion of the thumb at the interphalangeal joint when 
attempting to oppose the thumb against the lateral border of the 
second digit. EDx may show slowing of ulnar motor NCV across the 
elbow with prolonged ulnar sensory latencies. Ultrasound can show 
swelling of the ulnar nerve around the elbow as well. Treatment con-
sists of avoiding aggravating factors, using elbow pads, and surgery 
to decompress the nerve in the cubital tunnel. Ulnar neuropathies can 
also rarely occur at the wrist in the ulnar (Guyon) canal or in the hand, 
usually after trauma.
■
■RADIAL NEUROPATHY
The radial nerve winds around the proximal humerus in the spiral 
groove and proceeds down the lateral arm and enters the forearm, 
dividing into the posterior interosseous nerve and superficial nerve. 
The symptoms and signs consist of wrist drop; finger extension 
weakness; thumb abduction weakness; and sensory loss in the dorsal 
web between the thumb and index finger. Triceps and brachioradialis 
strength is often normal, and triceps reflex is often intact. Most cases 
of radial neuropathy are transient compressive (neuropraxic) injuries 
that recover spontaneously in 6–8 weeks. If there has been prolonged 
compression and severe axonal damage, it may take several months 
to recover. Treatment consists of cock-up wrist and finger splints, 
avoiding further compression, and physical therapy to avoid flexion 
contracture. If there is no improvement in 2–3 weeks, an EDx study 
is recommended to confirm the clinical diagnosis and determine the 
degree of severity.
■
■LATERAL FEMORAL CUTANEOUS NEUROPATHY 
(MERALGIA PARESTHETICA)
The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve arises from the upper lumbar 
plexus (spinal levels L2/3), crosses through the inguinal ligament near 
its attachment to the iliac bone, and supplies sensation to the anterior 
lateral thigh. The neuropathy affecting this nerve is also known as 
meralgia paresthetica. Symptoms and signs consist of paresthesias, 
numbness, and occasionally pain in the lateral thigh. Symptoms are 
increased by standing or walking and are relieved by sitting. There is 
normal strength, and knee reflexes are intact. The diagnosis is clinical, 
and further tests usually are not performed. EDx is only needed to rule 
out lumbar plexopathy, radiculopathy, or femoral neuropathy. If the 
symptoms and signs are classic, EMG is not necessary. Symptoms often 
resolve spontaneously over weeks or months, but the patient may be 
left with permanent numbness. Treatment consists of weight loss and 
avoiding tight belts. Analgesics in the form of a lidocaine patch, nonste-
roidal agents, and occasionally medications for neuropathic pain can be 
used (Table 438-6). Rarely, locally injecting the nerve with an anesthetic 
can be tried. There is no role for surgery.
■
■FEMORAL NEUROPATHY
Femoral neuropathies can arise as complications of retroperitoneal 
hematoma, lithotomy positioning, hip arthroplasty or dislocation, iliac 
artery occlusion, femoral arterial procedures, infiltration by hematoge-
nous malignancy, penetrating groin trauma, pelvic surgery including 
hysterectomy and renal transplantation, and diabetes (a partial form of 
lumbosacral diabetic plexopathy); some cases are idiopathic. Patients 
with femoral neuropathy have difficulty extending their knee and 
flexing the hip. Sensory symptoms occurring either on the anterior 
thigh and/or medial leg occur in only half of reported cases. A prom-
inent painful component is the exception rather than the rule, may be 
delayed, and is often self-limited in nature. The quadriceps (patellar) 
reflex is diminished.
■
■SCIATIC NEUROPATHY
Sciatic neuropathies commonly complicate hip arthroplasty, pelvic pro-
cedures in which patients are placed in a prolonged lithotomy position, 
trauma, hematomas, tumor infiltration, and vasculitis. In addition, 
many sciatic neuropathies are idiopathic. Weakness may involve all 
motions of the ankles and toes as well as flexion of the leg at the knee; 
abduction and extension of the thigh at the hip are spared. Sensory 
loss occurs in the entire foot and the distal lateral leg. The ankle jerk 
and on occasion the internal hamstring reflex are diminished or more 
typically absent on the affected side. The peroneal subdivision of the 
sciatic nerve is typically involved disproportionately to the tibial coun-
terpart. Thus, patients may have only ankle dorsiflexion and eversion 
weakness with sparing of knee flexion, ankle inversion, and plantar 
flexion; these features can lead to misdiagnosis of a common peroneal 
neuropathy.
PERONEAL NEUROPATHY
The sciatic nerve divides at the distal femur into the tibial and pero-
neal nerve. The common peroneal nerve passes posterior and laterally 
around the fibular head, under the fibular tunnel. It then divides into 
the superficial peroneal nerve, which supplies the ankle evertor mus-
cles and sensation over the anterolateral distal leg and dorsum of the 
foot, and the deep peroneal nerve, which supplies ankle dorsiflexors 
and toe extensor muscles and a small area of sensation dorsally in the 
area of the first and second toes.
Symptoms and signs consist of foot drop (ankle dorsiflexion, toe 
extension, and ankle eversion weakness) and variable sensory loss, 
which may involve the superficial and deep peroneal pattern. There is 
usually no pain. Onset may be on awakening in the morning. Peroneal 
neuropathy needs to be distinguished from L5 radiculopathy. In L5 


--- PDF PAGE 3269 ---

CHAPTER 438 Peripheral Neuropathy
3223
TABLE 438-9  Causes of Radiculopathy
•  Herniated nucleus pulposus
•  Degenerative joint disease
•  Rheumatoid arthritis
•  Trauma
•  Vertebral body compression fracture
•  Pott’s disease
•  Compression by extradural mass (e.g., meningioma, metastatic tumor, 
hematoma, abscess)
•  Primary nerve tumor (e.g., neurofibroma, schwannoma, neurinoma)
•  Carcinomatous meningitis
•  Perineurial spread of tumor (e.g., prostate cancer)
•  Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy
•  Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy
•  Sarcoidosis
•  Amyloidoma
•  Diabetic radiculopathy
•  Infection (Lyme disease, herpes zoster, HIV, cytomegalovirus, syphilis, 
schistosomiasis, strongyloides)
•  Arachnoiditis (e.g., postsurgical)
•  Radiation
radiculopathy, ankle invertors and evertors are weak and needle EMG 
reveals denervation. EDx can help localize the lesion. Peroneal motor 
conduction velocity shows slowing and amplitude drop across the 
fibular head. Management consists of rapid weight loss and avoiding 
leg crossing. Footdrop is treated with an ankle brace. A knee pad can 
be worn over the lateral knee to avoid further compression. Most cases 
spontaneously resolve over weeks or months.
RADICULOPATHIES
Radiculopathies are most often due to compression from degenerative 
joint disease and herniated disks, but there are a number of unusual 
etiologies (Table 438-9). Degenerative spine disease affects a number of 
different structures, which narrow the diameter of the neural foramen 
or canal of the spinal column and compromise nerve root integrity; 
these are discussed in detail in Chap. 14.
PLEXOPATHIES (PATTERN 4; TABLE 438-2)
■
■BRACHIAL PLEXUS
The brachial plexus is composed of three trunks (upper, middle, 
and 
lower), 
with 
two 
divisions 
(anterior and posterior) per trunk 
(Fig. 438-2). Subsequently, the trunks 
divide into three cords (medial, lateral, 
and posterior), and from these arise the 
multiple terminal nerves innervating 
the arm. The anterior primary rami 
of C5 and C6 fuse to form the upper 
trunk; the anterior primary ramus of 
C7 continues as the middle trunk, while 
the anterior rami of C8 and T1 join to 
form the lower trunk. There are several 
disorders commonly associated with 
brachial plexopathy.
Immune-Mediated 
Brachial 
Plexus 
Neuropathy 
Immune-
mediated brachial plexus neuropathy 
(IBPN) goes by various terms, includ-
ing acute brachial plexitis, neuralgic amy-
otrophy, and Parsonage-Turner syndrome. 
IBPN usually presents with an acute 
onset of severe pain in the shoulder 
region. The intense pain usually lasts 
several days to a few weeks, but a dull ache can persist. Individuals 
who are affected may not appreciate weakness of the arm early in the 
course because the pain limits movement. However, as the pain dis-
sipates, weakness and often sensory loss are appreciated. Attacks can 
occasionally recur.
Clinical findings are dependent on the distribution of involvement 
(e.g., specific trunk, divisions, cords, or terminal nerves). The most 
common pattern of IBPN involves the upper trunk or a single or 
multiple mononeuropathies primarily involving the suprascapular, 
long thoracic, or axillary nerves. Additionally, the phrenic and ante-
rior interosseous nerves may be concomitantly affected. Any of these 
nerves may also be affected in isolation. EDx is useful to confirm and 
localize the site(s) of involvement. Empirical treatment of severe pain 
with glucocorticoids is often used in the acute period.
Brachial Plexopathies Associated with Neoplasms  
Neoplasms involving the brachial plexus may be primary nerve tumors, 
local cancers expanding into the plexus (e.g., Pancoast lung tumor or 
lymphoma), and metastatic tumors. Primary brachial plexus tumors 
are less common than the secondary tumors and include schwanno-
mas, neurinomas, and neurofibromas. Secondary tumors affecting the 
brachial plexus are more common and are always malignant. These 
may arise from local tumors, expanding into the plexus. For example, a 
Pancoast tumor of the upper lobe of the lung may invade or compress 
the lower trunk, whereas a primary lymphoma arising from the cer-
vical or axillary lymph nodes may also infiltrate the plexus. Pancoast 
tumors typically present as an insidious onset of pain in the upper arm, 
sensory disturbance in the medial aspect of the forearm and hand, and 
weakness and atrophy of the intrinsic hand muscles along with an ipsi-
lateral Horner’s syndrome. Chest computed tomography (CT) scans or 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can demonstrate extension of the 
tumor into the plexus. Metastatic involvement of the brachial plexus 
may occur with spread of breast cancer into the axillary lymph nodes 
and local spread into the nearby nerves.
Perioperative Plexopathies (Median Sternotomy) 
The 
most common surgical procedures associated with brachial plexopathy 
as a complication are those that involve median sternotomies (e.g., 
open-heart surgeries and thoracotomies). Brachial plexopathies occur 
in as many as 5% of patients following a median sternotomy and typ-
ically affect the lower trunk. Thus, individuals manifest with sensory 
disturbance affecting the medial aspect of forearm and hand along 
with weakness of the intrinsic hand muscles. The mechanism is related 
to the stretch of the lower trunk, so most individuals who are affected 
recover within a few months.
Dorsal scapular
Long thoracic
Medial
anterior
thoracic
Anterior
Posterior
CORDS
PERIPHERAL NERVES
DIVISIONS
TRUNKS
ROOTS
Upper
subscapular
Axillary
Musculocutaneous
Radial
Median
Ulnar
Medial
antibrachial
cutaneous
Medial
brachial
cutaneous
M
P
L
Lateral
anterior
thoracic
Thoracodorsal
Lower
subscapular
Suprascapular
Subclavius
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
FIGURE 438-2  Brachial plexus anatomy. L, lateral; M, medial; P, posterior. (From J Goodgold: Anatomical Correlates 
of Clinical Electromyography. Baltimore, Williams and Wilkins, 1974, p. 56, with permission.)


--- PDF PAGE 3270 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3224
Genitofemoral nerve
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
IIiohypogastric nerve
IIioinguinal nerve
Lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh
To lliacus and psoas muscles
Obturator nerve
Femoral nerve
Lumbo-sacral trunk
Gluteal nerves
Pudendal nerve
Sciatic nerve
Post. cutaneous nerve of thigh
FIGURE 438-3  Lumbosacral plexus. (From AA Amato, JA Russell (eds): 
Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Education, 2016, Table 24-3, p. 541, 
with permission.)
TERMINAL AND
COLLATERAL BRANCHES
BRANCHES FROM 
POSTERIOR DIVISIONS
(From anterior
primary divisions)
(Posterior [black]
and anterior)
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
(To pudendal plexus)
Sciatic
nerve
Common peroneal
nerve
(To hamstring muscles)
Tibial nerve
Inferior medial clunial nerve (S2, 3)
BRANCHES FROM ANTERIOR DIVISIONS
L5, S1, 2
To obturator internus and
gemellus superior muscles
Posterior femoral
cutaneous nerve
(S1, 2, 3)
(To lumbar plexus)
(Lumbosacral
trunk)
BRANCH FROM BOTH
ANTERIOR AND
POSTERIOR DIVISIONS
Inferior gluteal
nerve (L5, S1, 2)
Nerves to piriformis (S1, 2)
Superior gluteal nerve (L4, 5, S1)
To quadratus femons and
gemellus inferior muscles
L4, 5, S1
DIVISIONS
PLEXUS ROOTS
FIGURE 438-4  Lumbosacral trunk sacral plexus, and sciatic nerve. (From AA 
Amato, JA Russell (eds): Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Education, 
2016, Table 24-4, p. 542, with permission.)
Lumbosacral Plexus  The lumbar plexus arises from the ventral 
primary rami of the first to the fourth lumbar spinal nerves (Fig. 438-3). 
These nerves pass downward and laterally from the vertebral column 
within the psoas major muscle. The femoral nerve derives from the 
dorsal branches of the second to the fourth lumbar ventral rami. The 
obturator nerve arises from the ventral branches of the same lumbar 
rami. The lumbar plexus communicates with the sacral plexus by the 
lumbosacral trunk, which contains some fibers from the fourth and all 
of the fibers from the fifth lumbar ventral rami (Fig. 438-4).
The sacral plexus is the part of the lumbosacral plexus that is formed 
by the union of the lumbosacral trunk with the ventral rami of the first 
to fourth sacral nerves. The plexus lies on the posterior and postero-
lateral wall of the pelvis with its components converging toward the 
sciatic notch. The lateral trunk of the sciatic nerve (which forms the 
common peroneal nerve) arises from the union of the dorsal branches 
of the lumbosacral trunk (L4, L5) and the dorsal branches of the S1 
and S2 spinal nerve ventral rami. The medial trunk of the sciatic nerve 
(which forms the tibial nerve) derives from the ventral branches of the 
same ventral rami (L4-S2).
■
■LUMBOSACRAL PLEXOPATHIES
Plexopathies are typically recognized when motor, sensory, and if 
applicable, reflex deficits occur in multiple nerve and segmental distri-
butions confined to one extremity. If localization within the lumbosa-
cral plexus can be accomplished, designation as a lumbar plexopathy, 
a sacral plexopathy, a lumbosacral trunk lesion, or a pan-plexopathy is 
the best localization that can be expected. Although lumbar plexopa-
thies may be bilateral, usually occurring in a stepwise and chronologi-
cally dissociated manner, sacral plexopathies are more likely to behave 
in this manner due to their closer anatomic proximity. The differential 
diagnosis of plexopathy includes disorders of the conus medullaris and 
cauda equina (polyradiculopathy). If there is a paucity of pain and sen-
sory involvement, motor neuron disease should be considered as well.
The causes of lumbosacral plexopathies are listed in Table 438-10. 
Diabetic radiculopathy (discussed above) is a fairly common cause of 
painful leg weakness. Lumbosacral plexopathies are a well-recognized 
complication of retroperitoneal hemorrhage. Various primary and met-
astatic malignancies can affect the lumbosacral plexus as well; these 
TABLE 438-10  Lumbosacral Plexopathies: Etiologies
•  Retroperitoneal hematoma
•  Psoas abscess
•  Malignant neoplasm
•  Benign neoplasm
•  Radiation
•  Amyloid
•  Diabetic radiculoplexus neuropathy
•  Idiopathic radiculoplexus neuropathy
•  Sarcoidosis
•  Aortic occlusion/surgery
•  Lithotomy positioning
•  Hip arthroplasty
•  Pelvic fracture
•  Obstetric injury
include carcinoma of the cervix, endometrium, and ovary; osteosar-
coma; testicular cancer; MM; lymphoma; acute myelogenous leukemia; 
colon cancer; squamous cell carcinoma of the rectum; adenocarcinoma 
of unknown origin; and intraneural spread of prostate cancer.
■
■RECURRENT NEOPLASTIC DISEASE OR  
RADIATION-INDUCED PLEXOPATHY
The treatment for various malignancies is often radiation therapy, the 
field of which may include parts of the brachial plexus. It can be dif-
ficult in such situations to determine if a new brachial or lumbosacral 
plexopathy is related to tumor within the plexus or from radiation- 
induced nerve damage. Radiation can be associated with microvascular 
abnormalities and fibrosis of surrounding tissues, which can damage 


================================================================================
Ch439 Guillain-Barre Syndrome and Immune-Mediated Neuropathies
Pages 3271-3277
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3271 ---

CHAPTER 439 Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Other Immune-Mediated Neuropathies
3225
the axons and the Schwann cells. Radiation-induced plexopathy can 
develop months or years following therapy and is dose dependent.
Tumor invasion is usually painful and more commonly affects the 
lower trunk, whereas radiation injury is often painless and affects the 
upper trunk. Imaging studies such as MRI and CT scans are useful but 
can be misleading, especially when there is small microscopic inva-
sion of the plexus. EMG can be informative if myokymic discharges 
are appreciated, as this finding strongly suggests radiation-induced 
damage.
■
■EVALUATION AND TREATMENT OF PLEXOPATHIES
Most patients with plexopathies will undergo both imaging with MRI 
and EDx evaluations. Severe pain from acute idiopathic lumbosacral 
plexopathy may respond to a short course of glucocorticoids.
■
■FURTHER READING
Amato AA, Russell J: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, 
McGraw-Hill, 2016.
Arnold WD, Elsheikh B: Entrapment neuropathies. Neurol Clin 
31:405, 2013.
Barohn RJ, Amato AA. Pattern-recognition approach to neuropathy 
and neuronopathy. Neurol Clin 31:343, 2013.
England JD et al: Evaluation of distal symmetric polyneuropathy: 
The role of autonomic testing, nerve biopsy, and skin biopsy (an evi-
dence-based review). Muscle Nerve 39:106, 2009.
England JD et al: Evaluation of distal symmetric polyneuropathy: The 
role of laboratory and genetic testing (an evidence-based review). 
Muscle Nerve 39:116, 2009.
Klein CJ et al: Inherited neuropathies: Clinical overview and update. 
Muscle Nerve 48:604, 2013.
Pasnoor M et al: Diabetic neuropathy part 1: Overview and symmetric 
phenotypes. Neurol Clin 31:425, 2013.
Pasnoor M et al: Diabetic neuropathy part 2: Proximal and asymmetric 
phenotypes. Neurol Clin 31:447, 2013.
Saporta AS et al: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease subtypes and genetic 
testing strategies. Ann Neurol 69:22, 2011.
Waldfogel JM et al: Pharmacotherapy for diabetic peripheral neurop-
athy pain and quality of life: A systematic review. Neurology 87:978, 
2016.
GUILLAIN-BARRÉ SYNDROME
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute, frequently severe, and 
fulminant polyradiculoneuropathy that is autoimmune in nature. It 
occurs year-round at a rate of between 1 and 4 cases per 100,000 annu-
ally; in the United States, ~5000–6000 cases occur per year. Males are 
at slightly higher risk for GBS than females, and in Western countries, 
adults are more frequently affected than children.
Clinical Manifestations  GBS manifests as a rapidly evolving 
areflexic motor paralysis with or without sensory disturbance. The 
usual pattern is an ascending paralysis that may be first noticed as 
rubbery legs. Weakness typically evolves over hours to a few days and 
is frequently accompanied by tingling dysesthesias in the extremities. 
The legs are usually more affected than the arms, and facial diparesis is 
present in 50% of affected individuals. The lower cranial nerves are also 
frequently involved, causing bulbar weakness with difficulty handling 
secretions and maintaining an airway; the diagnosis in these patients 
may initially be mistaken for brainstem ischemia. Pain in the neck, 
Guillain-Barré Syndrome and 
Other Immune-Mediated 
Neuropathies
Stephen L. Hauser, Anthony A. Amato 
439
shoulder, back, or diffusely over the spine is also common in the early 
stages of GBS, occurring in ~50% of patients. Most patients require 
hospitalization, and in different series, up to 30% require ventilatory 
assistance at some time during the illness. The need for mechanical 
ventilation is associated with more severe weakness on admission, a 
rapid tempo of progression, and the presence of facial and/or bulbar 
weakness during the first week of symptoms. Fever and constitutional 
symptoms are absent at the onset and, if present, cast doubt on the 
diagnosis. Deep tendon reflexes attenuate or disappear within the 
first few days of onset. Cutaneous sensory deficits (e.g., loss of pain 
and temperature sensation) are usually relatively mild, but functions 
subserved by large sensory fibers, such as deep tendon reflexes and 
proprioception, are more severely affected. Bladder dysfunction may 
occur in severe cases but is usually transient. If bladder dysfunction is 
a prominent feature and comes early in the course or there is a sensory 
level on examination, diagnostic possibilities other than GBS should be 
considered, particularly spinal cord disease (Chap. 434). Once clinical 
worsening stops and the patient reaches a plateau (almost always 
within 4 weeks of onset), further progression is unlikely.
Autonomic involvement is common and may occur even in patients 
whose GBS is otherwise mild. The usual manifestations are loss of 
vasomotor control with wide fluctuations in blood pressure, postural 
hypotension, and cardiac dysrhythmias. These features require close 
monitoring, and management and can be fatal. Pain is another common 
feature of GBS; in addition to the acute pain described above, a deep 
aching pain may be present in weakened muscles that patients liken 
to having overexercised the previous day. Other pains in GBS include 
dysesthetic pain in the extremities as a manifestation of sensory nerve 
fiber involvement. These pains are self-limited and often respond to 
standard analgesics (Chap. 10).
Several subtypes of GBS are recognized, as determined primarily 
by electrodiagnostic (Edx) and pathologic distinctions (Table 439-1). 
The most common variant is acute inflammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (AIDP). Additionally, there are two axonal variants, 
which are often clinically severe—the acute motor axonal neuropathy 
(AMAN) and acute motor sensory axonal neuropathy (AMSAN) sub-
types. In addition, a range of limited or regional GBS syndromes are 
also encountered. Notable among these is the Miller Fisher syndrome 
(MFS), which presents as rapidly evolving ataxia and areflexia of limbs 
without weakness, and ophthalmoplegia, often with pupillary paral-
ysis. The MFS variant accounts for ~5% of all cases and is strongly 
associated with antibodies to the ganglioside GQ1b (see “Immunop-
athogenesis,” below). Other regional variants of GBS include (1) pure 
sensory forms; (2) ophthalmoplegia with anti-GQ1b antibodies as part 
of severe motor-sensory GBS; (3) GBS with severe bulbar and facial 
paralysis, sometimes associated with antecedent cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) infection and anti-GM2 antibodies; and (4) acute pandysauto-
nomia (Chap. 432).
Antecedent Events  Approximately 70% of cases of GBS occur 
1–3 weeks after an acute infectious process, usually respiratory or 
gastrointestinal. Culture and seroepidemiologic techniques show that 
20–30% of all cases occurring in North America, Europe, and Australia 
are preceded by infection or reinfection with Campylobacter jejuni. A 
similar proportion is preceded by a human herpes virus infection, 
often CMV or Epstein-Barr virus. Other viruses (e.g., HIV, hepatitis E, 
Zika) and also Mycoplasma pneumoniae have been identified as agents 
involved in antecedent infections, as have recent immunizations. The 
swine influenza vaccine, administered widely in the United States 
in 1976, is the most notable example. Influenza vaccines in use from 
1992 to 1994, however, resulted in only one additional case of GBS per 
million persons vaccinated, and the more recent seasonal influenza 
vaccines appear to confer a GBS risk of <1 per million. Epidemiologic 
studies looking at H1N1 vaccination demonstrated at most only a 
slight increased risk of GBS. Meningococcal vaccinations (Menactra) 
does not appear to carry an increased risk. Older-type rabies vaccine, 
prepared in nervous system tissue, is implicated as a trigger of GBS 
in developing countries where it is still used; the mechanism is pre-
sumably immunization against neural antigens. GBS also occurs more 


--- PDF PAGE 3272 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3226
frequently than can be attributed to chance alone in patients with lym-
phoma (including Hodgkin’s disease), in HIV-seropositive individuals, 
and in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
C. jejuni has also been implicated in summer outbreaks of 
AMAN among children and young adults exposed to chickens 
in rural China. Infection by Zika virus recently has been impli-
cated in the increased incidence of GBS in Brazil and other endemic 
regions.
Immunopathogenesis  Several lines of evidence support an 
autoimmune basis for acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneur-
opathy (AIDP), the most common and best-studied type of GBS; the 
concept extends to all of the subtypes of GBS (Table 439-1).
It is likely that both cellular and humoral immune mechanisms 
contribute to tissue damage in AIDP. T cell activation is suggested by 
the finding that elevated levels of cytokines and cytokine receptors are 
present in serum (interleukin [IL] 2, soluble IL-2 receptor) and in cere-
brospinal fluid (CSF) (IL-6, tumor necrosis factor α, interferon γ). AIDP 
is also closely analogous to an experimental T cell–mediated immunop-
athy designated experimental allergic neuritis (EAN). EAN is induced in 
laboratory animals by immune sensitization against protein fragments 
derived from peripheral nerve proteins, and in particular against the 
P2 protein. Based on analogy to EAN, it was initially thought that 
AIDP was likely to be primarily a T cell–mediated disorder; however, 
abundant data now suggest that autoantibodies directed against T-cell 
independent nonprotein determinants may be central to many cases.
Circumstantial evidence suggests that all GBS results from immune 
responses to nonself antigens (infectious agents, vaccines) that misdi-
rect to host nerve tissue through a resemblance-of-epitope (molecular 
mimicry) mechanism (Fig. 439-1). The neural targets are likely to be 
o
t
s
e
i
d
o
b
it
n
a
o
t
u
a
G
g
I
s
t
n
a
ir
a
v
d
n
a
s
e
p
y
t
b
u
S
Guillain-Barré syndrome
     Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy
          Facial variant: Facial diplegia and paresthesia
     Acute motor axonal neuropathy
          More and less extensive forms
               Acute motor-sensory axonal neuropathy
               Acute motor-conduction-block neuropathy
          Pharyngeal-cervical-brachial weakness
None
None
GM1, GD1a
GM1, GD1a
GM1, GD1a
GT1a>GQ1b>>GD1a
GQ1b, GT1a
GQ1b, GT1a
GQ1b, GT1a
GQ1b, GT1a
Miller Fisher syndrome
     Incomplete forms
          Acute ophthalmoparesis (without ataxia)
          Acute ataxic neyropathy (without ophthalmoplegia)
     CNS variant: Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis
Galactose
KEY
Glucose
N-Acetylgalactosamine
N-Acetylneuraminic acid
Ceramide
Cer
Cer
GM1
Cer
GD1a
Cer
Cer
GT1a
GQ1b
FIGURE 439-1  Spectrum of disorders in Guillain–Barré Syndrome and associated antiganglioside antibodies. IgG autoantibodies against GM1 or GD1a are strongly 
associated with AMAN, as well as the more extensive AMSAN, and the less extensive acute motor-conduction-block neuropathy. IgG anti-GQ1b antibodies, which 
cross-react with GT1a, are strongly associated with Miller Fisher syndrome, its incomplete forms (acute ophthalmoparesis [without ataxia] and acute ataxic neuropathy 
[without ophthalmoplegia]), and its more extensive form, Bickerstaff’s brain-stem encephalitis. Pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness is categorized as a localized 
form of acute motor axonal neuropathy or an extensive form of Miller Fisher syndrome. Half of patients with pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness have IgG anti-GT1a 
antibodies, which often cross-react with GQ1b. IgG anti-GD1a antibodies have also been detected in a small percentage of patients. The anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome 
includes Miller Fisher syndrome, acute ophthalmoparesis, acute ataxic neuropathy, Bickerstaff’s brain-stem encephalitis, and pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness. 
The presence of clinical overlap also indicates that Miller Fisher syndrome is part of a continuous spectrum with these conditions. Patients who have had Guillain–Barré 
syndrome overlapped with Miller Fisher syndrome or with its related conditions have IgG antibodies against GM1 or GD1a as well as against GQ1b or GT1a, supporting 
a link between AMAN and anti-GQ1b syndrome. AMAN, acute motor axonal neuropathy; AMSAN, acute motor–sensory axonal neuropathy. (Adapted from N Yuki, H-P 
Hartung: Guillain-Barré syndrome. N Engl J Med 366:2294, 2012, Figure 1.)
TABLE 439-1  Subtypes of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)
SUBTYPE
FEATURES
ELECTRODIAGNOSIS
PATHOLOGY
Acute inflammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (AIDP)
Adults affected more than children; 
90% of cases in Western world; 
recovery rapid; anti-GM1 antibodies 
(<50%)
Demyelinating
First attack on Schwann cell surface; widespread 
myelin damage, macrophage activation, and 
lymphocytic infiltration; variable secondary axonal 
damage
Acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN)
Children and young adults; prevalent in 
China and Mexico; may be seasonal; 
recovery rapid; anti-GD1a antibodies
Axonal
First attack at motor nodes of Ranvier; macrophage 
activation, few lymphocytes, frequent periaxonal 
macrophages; extent of axonal damage highly variable
Acute motor sensory axonal 
neuropathy (AMSAN)
Mostly adults; uncommon; recovery 
slow, often incomplete; closely related 
to AMAN
Axonal
Same as AMAN, but also affects sensory nerves and 
roots; axonal damage usually severe
Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS)
Adults and children; ophthalmoplegia, 
ataxia, and areflexia; anti-GQ1b 
antibodies (90%)
Axonal or 
demyelinating
Few cases examined; resembles AIDP


--- PDF PAGE 3273 ---

CHAPTER 439 Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Other Immune-Mediated Neuropathies
3227
TABLE 439-2  Principal Antiglycolipid Antibodies Implicated in 
Immune Neuropathies
CLINICAL 
PRESENTATION
ANTIBODY TARGET
USUAL ISOTYPE
Acute Immune Neuropathies (Guillain-Barré Syndrome)
Acute inflammatory 
demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (AIDP)
No clear patterns
IgG (polyclonal)
GM1 most common
Acute motor axonal 
neuropathy (AMAN)
GD1a, GM1, GM1b, 
GalNAc–GD1a (<50% 
for any)
IgG (polyclonal)
Miller Fisher syndrome 
(MFS)
GQ1b (>90%)
IgG (polyclonal)
Acute pharyngeal 
cervicobrachial 
neuropathy (APCBN)
GT1a (? most)
IgG (polyclonal)
Chronic Immune Neuropathies
Chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (CIDP) 
(75%)
<10% to CNTN1 or 
NF155 and even more 
rare to P0, myelin P2 
protein, orPMP22,
IgG4 with CNTN1 and 
NF155
CIDP-M (MGUS 
associated) (25%)
Neural binding sites
IgG, IgA (monoclonal)
Chronic sensory > motor 
neuropathy
SPGP, SGLPG (on MAG) 
(50%)
IgM (monoclonal)
Uncertain (50%)
IgM (monoclonal)
Multifocal motor 
neuropathy (MMN)
GM1, GalNAc–GD1a, 
others (25–50%)
IgM (polyclonal, 
monoclonal)
Chronic sensory ataxic 
neuropathy
GD1b, GQ1b, and other 
b-series gangliosides
IgM (monoclonal)
Abbreviations: CIDP-M, CIDP with a monoclonal gammopathy; CNTN1, contactin-1; 
MAG, myelin-associated glycoprotein; MGUS, monoclonal gammopathy of 
undetermined significance; NF155, neurofascin-155.
Source: Modified from HJ Willison, N Yuki: Brain 125:2591, 2002.
glycoconjugates, specifically gangliosides (Table 439-2; Fig. 439-2). 
Gangliosides are complex glycosphingolipids that contain one or 
more sialic acid residues; various gangliosides participate in cell-cell 
interactions (including those between axons and glia), modulation of 
receptors, and regulation of growth. They are typically exposed on the 
plasma membrane of cells, rendering them susceptible to an antibody-
mediated attack. Gangliosides and other glycoconjugates are present in 
large quantity in human nervous tissues and in key sites, such as nodes 
of Ranvier. Antiganglioside antibodies, most frequently to GM1, are 
common in GBS (20–50% of cases), particularly in AMAN and AMSAN 
and in those cases preceded by C. jejuni infection. Some AIDP autoan-
tibodies may recognize glycolipid heterocomplexes, rather than single 
species, present on cell membranes. Furthermore, isolates of C. jejuni 
from stool cultures of patients with GBS have surface glycolipid struc-
tures that antigenically cross react with gangliosides, including GM1, 
concentrated in human nerves. Sialic acid residues from pathogenic 
C. jejuni strains can also trigger activation of dendritic cells via signaling 
through toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), promoting B cell differentiation and 
further amplifying humoral autoimmunity. Another line of evidence 
implicating humoral autoimmunity is derived from cases of GBS that 
followed intravenous administration of bovine brain gangliosides for 
treatment of various neuropathies; 5–15 days after injection, some 
recipients developed AMAN with high titers of anti-GM1 antibodies 
that recognized epitopes at nodes of Ranvier and motor endplates. 
Experimentally, anti-GM1 antibodies can trigger complement-mediated 
injury at paranodal axon-glial junctions, disrupting the clustering 
of sodium channels and likely contributing to conduction block (see 
“Pathophysiology,” below).
Anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies are found in >90% of patients with MFS 
(Table 439-2; Fig. 439-2), and titers of IgG are highest early in the course. 
Anti-GQ1b antibodies are not found in other forms of GBS unless there 
is extraocular motor nerve involvement. A possible explanation for 
this association is that extraocular motor nerves are enriched in GQ1b 
gangliosides in comparison to limb nerves. In addition, a monoclonal 
anti-GQ1b antibody raised against C. jejuni isolated from a patient with 
MFS blocked neuromuscular transmission experimentally.
Taken together, these observations provide strong but still incon-
clusive evidence that autoantibodies play an important pathogenic 
role in GBS. Although antiganglioside antibodies have been studied 
most intensively, other antigenic targets may also be important. Proof 
that these antibodies are pathogenic requires that they be capable of 
mediating disease following direct passive transfer to naïve hosts; 
this has not yet been demonstrated, although one case of possible 
maternal-fetal transplacental transfer of GBS has been described.
In AIDP, an early step in the induction of tissue damage appears to 
be complement deposition along the outer surface of the Schwann cell. 
Activation of complement initiates a characteristic vesicular disinte-
gration of the myelin sheath and also leads to recruitment of activated 
macrophages, which participate in damage to myelin and axons. In 
AMAN, the pattern is different in that complement is deposited along 
with IgG at the nodes of Ranvier along large motor axons. Interestingly, 
in cases of AMAN, antibodies against GD1a appear to have a fine speci-
ficity that favors binding to motor rather than sensory nerve roots, even 
though this ganglioside is expressed on both fiber types.
Pathophysiology  In the demyelinating forms of GBS, the basis 
for flaccid paralysis and sensory disturbance is conduction block. This 
finding, demonstrable electrophysiologically, implies that the axonal 
connections remain intact. Hence, recovery can take place rapidly as 
remyelination occurs. In severe cases of demyelinating GBS, secondary 
axonal degeneration usually occurs; its extent can be estimated electro-
physiologically. More secondary axonal degeneration correlates with a 
slower rate of recovery and a greater degree of residual disability. When 
a severe primary axonal pattern is encountered electrophysiologically, 
the implication is that axons have degenerated and become discon-
nected from their targets, specifically the neuromuscular junctions, and 
must therefore regenerate for recovery to take place. In motor axonal 
cases in which recovery is rapid, the lesion is thought to be localized to 
preterminal motor branches, allowing regeneration and reinnervation 
to take place quickly. Alternatively, in mild cases, collateral sprouting 
and reinnervation from surviving motor axons near the neuromuscular 
junction may begin to reestablish physiologic continuity with muscle 
cells over a period of several months.
Laboratory Features  CSF findings are distinctive, consisting of 
an elevated CSF protein level (1–10 g/L [100–1000 mg/dL]) without 
accompanying pleocytosis. The CSF is often normal when symptoms 
have been present for ≤48 h; by the end of the first week, the level 
of protein is usually elevated. A transient increase in the CSF white 
cell count (10–100/μL) occurs on occasion in otherwise typical GBS; 
however, a sustained CSF pleocytosis suggests an alternative diag-
nosis (viral myelitis) or a concurrent diagnosis such as unrecognized 
HIV infection, leukemia or lymphoma with infiltration of nerves, or 
neurosarcoidosis. Edx features are mild or absent in the early stages 
of GBS and lag behind the clinical evolution. In AIDP, the earliest fea-
tures are prolonged F-wave latencies, prolonged distal latencies, and 
reduced amplitudes of compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs), 
probably owing to the predilection for involvement of nerve roots 
and distal motor nerve terminals early in the course. Later, slowing of 
conduction velocity, conduction block, and temporal dispersion may be 
appreciated (Table 439-1). Occasionally, sensory nerve action potentials 
(SNAPs) may be normal in the feet (e.g., sural nerve) when abnormal 
in the arms. This is also a sign that the patient does not have one of 
the more typical “length-dependent” polyneuropathies. In cases with 
primary axonal pathology, the principal Edx finding is reduced ampli-
tude of CMAPs (and also SNAPS with AMSAN) without conduction 
slowing or prolongation of distal latencies.
Diagnosis  GBS is a descriptive entity. The diagnosis of AIDP is 
made by recognizing the pattern of rapidly evolving paralysis with 
areflexia, absence of fever or other systemic symptoms, and character-
istic antecedent events. In 2011, the Brighton Collaboration developed 


--- PDF PAGE 3274 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3228
Macrophage
scavenging
A
Motor
neuron
Axon
Kv
Caspr
Juxtaparanode
Axon
Myelin
Schwann-cell
microvilli
Paranode
Node
Nav
Cytoskeleton
KEY
KEY
IgG anti-GM1 or
anti-GD1a antibodies
C3
MAC
Unidentified antigen
Myelin
Nerve
injury
Macrophage
GM1,
GD1a
MAC
B
Axon
MAC
Myelin
Macrophage
Macrophage
Axon
Axon
Complement
activation
Antibody
binding
Axon
Macrophage
Myelin
FIGURE 439-2  Possible immune mechanisms in GBS. Panel A shows the immunopathogenesis of AIDP. Although autoantigens have yet to be unequivocally identified, 
autoantibodies may bind to myelin antigens and activate complement. This is followed by the formation of membrane-attack complex (MAC) on the outer surface of 
Schwann cells and the initiation of vesicular degeneration. Macrophages subsequently invade myelin and act as scavengers to remove myelin debris. Panel B shows 
the immunopathogenesis of acute axonal forms of GBS (AMAN and AMSAN). Myelinated axons are divided into four functional regions: the nodes of Ranvier, paranodes, 
juxtaparanodes, and internodes. Gangliosides GM1 and GD1a are strongly expressed at the nodes of Ranvier, where the voltage-gated sodium (Nav) channels are 
localized. Contactin-associated protein (Caspr) and voltage-gated potassium (Kv) channels are respectively present at the paranodes and juxtaparanodes. IgG anti-GM1 
or anti-GD1a autoantibodies bind to the nodal axolemma, leading to MAC formation. This results in the disappearance of Nav clusters and the detachment of paranodal 
myelin, which can lead to nerve-conduction failure and muscle weakness. Axonal degeneration may follow at a later stage. Macrophages subsequently invade from the 
nodes into the periaxonal space, scavaenging the injured axons. (Adapted from N Yuki, H-P Hartung: Guillain-Barré syndrome. N Engl J Med 366:2294, 2012, Figure 2.)
a new set of case definitions for GBS in response to needs of epidemi-
ologic studies of vaccination and assessing risks of GBS (Table 439-3). 
These criteria have subsequently been validated. Other disorders that 
may enter into the differential diagnosis include acute myelopathies 
(especially with prolonged back pain and sphincter disturbances); 
diphtheria (early oropharyngeal disturbances); Lyme polyradiculitis 
and other tick-borne paralyses; porphyria (abdominal pain, seizures, 
psychosis); vasculitic neuropathy (check erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate, described below); poliomyelitis (fever and meningismus com-
mon); West Nile virus; CMV polyradiculitis (in immunocompromised 
patients); critical illness neuropathy or myopathy; neuromuscular 
junction disorders such as myasthenia gravis and botulism (pupillary 
reactivity lost early); poisonings with organophosphates, thallium, or 
arsenic; paralytic shellfish poisoning; or severe hypophosphatemia 
(rare). Laboratory tests are helpful primarily to exclude mimics of GBS. 
Edx features may be minimal, and the CSF protein level may not rise 
until the end of the first week. If the diagnosis is strongly suspected, 
treatment should be initiated without waiting for evolution of the char-
acteristic Edx and CSF findings to occur. GBS patients with risk factors 
for HIV or with CSF pleocytosis should have a serologic test for HIV.
TREATMENT
Guillain-Barré Syndrome
In the vast majority of patients with GBS, treatment should be 
initiated as soon after diagnosis as possible. Each day counts; ~2 
weeks after the first motor symptoms, it is not known whether 


--- PDF PAGE 3275 ---

CHAPTER 439 Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Other Immune-Mediated Neuropathies
3229
TABLE 439-3  Brighton Criteria for Diagnosis of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) and Miller Fisher Syndrome
Clinical case definitions for diagnosis of GBS
Level 1 of diagnostic certainty
  Bilateral AND flaccid weakness of the limbs
      AND
  Decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes in weak limbs
      AND
  Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of weakness 
between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau
      AND
  Electrophysiologic findings consistent with GBS
      AND
  Cytoalbuminologic dissociation (i.e., elevation of CSF protein level above 
laboratory normal value AND CSF total white cell count  
<50 cells/μL)
      AND
  Absence of an identified alternative diagnosis for weakness
Level 2 of diagnostic certainty
  Bilateral AND flaccid weakness of the limbs
      AND
  Decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes in weak limbs
      AND
  Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of weakness 
between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau
      AND
  CSF total white cell count <50 cells/μL (with or without CSF protein elevation 
above laboratory normal value)
      OR
  If CSF not collected or results not available, electrophysiologic studies 
consistent with GBS
      AND
  Absence of identified alternative diagnosis for weakness
Level 3 of diagnostic certainty
  Bilateral and flaccid weakness of the limbs
      AND
  Decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes in weak limbs
      AND
  Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of weakness 
between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau
      AND
  Absence of identified alternative diagnosis for weakness
Clinical case definitions for diagnosis of Miller Fisher syndrome
Level 1 of diagnostic certainty
  Bilateral ophthalmoparesis and bilateral reduced or absent tendon reflexes, 
and ataxia
      AND
  Absence of limb weakness
      AND
  Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of weakness 
between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau
      AND
  Cytoalbuminologic dissociation (i.e., elevation of cerebrospinal protein above 
the laboratory normal and total CSF white cell count <50 cells/μL)
      AND
  Nerve conduction studies are normal, OR indicate involvement of sensory 
nerves only
      AND
  No alterations in consciousness or corticospinal tract signs
      AND
Absence of identified alternative diagnosis
Level 2 of diagnostic certainty
  Bilateral ophthalmoparesis and bilateral reduced or absent tendon reflexes 
and ataxia
      AND
  Absence of limb weakness
      AND
  Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of weakness 
between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau
      AND
  CSF with a total white cell count <50 cells/μL) (with or without CSF protein 
elevation above laboratory normal value)
      OR
  Nerve conduction studies are normal, OR indicate involvement of sensory 
nerves only
      AND
  No alterations in consciousness or corticospinal tract signs
     AND
  Absence of identified alternative diagnosis
Level 3 of diagnostic certainty
  Bilateral ophthalmoparesis and bilateral reduced or absent tendon reflexes 
and ataxia
      AND
  Absence of limb weakness
     AND
  Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of weakness 
between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau
      AND
  No alterations in consciousness or corticospinal tract signs
      AND
  Absence of identified alternative diagnosis
Abbreviation: CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
Source: From JJ Sejvar et al: Guillain-Barré syndrome and Fisher syndrome: Case definitions and guidelines for collection, analysis, and presentation of immunization 
safety data. Vaccine 29:599, 2011. Validation study published by C Fokke et al: Diagnosis of Guillain-Barré syndrome and validation of Brighton criteria. Brain 137:33, 
2014.
immunotherapy is still effective. If the patient has already reached 
the plateau stage, then treatment probably is no longer indicated, 
unless the patient has severe motor weakness and one cannot 
exclude the possibility that an immunologic attack is still ongoing. 
Either high-dose intravenous immune globulin (IVIg) or plasma-
pheresis can be initiated, as they are equally effective for typical 
GBS. A combination of the two therapies is not significantly better 
than either alone. IVIg is often the initial therapy chosen because of 
its ease of administration and good safety record. Anecdotal data 
have also suggested that IVIg may be preferable to plasma exchange 
(PE) for the AMAN and MFS variants of GBS. IVIg is administered 
as five daily infusions for a total dose of 2 g/kg body weight. 
There is some evidence that GBS autoantibodies are neutralized 
by anti-idiotypic antibodies present in IVIg preparations, perhaps 
accounting for the therapeutic effect. A course of plasmapheresis 
usually consists of ~40–50 mL/kg PE 4–5 times over 7–10 days. Meta- 
analysis of randomized clinical trials indicates that treatment reduces 
the need for mechanical ventilation by nearly half (from 27 to 14% 
with PE) and increases the likelihood of full recovery at 1 year (from 
55 to 68%). Functionally significant improvement may occur toward 
the end of the first week of treatment or may be delayed for several 
weeks. The lack of noticeable improvement following a course of 
IVIg or PE is not an indication to treat with the alternate treatment. 
However, there are occasional patients who are treated early in the 
course of GBS and improve, who then relapse within a month. Brief 
retreatment with the original therapy is usually effective in such 
cases. Glucocorticoids have not been found to be effective in GBS. 
Occasional patients with very mild forms of GBS, especially those 
who appear to have already reached a plateau when initially seen, 
may be managed conservatively without IVIg or PE.


--- PDF PAGE 3276 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3230
In the worsening phase of GBS, most patients require monitoring 
in a critical care setting, with particular attention to vital capacity, 
heart rhythm, blood pressure, nutrition, deep-vein thrombosis pro-
phylaxis, cardiovascular status, early consideration (after 2 weeks 
of intubation) of tracheotomy, and chest physiotherapy. As noted, 
~30% of patients with GBS require ventilatory assistance, sometimes 
for prolonged periods of time (several weeks or longer). Frequent 
turning and assiduous skin care are important, as are daily range-of-
motion exercises to avoid joint contractures and daily reassurance as 
to the generally good outlook for recovery.
Prognosis and Recovery  Approximately 85% of patients with 
GBS achieve a full functional recovery within several months to a 
year, although minor findings on examination (such as areflexia) may 
persist and patients often complain of continued symptoms, including 
fatigue. The mortality rate is <5% in optimal settings; death usually 
results from secondary pulmonary complications. The outlook is worst 
in patients with severe proximal motor and sensory axonal damage. 
Such axonal damage may be either primary or secondary in nature (see 
“Pathophysiology,” above), but in either case successful regeneration 
cannot occur. Other factors that worsen the outlook for recovery are 
advanced age, a fulminant or severe attack, and a delay in the onset of 
treatment. Between 5 and 10% of patients with typical GBS have one 
or more late relapses; many of these cases are then classified as chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP).
CHRONIC INFLAMMATORY 
DEMYELINATING POLYNEUROPATHY
CIDP is distinguished from GBS by its chronic course. In other respects, 
this neuropathy shares many features with the common demyelinating 
form of GBS, including elevated CSF protein levels and the Edx find-
ings of acquired demyelination. Most cases occur in adults, and males 
are affected slightly more often than females. The incidence of CIDP is 
lower than that of GBS, but due to the protracted course, the prevalence 
is greater.
Clinical Manifestations  Onset is usually gradual over a few 
months or longer, but in a few cases, the initial attack is indistinguish-
able from that of GBS. An acute-onset form of CIDP may mimic GBS 
but should be considered if it deteriorates >9 weeks after onset or 
relapses at least three times. Symptoms are both motor and sensory 
in most cases. Weakness of the limbs is usually symmetric but can be 
strikingly asymmetric in multifocal acquired demyelinating sensory 
and motor (MADSAM) neuropathy variant (Lewis-Sumner syndrome) 
in which discrete peripheral nerves are involved. There is consider-
able variability from case to case. Some patients experience a chronic 
progressive course, whereas others, usually younger patients, have a 
relapsing and remitting course. Some have only motor findings, and 
a small proportion present with a relatively pure syndrome of sensory 
ataxia. Tremor occurs in ~10% and may become more prominent dur-
ing periods of subacute worsening or improvement. A small proportion 
have cranial nerve findings, including external ophthalmoplegia. CIDP 
tends to ameliorate over time with treatment; the result is that many 
years after onset, nearly 75% of patients have reasonable functional 
status. Death from CIDP is uncommon.
Diagnosis  The diagnosis rests on characteristic clinical, CSF, and 
electrophysiologic findings. The CSF is usually acellular with an ele-
vated protein level, sometimes several times normal. As with GBS, 
a CSF pleocytosis should lead to the consideration of HIV infection, 
leukemia or lymphoma, and neurosarcoidosis. Edx findings reveal vari-
able degrees of conduction slowing, prolonged distal latencies, distal 
and temporal dispersion of CMAPs, and conduction block as the prin-
cipal features. In particular, the presence of conduction block is a certain 
sign of an acquired demyelinating process. Evidence of axonal loss, 
presumably secondary to demyelination, is present in >50% of patients. 
Serum protein electrophoresis with immunofixation is indicated to 
search for monoclonal gammopathy and associated conditions (see 
“Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance,” below). 
In all patients with presumptive CIDP, it is also reasonable to exclude 
vasculitis, collagen vascular disease (especially SLE), chronic hepatitis, 
HIV infection, amyloidosis, and diabetes mellitus. Other associated 
conditions include inflammatory bowel disease and lymphoma.
Pathogenesis  Biopsy typically reveals little inflammation and 
onion-bulb changes (imbricated layers of attenuated Schwann cell pro-
cesses surrounding an axon) that result from recurrent demyelination 
and remyelination (Fig. 439-1). The response to therapy suggests that 
CIDP is immune-mediated; CIDP responds to glucocorticoids, whereas 
GBS does not. Passive transfer of demyelination into experimental 
animals has been accomplished using IgG purified from the serum of 
some patients with CIDP, lending support for a humoral autoimmune 
pathogenesis. A minority of patients have serum antibodies against 
P0, myelin P2 protein, or PMP22 (proteins whose genes are mutated 
in certain forms of hereditary Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy). 
More recently antibodies of IgG4 isotype directed against contactin-1 
(CNTN1) or neurofascin-155 (NF155) have been associated with early 
axonal damage, severe distal motor involvement or sensory ataxia with 
tremor, and a poor response to IVIg. CNTN1 and its partner contact-
in-associated protein-1 (CASPR1) interact with NF155 at paranodal 
axoglial junctions. Passive transfer of IgG4 CNTN1 antibodies pro-
duces paranodal damage and ataxia in rodents. It is also of interest that 
a CIDP-like illness developed spontaneously in the nonobese diabetic 
(NOD) mouse when the immune co-stimulatory molecule B7-2 (CD86) 
was genetically deleted; this suggests that CIDP can result from altered 
triggering of T cells by antigen-presenting cells.
As many as 25% of patients with clinical features of CIDP also have 
a monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS). 
Cases associated with monoclonal IgA or IgG kappa usually respond 
to treatment as favorably as cases without a monoclonal gammopathy. 
Patients with IgM-kappa monoclonal gammopathy and antibodies 
directed against myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) have a distinct 
demyelinating polyneuropathy with more sensory findings, usually 
only distal weakness, and a poor response to immunotherapy.
TREATMENT
Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy
Most authorities initiate treatment for CIDP when progression is 
rapid or walking is compromised. If the disorder is mild, manage-
ment can be expectant, awaiting spontaneous remission. Controlled 
studies have shown that high-dose IVIg, PE, and glucocorticoids are 
all more effective than placebo. Initial therapy is usually with IVIg, 
administered as 2.0 g/kg body weight given in divided doses over 
2–5 days; three monthly courses are generally recommended before 
concluding a patient is a treatment failure. If the patient responds, 
the infusion intervals can be gradually increased or the dosage 
decreased (e.g., starting at 1 g/kg every 3–4 weeks). PE, which 
appears to be as effective as IVIg, is initiated at 2-3 treatments per 
week for 6 weeks; periodic re-treatment may also be required. Treat-
ment with glucocorticoids is another option (60–80 mg prednisone 
PO daily for 1–2 months, followed by a gradual dose reduction of  
10 mg per month as tolerated), but long-term adverse effects includ-
ing bone demineralization, gastrointestinal bleeding, and cushin-
goid changes are problematic. As many as one-third of patients 
with CIDP fail to respond adequately to the initial therapy chosen; 
a different treatment should then be tried. Patients who fail therapy 
with IVIg, PE, and glucocorticoids may benefit from treatment with 
immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine, methotrexate, 
cyclosporine, and cyclophosphamide, either alone or as adjunctive 
therapy. CIDP associated with anti-CNTN1 and NF155 antibodies 
is typically refractory to IVIg, but a few studies suggest a response 
to rituximab. Use of these therapies requires periodic reassessment 
of their risks and benefits. In patients with a CIDP-like neuropathy 
who fail to respond to treatment, it is important to evaluate for 
POEMS syndrome (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, 
monoclonal gammopathy, skin changes; see below).


--- PDF PAGE 3277 ---

CHAPTER 439 Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Other Immune-Mediated Neuropathies
3231
MULTIFOCAL MOTOR NEUROPATHY
Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) is a distinctive but uncommon 
neuropathy that presents as slowly progressive motor weakness and 
atrophy evolving over years in the distribution of selected nerve 
trunks, associated with sites of persistent focal motor conduction block 
in the same nerve trunks. Sensory fibers are relatively spared. The arms 
are affected more frequently than the legs, and >75% of all patients are 
male. Some cases have been confused with lower motor neuron forms 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Chap. 429). Less than 50% of patients 
present with high titers of polyclonal IgM antibody to the ganglioside 
GM1. It is uncertain how this finding relates to the discrete foci of 
persistent motor conduction block, but high concentrations of GM1 
gangliosides are normal constituents of nodes of Ranvier in peripheral 
nerve fibers. Pathology reveals demyelination and mild inflammatory 
changes at the sites of conduction block.
Most patients with MMN respond to high-dose IVIg (dosages as 
for CIDP, above); periodic re-treatment is required (usually at least 
monthly) to maintain the benefit. Some refractory patients have 
responded to rituximab or cyclophosphamide. Glucocorticoids and PE 
are not effective.
NEUROPATHIES WITH MONOCLONAL 
GAMMOPATHY
■
■MULTIPLE MYELOMA
Clinically overt polyneuropathy occurs in ~5% of patients with the 
commonly encountered type of multiple myeloma, which exhibits 
either lytic or diffuse osteoporotic bone lesions. These neuropathies 
are sensorimotor, are usually mild and slowly progressive but may be 
severe, and generally do not reverse with successful suppression of 
the myeloma. In most cases, Edx and pathologic features are consistent 
with a process of axonal degeneration.
In contrast, myeloma with osteosclerotic features, although repre-
senting only 3% of all myelomas, is associated with polyneuropathy 
in one-half of cases. These neuropathies, which may also occur with 
solitary plasmacytoma, are distinct because they (1) are usually demy-
elinating in nature and resemble CIDP; (2) often respond to radiation 
therapy or removal of the primary lesion; (3) are associated with dif-
ferent monoclonal proteins and light chains (almost always lambda as 
opposed to primarily kappa in the lytic type of multiple myeloma); (4) 
are typically refractory to standard treatments of CIDP; and (5) may 
occur in association with other systemic findings including thicken-
ing of the skin, hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, organomegaly, 
endocrinopathy, anasarca, and clubbing of fingers. These are features 
of POEMS syndrome. Levels of vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) are increased in the serum, and this factor is thought to some-
how play a pathogenic role in this syndrome. Treatment of the neur-
opathy is best directed at the osteosclerotic myeloma using surgery, 
radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or autologous peripheral blood stem cell 
transplantation.
Neuropathies are also encountered in other systemic conditions 
with gammopathy, including Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia, pri-
mary systemic amyloidosis, and cryoglobulinemic states (mixed essen-
tial cryoglobulinemia, some cases of hepatitis C).
■
■MONOCLONAL GAMMOPATHY OF UNDETERMINED 
SIGNIFICANCE
Chronic polyneuropathies occurring in association with MGUS are 
usually associated with the immunoglobulin isotypes IgG, IgA, and 
IgM. Most patients present with isolated sensory symptoms in their 
distal extremities and have Edx features of an axonal sensory or 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy. These patients otherwise resemble 
idiopathic sensory polyneuropathy, and the MGUS might just be coin-
cidental. They usually do not respond to immunotherapies designed 
to reduce the concentration of the monoclonal protein. Some patients, 
however, present with generalized weakness and sensory loss and Edx 
studies indistinguishable from CIDP without monoclonal gammopathy 
(see “Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy,” above), 
and their response to immunosuppressive agents is also similar. An 
exception is the syndrome of IgM kappa monoclonal gammopathy 
associated with an indolent, long-standing, sometimes static sensory 
neuropathy, frequently with tremor and sensory ataxia. Most patients 
are male and aged >50 years. In the majority, the monoclonal IgM 
immunoglobulin binds to a normal peripheral nerve constituent, MAG, 
found in the paranodal regions of Schwann cells. Binding appears 
to be specific for a polysaccharide epitope that is also found in other 
normal peripheral nerve myelin glycoproteins, P0 and PMP22, and 
also in other normal nerve-related glycosphingolipids (Fig. 439-1). In 
the MAG-positive cases, IgM paraprotein is incorporated into the mye-
lin sheaths of affected patients and widens the spacing of the myelin 
lamellae, thus producing a distinctive ultrastructural pattern. Demyeli-
nation and remyelination are the hallmarks of the lesions, but axonal 
loss develops over time. These anti-MAG polyneuropathies are typical 
refractory to immunotherapy. In a small proportion of patients (30% at 
10 years), MGUS will in time evolve into frankly malignant conditions 
such as multiple myeloma or lymphoma.
VASCULITIC NEUROPATHY
Peripheral nerve involvement is common in polyarteritis nodosa 
(PAN), appearing in half of all cases clinically and in 100% of cases 
at postmortem studies (Chap. 356). The most common pattern is 
multifocal (asymmetric) motor-sensory neuropathy (mononeuropathy 
multiplex) due to ischemic lesions of nerve trunks and roots; however, 
some cases of vasculitic neuropathy present as a distal, symmetric 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Symptoms of neuropathy are a com-
mon presenting complaint in patients with PAN. The Edx findings 
are those of an axonal process. Small- to medium-sized arteries of the 
vasa nervorum, particularly the epineural vessels, are affected in PAN, 
resulting in a widespread ischemic neuropathy. A high frequency of 
neuropathy occurs in eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Churg-Strauss syndrome [CSS]).
Systemic vasculitis should always be considered when a subacute 
or chronically evolving mononeuropathy multiplex occurs in conjunc-
tion with constitutional symptoms (fever, anorexia, weight loss, loss of 
energy, malaise, and nonspecific pains). Diagnosis of suspected vascu-
litic neuropathy is made by a combined nerve and muscle biopsy, with 
serial section or skip-serial techniques.
Approximately one-third of biopsy-proven cases of vasculitic neur-
opathy are “nonsystemic” in that the vasculitis appears to affect only 
peripheral nerves. Constitutional symptoms are absent, and the course 
is more indolent than that of PAN. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
may be elevated, but other tests for systemic disease are negative. Nev-
ertheless, clinically silent involvement of other organs is likely, and vas-
culitis is frequently found in muscle biopsied at the same time as nerve.
Vasculitic neuropathy may also be seen as part of the vasculitis 
syndrome occurring in the course of other connective tissue disorders 
(Chap. 356). The most frequent is rheumatoid arthritis, but ischemic 
neuropathy due to involvement of vasa nervorum may also occur in 
mixed cryoglobulinemia, Sjögren’s syndrome, granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (formerly known as Wegener’s), hypersensitivity angiitis, 
SLE, and progressive systemic sclerosis.
Some vasculitides are associated with antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies (ANCAs), which in turn, are subclassified as cytoplasmic 
(cANCA) or perinuclear (pANCA). cANCAs are directed against 
proteinase 3 (PR3), whereas pANCAs target myeloperoxidase (MPO). 
PR3/cANCAs are associated with eosinophilic granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis, whereas MPO/pANCAs are typically associated with 
microscopic polyangiitis, CSS, and less commonly PAN. Of note, 
MPO/pANCA has also been seen in minocycline-induced vasculitis.
Management of these neuropathies, including the “nonsystemic” 
vasculitic neuropathy, consists of treatment of the underlying condition 
as well as the aggressive use of glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide. 
Use of these immunosuppressive agents has resulted in dramatic 
improvements in outcome, with 5-year survival rates now >80%. Clini-
cal trials found that the combination of rituximab and glucocorticoids is 
not inferior to cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids. Thus, combina-
tion therapy with glucocorticoids and rituximab is recommended as the 


================================================================================
Ch440 Myasthenia Gravis and NMJ Disorders
Pages 3278-3284
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3278 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3232 standard initial treatment, particularly for ANCA-associated vasculitis. 
A recent study demonstrated that mepolizumab, an anti-interleukin-5 
monoclonal antibody, when added to standard care is effective for 
treatment of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
ANTI-Hu PARANEOPLASTIC NEUROPATHY 
(CHAP. 90)
This uncommon immune-mediated disorder manifests as a sensory 
neuronopathy (i.e., selective damage to sensory nerve bodies in dor-
sal root ganglia). The onset is often asymmetric with dysesthesias 
and sensory loss in the limbs that soon progress to affect all limbs, 
the torso, and the face. Marked sensory ataxia, pseudoathetosis, and 
inability to walk, stand, or even sit unsupported are frequent features 
and are secondary to the extensive deafferentation. Subacute sensory 
neuronopathy may be idiopathic, but more than half of cases are 
paraneoplastic, primarily related to lung cancer, and most of those 
are small-cell lung cancer (SCLC). Diagnosis of the underlying SCLC 
requires awareness of the association, testing for the paraneoplastic 
antibody, and often positron emission tomography (PET) scanning for 
the tumor. The target antigens are a family of RNA-binding proteins 
(HuD, HuC, and Hel-N1) that in normal tissues are only expressed by 
neurons. The same proteins are usually expressed by SCLC, triggering 
in some patients an immune response characterized by antibodies and 
cytotoxic T cells that cross-react with the Hu proteins of the dorsal root 
ganglion neurons, resulting in immune-mediated neuronal destruction. 
An encephalomyelitis may accompany the sensory neuronopathy and 
presumably has the same pathogenesis. Neurologic symptoms usually 
precede, by ≤6 months, the identification of SCLC. The sensory neu-
ronopathy runs its course in a few weeks or months and stabilizes, 
leaving the patient disabled. Most cases are unresponsive to treatment 
with glucocorticoids, IVIg, PE, or immunosuppressant drugs.
■
■FURTHER READING
Amato AA, Russell JA (eds): Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. 
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, pp 320–383.
Collins MP: The vasculitic neuropathies: an update. Curr Opin 
Neurol 25:573, 2012.
Devaux JJ et al: Neurofascin-155 IgG4 in chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating polyneuropathy. Neurology 86:800, 2016.
Fokke C et al: Diagnosis of Guillain-Barré syndrome and validation of 
Brighton criteria. Brain 137:33, 2014.
Manso C et al: Contactin-1 IgG4 antibodies cause paranode disman-
tling and conduction defects. Brain 139:1700, 2016.
Querol L, Illa I: Paranodal and other autoantibodies in chronic 
inflammatory neuropathies. Curr Opin Neurol 28:474, 2015.
Willison HJ et al: Guillain-Barré syndrome. Lancet 388: 717, 2016.
Yuki N, Hartung H-P: Guillain-Barré syndrome. N Engl J Med 
366:2294, 2012.
Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a neuromuscular junction (NMJ) disorder 
characterized by weakness and fatigability of skeletal muscles. The 
underlying defect is a decrease in the number of available acetylcholine 
receptors (AChRs) at NMJs due to an antibody-mediated autoimmune 
attack. Treatment now available for MG is highly effective, although a 
specific cure has remained elusive.
■
■PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
At the NMJ (Fig. 440-1, Video 440-1), acetylcholine (ACh) is synthe-
sized in the motor nerve terminal and stored in vesicles (quanta). When 
440 Myasthenia Gravis and  
Other Diseases of the 
Neuromuscular Junction
Anthony A. Amato 
an action potential travels down a motor nerve and reaches the nerve 
terminal, ACh from 150 to 200 vesicles is released and combines with 
AChRs that are densely packed at the peaks of postsynaptic folds. The 
AChR consists of five subunits (2α, 1β, 1δ, 1γ, or ε) arranged around 
a central pore. When ACh combines with the binding sites on the α 
subunits of the AChR, the channel in the AChR opens, permitting the 
rapid entry of cations, chiefly sodium, which produces depolarization 
at the end-plate region of the muscle fiber. If the depolarization is suf-
ficiently large, it initiates an action potential that is propagated along 
the muscle fiber, triggering muscle contraction. This process is rapidly 
terminated by hydrolysis of ACh by acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 
which is present within the synaptic folds, and by diffusion of ACh 
away from the receptor.
In MG, the fundamental defect is a decrease in the number of 
available AChRs at the postsynaptic muscle membrane. In addition, 
the postsynaptic folds are flattened, or “simplified.” These changes 
result in decreased efficiency of neuromuscular transmission. There-
fore, although ACh is released normally, it produces small end-plate 
potentials that may fail to trigger muscle action potentials. Failure of 
transmission results in weakness of muscle contraction.
The amount of ACh released per impulse normally declines on 
repeated activity (termed presynaptic rundown). In the myasthenic 
patient, the decreased efficiency of neuromuscular transmission com-
bined with the normal rundown results in the activation of fewer and 
fewer muscle fibers by successive nerve impulses and hence increasing 
weakness, or myasthenic fatigue. This mechanism also accounts for the 
decremental response to repetitive nerve stimulation seen on electrodi-
agnostic testing.
MG is an autoimmune disorder most commonly caused by anti-
AChR antibodies. The anti-AChR antibodies reduce the number of 
available AChRs at NMJs by three distinct mechanisms: (1) accelerated 
turnover of AChRs by a mechanism involving cross-linking and rapid 
endocytosis of the receptors; (2) damage to the postsynaptic muscle 
membrane by the antibody in collaboration with complement; and 
(3) blockade of the active site of the AChR (i.e., the site that normally 
binds Ach). An immune response to muscle-specific kinase (MuSK), a 
protein involved in AChR clustering at the NMJ, can also result in MG, 
with reduction of AChRs demonstrated experimentally. Anti-MuSK 
antibody occurs in about 10% of patients (about 40% of AChR antibody 
negative patients), while 1–3% have antibodies to another protein at the 
NMJ—low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4 (LRP4)—that 
is also important for clustering of AChRs. The pathogenic antibodies 
are IgG and are T cell dependent. Thus, immunotherapeutic strategies 
directed against either the antibody-producing B cells or helper T cells 
are effective in this antibody-mediated disease.
How the autoimmune response is initiated and maintained in MG 
is not completely understood, but the thymus appears to play a role in 
this process. The thymus is abnormal in ~75% of patients with AChR 
antibody–positive MG; in ~65% the thymus is “hyperplastic,” with the 
presence of active germinal centers detected histologically, although 
the hyperplastic thymus is not necessarily enlarged. An additional 10% 
of patients have thymic tumors (thymomas). Muscle-like cells within 
the thymus (myoid cells), which express AChRs on their surface, may 
serve as a source of autoantigen and trigger the autoimmune reaction 
within the thymus gland.
■
■CLINICAL FEATURES
MG has a prevalence as high as 200 in 100,000. It affects individuals in 
all age groups, but peak incidences occur in women in their twenties 
and thirties and in men in their fifties and sixties. Overall, women are 
affected more frequently than men, in a ratio of ~3:2. The cardinal fea-
tures are weakness and fatigability of muscles. The weakness increases 
during repeated use (fatigue) or late in the day and may improve fol-
lowing rest or sleep. The course of MG is often variable. Exacerbations 
and remissions may occur, particularly during the first few years after 
the onset of the disease. Unrelated infections or systemic disorders can 
lead to increased myasthenic weakness and may precipitate “crisis” 
(see below).


--- PDF PAGE 3279 ---

CHAPTER 440 Myasthenia Gravis and Other Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction 
3233
FIGURE 440-1  Illustrations of (A) a normal presynaptic neuromuscular junction, (B) a normal postsynapatic terminal, and (C) a myasthenic neuromuscular 
junction. AChE, acetylcholinesterase. See text for description of normal neuromuscular transmission. The myasthenia gravis (MG) junction demonstrates a reduced 
number of acetylcholine receptors (AChRs); flattened, simplified postsynaptic folds; and a widened synaptic space. See Video 440-1 also. (From AA Amato, J Russell: 
Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Figures 25-3 [p 588], 25-4 [p 589], and 25-5 [p 590]; with permission.)
Agrin
Voltage-gated
K+ channel
ChAT  Choline acetyltransferase
Acetylcholine receptor
SNARE proteins
Syntaxin-1
SNAP 25
Synaptotagmin
Synaptobrevin
Axon
Myelin
sheath
Acetate
Choline
ChAT
Ca+ ions
AChE
Voltage-gated
Na+ channels
Voltage-gated
Ca+ channel
Myofibril
Active zone
A
The distribution of muscle weakness often has a characteristic 
pattern. The cranial muscles, particularly the lids and extraocular mus-
cles (EOMs), are typically involved early in the course of MG; diplopia 
and ptosis are common initial complaints. Facial weakness produces a 
“snarling” expression when the patient attempts to smile. Weakness in 
chewing is most noticeable after prolonged effort, as in chewing meat. 
Speech may have a nasal timbre caused by weakness of the palate or 
a dysarthric “mushy” quality due to tongue weakness. Difficulty in 
swallowing may occur as a result of weakness of the palate, tongue, 
or pharynx, giving rise to nasal regurgitation or aspiration of liquids 
or food. Bulbar weakness is especially prominent in MuSK antibody–
positive MG. In ~85% of patients, the weakness becomes generalized, 
affecting the limb muscles as well. If weakness remains restricted to the 
EOMs for 3 years, it is likely that it will not become generalized, and 
these patients are said to have ocular MG. The limb weakness in MG is 
often proximal and may be asymmetric. Despite the muscle weakness, 
deep tendon reflexes are preserved. If ventilatory weakness becomes 
requires respiratory assistance, the patient is said to be in crisis.
■
■DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION (TABLE 440-1)
The diagnosis is suspected on the basis of weakness and fatigability 
in the typical distribution described above, without loss of reflexes or 
impairment of sensation or other neurologic function. The suspected 
diagnosis should always be confirmed definitively before treatment is 
undertaken; this is essential because (1) other treatable conditions may 
closely resemble MG and (2) the treatment of MG may involve surgery 
and the prolonged use of drugs with potentially adverse side effects.
Ice-pack Test  If a patient has ptosis, application of a pack of ice 
over a ptotic eye often results in improvement if the ptosis is due to an 
NMJ defect. This is hypothesized to be due to less depletion of quanta 
of AChR in the cold and reduced activity of AChE at the NMJ. It is a 
quick and easy test to do in the clinic or at the bedside of a hospitalized 
patient.
Autoantibodies Associated with MG 
As previously men-
tioned, anti-AChR antibodies are detectable in the serum of ~85% of all 
myasthenic patients but in only about 50% of patients with weakness 
confined to the ocular muscles. The presence of anti-AChR antibodies 
is virtually diagnostic of MG, but a negative test does not exclude the 
disease. The measured level of anti-AChR antibody does not corre-
spond well with the severity of MG in different patients. Antibodies 
to MuSK are present in ~40% of AChR antibody–negative patients 
with generalized MG. MuSK antibodies are rarely present in AChR 


--- PDF PAGE 3280 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3234
ACh
AChE
Vesicle
SNARE proteins
Syntaxin-1
SNAP 25
Synaptotagmin
Synaptobrevin
Vesicle
fusion
Agrin
Dystroglycan
Lysis of
ACh receptors
Na+ channel
Myofibril
AChR autoantibody
Complement
α
α α
α
C
ACh
(acetylcholine)
Vesicle
SNARE proteins
Syntaxin-1
SNAP 25
Synaptotagmin
Synaptobrevin
Vesicle
fusion
Agrin
Dystroglycan
Lrp4
MuSK
Dok-7
Rapsyn
δ
Na+ channels
Myofibril
ACh
receptor
AChE
α
α
γ
β
B
FIGURE 440-1  (Continued)
antibody–positive patients or in patients with MG limited to ocular 
muscles. These antibodies may interfere with clustering of AChRs at 
NMJs. A small proportion of MG patients without antibodies to AChR 
or MuSK have antibodies to LRP4. Interestingly, antibodies against 
agrin have recently been found in some patients with MG. Agrin is 
a protein derived from motor nerves that normally binds to LRP4 
and important for normal clustering of AChRs at NMJ. Additionally, 
anti-striated muscle antibodies directed against titin and other skeletal 
muscle components are found in ~30% of myasthenic without thy-
moma, 24% of thymoma patients without myasthenia, and 70–80% of 
patients with both myasthenia and thymoma. Furthermore, antibodies 
directed against Netrin-1 receptors and Caspr2 (contactin-associated 
protein-like 2) often coexist and are associated in patients with thy-
moma who have MG and neuromyotonia or Morvan syndrome.
Electrodiagnostic Testing  Repetitive nerve stimulation may 
provide helpful diagnostic evidence of MG. Anti-AChE medication 
should be stopped 6–12 h before testing. It is best to test weak muscles 
or proximal muscle groups. Electrical stimulation is delivered at a rate 
of two or three per second to the appropriate nerves, and action poten-
tials are recorded from the muscles. In normal individuals, the ampli-
tude of the evoked muscle action potentials does not change by >10% 
at these rates of stimulation. However, in myasthenic patients, there is 
a rapid reduction of >10% in the amplitude of the evoked responses.
Anticholinesterase Test  Drugs that inhibit the enzyme AChE 
allow ACh to interact repeatedly with the limited number of AChRs in 
MG, producing improvement in muscle strength. Edrophonium is used 
most commonly for diagnostic testing because of the rapid onset (30 s) 
and short duration (~5 min) of its effect. An objective end point must 
be selected to evaluate the effect of edrophonium, such as weakness of 
TABLE 440-1  Diagnosis of Myasthenia Gravis (MG)
History
  Diplopia, ptosis, dysarthria, dysphagia, dyspnea
  Weakness in characteristic distribution: proximal limbs, neck extensors, 
generalized
  Fluctuation and fatigue: worse with repeated activity, improved by rest
  Effects of previous treatments
Physical examination
  Evaluation for ptosis at rest and following one minute of exercise, 
extraocular muscles and subjective diplopia, orbicularis oculi and oris 
strength, jaw opening and closure
  Assessment of muscle strength in neck and extremities
  Weakness following repeated shoulder abduction
  Vital capacity measurement
  Absence of other neurologic signs
Laboratory testing
  Anti-AChR radioimmunoassay: ~85% positive in generalized MG; 50% in 
ocular MG; definite diagnosis if positive; negative result does not exclude 
MG; ~40% of AChR antibody–negative patients with generalized MG have 
anti-MuSK antibodies
  Repetitive nerve stimulation: decrement of >10% at 3 Hz: highly probable
  Single-fiber electromyography: blocking and jitter, with normal fiber density; 
confirmatory, but not specific
  Edrophonium chloride (Enlon®) 2 mg + 8 mg IV; highly probable diagnosis if 
unequivocally positive
  For ocular or cranial MG: exclude intracranial lesions by CT or MRI
Abbreviations: AChR, acetylcholine receptor; CT, computed tomography; MRI, 
magnetic resonance imaging; MuSK, muscle-specific tyrosine kinase.


--- PDF PAGE 3281 ---

CHAPTER 440 Myasthenia Gravis and Other Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction 
3235
EOMs, impairment of speech, or the length of time that the patient can 
maintain the arms in forward. An initial IV dose of 2 mg of edropho-
nium is given. If definite improvement occurs, the test is considered 
positive and is terminated. If there is no change, the patient is given 
an additional 8 mg IV. The dose is administered in two parts because 
some patients react to edrophonium with side effects such as nausea, 
diarrhea, salivation, fasciculations, and rarely with severe symptoms 
of syncope or bradycardia. Atropine (0.6 mg) should be drawn up in 
a syringe and ready for IV administration if these symptoms become 
troublesome. The edrophonium test is now reserved for patients with 
clinical findings that are suggestive of MG but who have negative 
antibody, electrodiagnostic testing, or ice-pack test. False-positive tests 
occur in occasional patients with other neurologic disorders, such as 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Chap. 429), and in placebo-reactors. 
False-negative or equivocal tests may also occur.
Pulmonary Function Tests (Chap. 278)  Measurements of ven-
tilatory function are valuable because of the frequency and seriousness 
of respiratory impairment in myasthenic patients.
Differential Diagnosis  Other conditions that cause weakness of 
the cranial and/or somatic musculature include the nonautoimmune 
congenital myasthenia, drug-induced myasthenia, Lambert-Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), neurasthenia, hyperthyroidism 
(Graves’ disease), botulism, intracranial mass lesions, oculopharyngeal 
dystrophy, and mitochondrial myopathy (Kearns-Sayre syndrome, 
progressive external ophthalmoplegia). Treatment with penicillamine 
(used for scleroderma or rheumatoid arthritis) and check point inhib-
itors for cancer may also result in autoimmune MG. Aminoglycoside 
antibiotics or procainamide can cause exacerbation of weakness 
in myasthenic patients; very large doses can cause neuromuscular 
weakness in normal individuals.
The congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) comprise a rare hetero-
geneous group of disorders of the NMJ that are not autoimmune but 
rather are due to genetic mutations in which virtually any component 
of the NMJ may be affected. Alterations in function of the presynaptic 
nerve terminal, in the various subunits of the AChR, AChE, or the 
other molecules involved in end-plate development or maintenance, 
have been identified in the different forms of CMS. These disorders 
share many of the clinical features of autoimmune MG, including 
weakness and fatigability of proximal or distal extremity muscles, 
and often involving EOMs and the eyelids similar to the distribution 
in autoimmune MG. CMS should be suspected when symptoms of 
myasthenia have begun in infancy or childhood, but they can present 
in early adulthood. As in acquired autoimmune MG, repetitive nerve 
stimulation is associated with a decremental response. Some forms 
(e.g., AChE deficiency, prolonged open channel syndrome) have a fea-
ture of after-discharges which are not seen in MG. An additional clue 
is the absence of AChR and MuSK antibodies though these are absent 
in ~10% of generalized MG patients (so-called double seronegative 
MG) antibodies.
The prevalence of CMS is estimated at ~3.8 per 100,000. The most 
common genetic defects occur in the ε subunit of the AChR, account-
ing for ~50% of CMS cases, with mutations in the genes encoding for 
rapsin, COLQ, DOK7, agrin, and GFPT together accounting for ~40%. 
In most of the recessively inherited forms of CMS, the mutations are 
heteroallelic; that is, different mutations affecting each of the two alleles 
are present. Features of the most common forms of CMS are summa-
rized in Table 440-2. Molecular analysis is required for precise elucida-
tion of the defect; this may lead to helpful treatment as well as genetic 
counseling. Some forms of CMS improve with AChE inhibitors, while 
others (e.g., slow channel syndrome, AChE deficiency, DOK-7 related 
CMS) actually worsen. Fluoxetine and quinidine can be useful for slow 
channel syndrome, and albuterol for mutations affecting AChE, DOK-
7, rapsyn, and agrin. Additionally, ephedrine and 3,4 diaminopyridine 
(3,4 DAP) may be of benefit in some forms of CMS.
LEMS is a presynaptic disorder of the NMJ that can cause weakness 
similar to that of MG. The proximal muscles of the lower limbs are most 
commonly affected, but other muscles may be involved as well. Cranial 
nerve findings, including ptosis of the eyelids and diplopia, occur in 
up to 70% of patients and resemble features of MG. However, the two 
conditions are usually readily distinguished because patients with 
LEMS have depressed or absent reflexes and experience autonomic 
changes such as dry mouth and impotence. Nerve stimulation pro-
duces an initial low-amplitude compound muscle action potential and, 
at low rates of repetitive stimulation (2–3 Hz), a decremental responses 
as seen in MG; however, at high rates (20–50 Hz), or following brief 
exercise, incremental responses occur. LEMS is caused by autoanti-
bodies directed against P/Q-type calcium channels at the motor nerve 
terminals detected in ~85% of LEMS patients. These autoantibodies 
impair the release of ACh from nerve terminals. In young adults, par-
ticularly women, LEMS is not associated with an underlying cancer. 
However, in older adults, most LEMS is associated with malignancy, 
most commonly small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) The tumor cells may 
express calcium channels that stimulate the autoimmune response. 
Treatment of LEMS involves plasmapheresis and immunotherapy, as 
for MG. 3,4-Diaminopyridine (3,4-DAP) and pyridostigmine can also 
help with symptoms. 3,4-DAP acts by blocking potassium channels, 
which results in prolonged depolarization of the motor nerve terminals 
and thus enhances ACh release. Pyridostigmine prolongs the action of 
ACh, allowing repeated interactions with AChRs.
Botulism (Chap. 148) is due to potent bacterial toxins produced 
by any of eight different strains of Clostridium botulinum. The toxins 
enzymatically cleave specific proteins essential for the release of ACh 
from the motor nerve terminal, thereby interfering with neuromuscu-
lar transmission. Most commonly, botulism is caused by ingestion of 
improperly prepared food containing toxin. Rarely, the nearly ubiq-
uitous spores of C. botulinum may germinate in wounds. In infants, 
the spores may germinate in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and release 
toxin, causing muscle weakness. Patients present with myasthenia-
like bulbar weakness (e.g., diplopia, dysarthria, dysphagia) and lack 
sensory symptoms and signs. Weakness may generalize to the limbs 
and may result in respiratory failure. Reflexes are present early, but 
they may be diminished as the disease progresses. Mentation is 
normal. Autonomic findings include paralytic ileus, constipation, 
urinary retention, dilated or poorly reactive pupils, and dry mouth. 
The demonstration of toxin in serum by bioassay is definitive, but the 
results usually take a relatively long time to be completed and may be 
negative. Nerve stimulation studies reveal reduced compound muscle 
action potential (CMAP) amplitudes that increase following high- 
frequency repetitive stimulation. Treatment includes ventilatory sup-
port and aggressive inpatient supportive care (e.g., nutrition, deep 
vein thrombosis prophylaxis) as needed. Antitoxin should be given 
as early as possible to be effective and can be obtained through 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. A preventive vac-
cine is available for laboratory workers or other highly exposed 
individuals.
Neurasthenia is the historic term for a myasthenia-like fatigue syn-
drome without an organic basis. These patients may present with 
subjective symptoms of weakness and fatigue, but muscle testing 
usually reveals the “give-away weakness” characteristic of nonorganic 
disorders; the complaint of fatigue in these patients means tiredness or 
apathy rather than decreasing muscle power on repeated effort. Hyper-
thyroidism is readily diagnosed or excluded by tests of thyroid function, 
which should be carried out routinely in patients with suspected MG. 
Abnormalities of thyroid function (hyper- or hypothyroidism) may 
increase myasthenic weakness. Diplopia resembling that in MG may 
occasionally be due to an intracranial mass lesion that compresses 
nerves to the EOMs (e.g., sphenoid ridge meningioma), but magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and orbits usually reveals the 
lesion.
Progressive external ophthalmoplegia is a rare condition resulting in 
weakness of the EOMs, which may be accompanied by weakness of 
the proximal muscles of the limbs and other systemic features. Most 
patients with this condition have mitochondrial disorders that can be 
detected on muscle biopsy (Chap. 441).


--- PDF PAGE 3282 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3236
TABLE 440-2  Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes
CMS SUBTYPE
GENE
CLINICAL FEATURES
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL 
FEATURES
RESPONSE 
TO ACHE 
INHIBITORS
TREATMENT
Presynaptic Disorders
CMS with paucity of ACh 
release
CHAT
CHT
AR; early onset, respiratory failure at 
birth, episodic apnea, improvement 
with age
Decremental response  
to RNS
Improve
AChE inhibitors; 3,4 DAP
Synaptic Disorders
AChE deficiency
COLQ
AR; early onset; variable severity; 
axial weakness with scoliosis; 
apnea; +/- EOM involvement, slow 
or absent pupillary responses
After discharges on nerve 
stimulation and decrement 
on RNS
Worsen
Albuterol; ephedrine; 3,4 
DAP; avoid AChE inhibitors
Postsynaptic Disorders Involving AChR Deficiency or Kinetics
Primary AChR deficiency
AChR subunit 
genes
AR; early onset; variable severity; 
fatigue; typical MG features
Decremental response to 
RNS
Improve
AChE inhibitors; 3,4 DAP
AChR kinetic disorder: 
slow channel syndrome
AChR subunit 
genes
AD; onset childhood to early adult; 
weak forearm extensors and neck; 
respiratory weakness; variable 
severity
After discharges on nerve 
stimulation and decrement 
on RNS
Worsen
Fluoxetine and quinidine; 
avoid AChE inhibitors
AChR kinetic disorder: 
fast channel syndrome
AChR subunit 
genes
AR; early onset; mild to severe; 
ptosis, EOM involvement; weakness 
and fatigue
Decremental response  
to RNS
Improve
AChE inhibitors; caution with 
3,4 DAP
Postsynaptic Disorders Involving Abnormal Clustering/Function of AChR
DOK 7
AR; limb girdle weakness with ptosis 
but no EOM involvement
Decremental response  
to RNS
Variable
Albuterol; ephedrine; may 
worsen with AChE inhibitors
Rapsyn
AR; early onset with hypotonia, 
respiratory failure, and 
arthrogryposis at birth to early adult 
onset resembling MG
Decremental response  
to RNS
Variable
Albuterol
Agrin
AR; limb girdle or distal weakness, 
apnea
Decremental response  
to RNS
Variable
Albuterol; may worsen with 
AChE inhibitors
MuSK
AR; congenital or childhood onset 
of ptosis, EOM and progressive limb 
girdle weakness
Decremental response  
to RNS
Variable
Variable response to AChE 
inhibitors and 3,4, DAP
Positive response to 
albuterol
LPR4
AR; congenital onset with hypotonia; 
ventilatory failure, mild ptosis, and 
EOM weakness
Decremental response  
to RNS
Worsen
Worsen with AChE inhibitors
Other Postsynaptic Disorders
Limb-girdle CMS with 
tubular aggregates
GFPT1; DPAGT1; 
ALG2;
ALG14;
DPAGT1
AR; limb girdle weakness usually 
without ptosis or EOM weakness; 
onset in infancy or early adult
Decremental response  
to RNS
Variable
Albuterol; ephedrine; variable 
response to AChE inhibitors 
and 3,4, DAP;
albuterol
Congenital muscular 
dystrophy with 
myasthenia
Plectin
AR; infantile or childhood onset of 
generalized weakness including 
ptosis and EOM; epidermolysis 
bullosa simplex; elevated CK
Decremental response  
to RNS
Variable
No response to AChE and 
3,4 DAP
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CHAT, choline acetyl transferase; CHT, sodium-dependent high-affinity choline transport 1; CMA, 
congenital myasthenic syndrome; COLQ, collaganic tail of endplate acetylcholinesterase; 3,4 DAP, 3,4-diaminopyridine; Dok7, downstream of tyrosine kinase 7; DPAGT1, 
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-dolichyl-phosphate N-acetylglucosamine phosphotransferase; GFPT1, glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase 1; LRP4, lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein 4; MuSK, muscle specific kinase; RNS, repetitive nerve stimulation
Source: From AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2016, p 627, Figure 26-2; with permission.
Search for Associated Conditions (Table 440-3)  Myasthenic 
patients have an increased incidence of several associated disorders. 
Thymic abnormalities occur in ~75% of AChR antibody–positive 
patients, as noted above. Neoplastic change (thymoma) may produce 
enlargement of the thymus, which is detected by chest computed 
tomography (CT). A thymic shadow on CT scan may normally be 
present through young adulthood, but enlargement of the thymus in 
a patient age >40 years is highly suspicious of thymoma. Hyperthy-
roidism occurs in 3–8% of patients and may aggravate the myasthenic 
weakness. Thyroid function tests should be obtained in all patients 
with suspected MG. Other autoimmune disorders, most commonly 
systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis, can coexist 
with MG; associations also occur with neuromyelitis optica, neuro-
myotonia, Morvan’s syndrome (encephalitis, insomnia, confusion, 
hallucinations, autonomic dysfunction, and neuromyotonia), rippling 
muscle disease, granulomatous myositis/myocarditis, and chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.
An infection of any kind can exacerbate typical MG, and should be 
sought carefully in patients with relapses. Because of the side effects of 
glucocorticoids and other immunotherapies used in the treatment of 
MG, a thorough medical investigation should be undertaken, searching 
specifically for evidence of chronic or latent infection (such as tubercu-
losis or hepatitis), hypertension, diabetes, renal disease, and glaucoma.
TREATMENT
Myasthenia Gravis
The prognosis has improved strikingly as a result of advances in 
treatment. Nearly all myasthenic patients can be returned to full 


--- PDF PAGE 3283 ---

CHAPTER 440 Myasthenia Gravis and Other Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction 
3237
productive lives with proper therapy. The most useful treatments 
for MG include anticholinesterase medications, immunosuppressive 
agents, thymectomy, plasmapheresis, and intravenous immunoglob-
ulin (IVIg) (Fig. 440-2).
ANTICHOLINESTERASE MEDICATIONS
Anticholinesterase medication produces at least partial improve-
ment in most myasthenic patients, although improvement is com-
plete in only a few. Patients with anti-MuSK MG generally obtain 
less benefit from anticholinesterase agents than those with AChR 
antibodies and may actually worsen. Pyridostigmine is the most 
widely used anticholinesterase drug and is initiated at a dosage 
of 30–60 mg three to four times daily. The beneficial action of oral 
pyridostigmine begins within 15–30 min and lasts for 3–4 h, but 
individual responses vary. The frequency and amount of the dose 
should be tailored to the patient’s individual requirements through-
out the day. For example, patients with weakness in chewing and 
swallowing may benefit by taking the medication before meals 
so that peak strength coincides with mealtimes. Long-acting pyri-
dostigmine may occasionally be useful to get the patient through 
the night but should not be used for daytime medication because of 
variable absorption. The maximum useful dose of pyridostigmine 
rarely exceeds 300 mg daily. Overdosage with anticholinesterase 
medication may cause increased weakness and other side effects. 
In some patients, muscarinic side effects of the anticholinesterase 
medication (diarrhea, abdominal cramps, salivation, nausea) may 
limit the dose tolerated. Atropine/diphenoxylate or loperamide is 
useful for the treatment of GI symptoms.
THYMECTOMY
Two separate issues should be distinguished: (1) surgical removal 
of thymoma, and (2) thymectomy as a treatment for MG. Surgical 
removal of a thymoma is necessary because of the possibility of local 
tumor spread, although most thymomas are histologically benign. 
Until recently there was a debate regarding the role of thymec-
tomy in non-thymotous MG, but a recent large international trial 
of extended transternal thymectomy in non-thymomatous AChR 
antibody positive, generalized MG demonstrated that participants 
who underwent thymectomy had improved strength and func-
tion, required less prednisone and additions of second line agents 
(e.g., azathioprine), and fewer hospitalizations for exacerbations. 
Whether or not less invasive thymectomy may be beneficial is 
unknown. Also, patients with ocular myasthenia, MuSK-positive, 
and seronegative MG were excluded from the study; retrospective 
and anecdotal evidence suggest that these patients may not benefit 
from thymectomy. Thymectomy should never be carried out as an 
emergency procedure, but only when the patient is adequately pre-
pared. If necessary, treatment with IVIg or plasmapheresis may be 
used before surgery to maximize strength in weak patients.
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
Immunosuppression using one or more of the available agents is 
effective in nearly all patients with MG. The choice of drugs or other 
immunomodulatory treatments should be guided by the relative 
benefits and risks for the individual patient and the urgency of 
treatment. It is helpful to develop a treatment plan based on short-
term, intermediate-term, and long-term objectives. For example, if 
immediate improvement is essential either because of the severity 
of weakness or because of the patient’s need to return to activity as 
soon as possible, IVIg should be administered or plasmapheresis 
should be undertaken. For the intermediate term, glucocorticoids 
and cyclosporine or tacrolimus generally produce clinical improve-
ment within a period of 1–3 months. The beneficial effects of 
azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil usually begin after many 
months (as long as a year), but these drugs have advantages for the 
long-term treatment of patients with MG. There is a growing body of 
evidence that rituximab is effective in many MG patients, especially 
those with MuSK antibody.
Glucocorticoid Therapy  Glucocorticoids, when used properly, pro-
duce improvement in myasthenic weakness in the great majority 
of patients. To minimize adverse side effects, prednisone should 
TABLE 440-3  Disorders Associated with Myasthenia Gravis and 
Recommended Laboratory Tests
Associated disorders
  Disorders of the thymus: thymoma, hyperplasia
  Other autoimmune neurological disorders: chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating polyneuropathy, neuromyelitis optica
  Other autoimmune disorders: Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Graves’ disease, 
rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, skin disorders, family 
history of autoimmune disorder
  Disorders or circumstances that may exacerbate myasthenia gravis: 
hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, occult infection, medical treatment for 
other conditions (see Table 440-4)
  Disorders that may interfere with therapy: tuberculosis, diabetes, peptic 
ulcer, gastrointestinal bleeding, renal disease, hypertension, asthma, 
osteoporosis, obesity
Recommended laboratory tests or procedures
  CT or MRI of chest
  Tests for antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor
  Thyroid function tests
  Testing for tuberculosis
  Fasting blood glucose, hemoglobin A1c
  Pulmonary function tests
  Bone densitometry
Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
Establish diagnosis unequivocally (see Table 440-1)
Search for associated conditions (see Table 440-3)
Ocular only
MRI of brain
  (if positive,
   reassess)
Anticholinesterase
  (pyridostigmine)
Anticholinesterase
  (pyridostigmine)
Evaluate for thymectomy
  (indications: thymoma or
  generalized MG);
  evaluate surgical risk, FVC
Crisis
Intensive care
  (tx respiratory
   infection; fluids)
Generalized
If unsatisfactory
Thymectomy
Good risk
  (good FVC)
Poor risk
  (low FVC)
If not
  improved
Immunosuppression
Evaluate clinical status; if indicated,
  go to immunosuppression
Improved
See text for short-term, intermediate,
and long-term treatments
Plasmapheresis
  or intravenous Ig
then
MANAGEMENT OF MG
FIGURE 440-2  Algorithm for the management of myasthenia gravis. FVC, forced 
vital capacity; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. 


--- PDF PAGE 3284 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3238
be given in a single dose rather than in divided doses throughout 
the day. In patients with only mild or moderate weakness, the 
initial dose should be relatively low (15–25 mg/d) to avoid the 
early weakening that occurs in perhaps 10–15% of patients treated 
initially with a high-dose regimen. The dose is increased stepwise, 
as tolerated by the patient (usually by 5 mg/d at 2–3 day intervals), 
until there is marked clinical improvement or a dose of 50–60 mg/d 
is reached. In patients with more severe weakness and those already 
in the hospital, starting at a high dose is reasonable. Patients are 
maintained on the dose that seems to control their symptoms for 
about a month, and then the dosage is slowly tapered (no faster than 
10 mg a month until on 20 mg daily and then by 2.5–5 mg a month) 
to determine the minimum effective dose, and close monitoring is 
required. Some patients are able to be managed without the addi-
tion of other immunotherapies. Patients on long-term glucocorti-
coid therapy must be followed carefully to prevent or treat adverse 
side effects. The most common errors in glucocorticoid treat-
ment of myasthenic patients include (1) insufficient persistence— 
improvement may be delayed and gradual; (2) tapering the dosage 
too early, too rapidly, or excessively; and (3) lack of attention to 
prevention and treatment of side effects.
The management of patients treated with glucocorticoids is  
discussed in Chap. 379.
Other Immunotherapies  Mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine, 
cyclosporine, tacrolimus, rituximab, and occasionally cyclophos-
phamide are effective in many patients, either alone or in various 
combinations.
Mycophenolate mofetil is widely used because of its presumed 
effectiveness and relative lack of side effects. A dose of 1–1.5 g bid 
is recommended. Its mechanism of action involves inhibition of 
purine synthesis by the de novo pathway. Since lymphocytes have 
only the de novo pathway, but lack the alternative salvage pathway 
that is present in all other cells, mycophenolate inhibits proliferation 
of lymphocytes but not proliferation of other cells. It does not kill 
or eliminate preexisting autoreactive lymphocytes, and therefore 
clinical improvement may be delayed for many months to a year, 
until the preexisting autoreactive lymphocytes die spontaneously. 
The advantage of mycophenolate lies in its relative lack of adverse 
side effects, with only occasional production of GI symptoms, rare 
development of leukopenia, and very small risks of malignancy or 
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy inherent in nearly all 
immunosuppressive treatments. Although two published studies 
did not show positive outcomes, most experts attribute the negative 
results to flaws in the trial designs, and mycophenolate is widely 
used for long-term treatment of myasthenic patients.
Azathioprine has long been used for MG and a randomized, clin-
ical trial demonstrated that it was effective in reducing the dosage of 
prednisone necessary to control symptoms. However, the beneficial 
effect of azathioprine can take a year or more to become evident. 
Approximately 10–15% of patients are unable to tolerate azathioprine 
because of idiosyncratic reactions consisting of flulike symptoms of 
fever and malaise, bone marrow suppression, or abnormalities of 
liver function. An initial dose of 50 mg/d is given for about a week 
to test for these side effects. If this dose is tolerated, it is increased 
gradually to about 2–3 mg/kg of total body weight, or until the white 
blood count falls to 3000–4000/μL. Allopurinol should never be used 
in combination with azathioprine because the two drugs share a 
common degradation pathway; the result may be severe bone mar-
row suppression due to increased effects of the azathioprine.
The calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine and tacrolimus seem to 
be effective in MG and appear to work more rapidly than azathio-
prine and mycophenolate. However, they are associated with more  
frequent severe side effects including hypertension and nephrotox-
icity. The usual dose of cyclosporine is 4–5 mg/kg per d, and the 
average dose of tacrolimus is 0.07–0.1 mg/kg per d, given in two 
equally divided doses. “Trough” blood levels are measured 12 h 
after the evening dose. The therapeutic range for the trough level 
of cyclosporine is 150–200 ng/L, and for tacrolimus, it is 5–15 ng/L.
Rituximab (Rituxan) is a monoclonal antibody that binds to the 
CD20 molecule on B lymphocytes. It has been widely used for the 
treatment of B cell lymphomas and has also proven successful in the 
treatment of several autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid 
arthritis, pemphigus, and some IgM-related neuropathies. There is 
an increasing literature on the benefit of rituximab in MG. It appears 
particularly effective in MuSK antibody–positive MG, although 
some patients with AChR antibody MG also respond. A large NIH 
sponsored trial is underway in AChR-positive MG. The usual dose is 
1 g IV on two occasions 2 weeks apart. Periodically, a repeat course 
needs to be administered; some MuSK patients go 2–3 years between 
infusions.
Eculizumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds membrane 
attack complex and was beneficial in a small pilot study of MG 
patients. The results of a large phase 3 clinical trial were recently 
published and largely  positive leading to recent FDA approval. The 
drug is administered intravenously every 2 weeks.
For the rare refractory MG patient, a course of high-dose cyclo-
phosphamide may induce long-lasting benefit by “rebooting” the 
immune system. At high doses, cyclophosphamide eliminates 
mature lymphocytes but spares hematopoietic precursors (stem 
cells), because they express the enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase, 
which hydrolyzes cyclophosphamide. This procedure is reserved 
for refractory patients and should be administered only in a facil-
ity fully familiar with this approach. Maintenance immunotherapy 
after rebooting is usually required to sustain the beneficial effect.
PLASMAPHERESIS AND INTRAVENOUS IMMUNOGLOBULIN
Plasmapheresis has been used therapeutically in MG. Plasma, which 
contains the pathogenic antibodies, is mechanically separated from 
the blood cells, which are returned to the patient. A course of five 
exchanges (3–4 L per exchange) is generally administered over a 
10- to 14-day period. Plasmapheresis produces a short-term reduc-
tion in anti-AChR antibodies, with clinical improvement in many 
patients. It is useful as a temporary expedient in seriously affected 
patients or to improve the patient’s condition prior to surgery (e.g., 
thymectomy).
The indications for the use of IVIg are the same as those for 
plasma exchange: to produce rapid improvement to help the patient 
through a difficult period of myasthenic weakness or prior to sur-
gery. This treatment has the advantages of not requiring special 
equipment or large-bore venous access. The usual dose is 2 g/kg, 
which is typically administered >2–5 days. Improvement occurs in 
~70% of patients, beginning during treatment or within a week, and 
continuing for weeks to months. The mechanism of action of IVIg is 
not known; the treatment has no consistent effect on the measurable 
amount of circulating AChR antibody. Adverse reactions are gen-
erally not serious but may include headache, fluid overload, and 
rarely aseptic meningitis or renal failure. IVIg or plasma exchange 
is occasionally used in combination with other immunosuppressive 
therapy for maintenance treatment of difficult MG.
MANAGEMENT OF MYASTHENIC CRISIS
Myasthenic crisis is defined as an exacerbation of weakness sufficient 
to endanger life; it usually includes ventilatory failure caused by 
diaphragmatic and intercostal muscle weakness. Treatment should 
be carried out in intensive care units staffed with teams experienced 
in the management of MG. The possibility that deterioration could 
be due to excessive anticholinesterase medication (“cholinergic 
crisis”) is best excluded by temporarily stopping anticholinesterase 
drugs. The most common cause of crisis is intercurrent infection. 
This should be treated immediately because the mechanical and 
immunologic defenses of the patient can be assumed to be compro-
mised. The myasthenic patient with fever and early infection should 
be treated like other immunocompromised patients. Early and 
effective antibiotic therapy, ventilatory assistance, and pulmonary 
physiotherapy are essentials of the treatment program. As discussed 
above, plasmapheresis or IVIg is frequently helpful in hastening 
recovery.


================================================================================
Ch441 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
Pages 3285-3299
================================================================================


--- PDF PAGE 3285 ---

CHAPTER 441 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
3239
DRUGS TO AVOID IN MYASTHENIC PATIENTS
Many drugs can potentially exacerbate weakness in patients with 
MG (Table 440-4). As a rule, the listed drugs should be avoided 
whenever possible.
■
■PATIENT ASSESSMENT
To evaluate the effectiveness of treatment as well as drug-induced side 
effects, it is important to assess the patient’s clinical status systematically 
at baseline and on repeated interval examinations. Spirometry with 
determination of forced vital capacity and mean inspiratory and expi-
ratory pressures are important to follow.
PROGNOSIS
Approximately 20% of patients with MG can be tapered off all immu-
notherapies and achieve a sustained remission. There does not appear 
to be a correlation with maximal disease severity and chance for remis-
sion. Thymectomy may increase the likelihood of achieving remission 
in anti-AChR MG, but the large randomized trial was too short in 
duration to examine this endpoint; rather, the results revealed only 
that thymectomy was efficacious and led to less use of glucocorticoids 
and second line agents. Mortality from MG diminished greatly during 
the twentieth century, changing from a “grave” illness with mortality 
of nearly 70% a century ago, to 2–30% by the 1950s, with contempo-
rary estimates in the 1–2% range. Anti-MuSK patients typically do not 
experience myasthenic crises, but are generally more difficult to treat 
than anti-AChR MG. However, as noted above, recent series suggest 
that rituximab is effective in this subgroup. Non-paraneoplastic LEMS 
is usually responsive to immunotherapy and symptomatic treatment 
with pyridostigmine and 3,4 DAP. In older adults, LEMS is most 
often paraneoplastic, and screening for an underlying tumor is indi-
cated. Recent studies suggest that survival in patients with LEMS has 
improved, for uncertain reasons and likely not due to earlier diagnosis 
and treatment of the tumor. There is wide variability in age of onset, 
severity, and prognosis of the many types of CMS.
GLOBAL ISSUES
The incidence of MG and its subtpes vary in different popula-
tions, for example occurring in ~2–10/106 individuals in the 
United States and the Netherlands, and up to 20/106 in Spain. 
Estimates of prevalence in different parts of the world range widely 
from 2–200/106. The age of onset may also be influenced by geograph-
ical and/or ethnic differences. Juvenile onset MG is uncommon in 
Western populations but may represent more than half of cases in 
Asians. MuSK MG appearts to be more common in the Mediterranean 
area of Europe than in northern Europe and is also more common in the 
northern regions of East Asia than in the southern regions.
■
■FURTHER READING
Amato AA, Russell JA: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill; 2016, pp. 581–655.
Beeson D: Congenital myasthenic syndromes: Recent advances. Curr 
Opin Neurol 29:565, 2016.
Garg N et al: Late presentations of congenital myasthenic syndromes: 
How many do we miss? Muscle Nerve 54:721, 2016.
Gilhus NE: Myasthenia Gravis. N Engl J Med 375:2570, 2016.
Howard JF Jr et al: Safety and efficacy of eculizumab in anti- 
acetylcholine receptor antibody-positive refractory generalised myas-
thenia gravis (REGAIN): A phase 3, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, multicentre study. Lancet Neurol 16:976, 2017.
Nicolle MW: Myasthenia gravis and Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syn-
drome. Continuum (Minneap Minn) 22(6, Muscle and neuromuscular 
junction disorders):1978, 2016.
Tandan R et al: Rituximab treatment of myasthenia gravis: A system-
atic review. Muscle Nerve 56:185, 2017.
Titulaer MJ et al: Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome: From clinical 
characteristics to therapeutic strategies. Lancet Neurol 10:1098, 2011.
Wolfe GI et al: Randomized trial of thymectomy in myasthenia gravis. 
N Engl J Med 375:511, 2016.
TABLE 440-4  Drugs with Interactions in Myasthenia Gravis (MG)
Drugs That May Exacerbate MG
Antibiotics
Aminoglycosides: e.g., streptomycin, tobramycin, kanamycin
Quinolones: e.g., ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, ofloxacin, gatifloxacin
Macrolides: e.g., erythromycin, azithromycin
Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants for surgery
d-Tubocurarine (curare), pancuronium, vecuronium, atracurium
Beta-blocking agents
Propranolol, atenolol, metoprolol
Local anesthetics and related agents
Procaine, Xylocaine in large amounts
Procainamide (for arrhythmias)
Botulinum toxin
Botox exacerbates weakness
Quinine derivatives
Quinine, quinidine, chloroquine, mefloquine (Lariam)
Magnesium
Decreases acetylcholine release
Penicillamine
May cause MG
Check point inhibitors
May cause MG and other autoimmune neuromuscular disorders (e.g., 
myositis, inflammatory neuropathy)
Drugs with Important Interactions in MG
Cyclosporine and Tacrolimus
Broad range of drug interactions, which may raise or lower levels.
Azathioprine
Avoid allopurinol—combination may result in myelosuppression.
VIDEO 440-1  Myasthenia gravis and other diseases of the neuromuscular junction.
Myopathies are disorders with structural changes or functional impair-
ment of muscle and can be differentiated from other diseases of the 
motor unit (e.g., lower motor neuron or neuromuscular junction 
pathologies) by characteristic clinical and laboratory findings. Myas-
thenia gravis and related disorders are discussed in Chap. 440; 
inflammatory myopathies are discussed in Chap. 358.
■
■CLINICAL FEATURES
The most important aspect of assessing individuals with neuromus-
cular disorders is taking a thorough history of the patient’s symp-
toms, disease progression, past medical and family history as well 
as performing a detailed neurologic examination. Based on this and 
additional laboratory workup (e.g., serum creatine kinase [CK], elec-
tromyography [EMG]) one can usually localize the site of the lesion to 
muscle (as opposed to motor neurons, peripheral nerves, or neuromus-
cular junction) and the pattern of muscle involvement. It is this pattern 
of muscle involvement which is most useful in narrowing the differen-
tial diagnosis (Table 441-1). Most myopathies present with proximal, 
symmetric limb weakness with preserved reflexes and sensation. 
However, asymmetric and predominantly distal weakness can be seen 
in some myopathies. An associated sensory loss suggests a peripheral 
441 Muscular Dystrophies and 
Other Muscle Diseases
Anthony A. Amato, Robert H. Brown, Jr. 


--- PDF PAGE 3286 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3240
neuropathy or a central nervous system (CNS) abnormality (e.g., mye-
lopathy) rather than a myopathy. On occasion, disorders affecting the 
motor nerve cell bodies in the spinal cord (anterior horn cell disease), 
the neuromuscular junction, or peripheral nerves can mimic findings 
of myopathy.
Muscle Weakness  Symptoms of muscle weakness can be either 
intermittent or persistent. Disorders causing intermittent weakness 
(Table 441-1 and Fig. 441-1) include myasthenia gravis, periodic 
paralyses (hypokalemic or hyperkalemic), and metabolic energy defi-
ciencies of glycolysis (especially myophosphorylase deficiency), fatty 
acid utilization (carnitine palmitoyltransferase [CPT] deficiency), and 
some mitochondrial myopathies. The states of energy deficiency cause 
activity-related muscle breakdown accompanied by myoglobinuria.
Most muscle disorders cause persistent weakness (Table 441-1 and 
Fig. 441-2). In the majority of these, including most types of muscular 
dystrophy, polymyositis, and dermatomyositis, the proximal muscles 
are weaker than the distal and are symmetrically affected, and the 
facial muscles are spared, a pattern referred to as limb-girdle weakness. 
The differential diagnosis is more restricted for other patterns of weak-
ness. Facial weakness (difficulty with eye closure and impaired smile) 
and scapular winging (Fig. 441-3) are characteristic of facioscapulohu-
meral dystrophy (FSHD). Facial and distal limb weakness associated 
with hand grip myotonia is virtually diagnostic of myotonic dystrophy 
type 1. When other cranial nerve muscles are weak, causing ptosis or 
extraocular muscle weakness, the most important disorders to consider 
include neuromuscular junction disorders, oculopharyngeal muscu-
lar dystrophy, mitochondrial myopathies, or some of the congenital 
myopathies (Table 441-1). A pathognomonic pattern characteristic of 
inclusion body myositis is atrophy and weakness of the flexor forearm 
(e.g., wrist and finger flexors) and quadriceps muscles that is often 
asymmetric. Less frequently, but important diagnostically, is the pres-
ence of a dropped head syndrome indicative of selective neck exten-
sor muscle weakness. The most important neuromuscular diseases 
associated with this pattern of weakness include myasthenia gravis, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, late-onset core or nemaline rod myopa-
thy, hyperparathyroidism, focal myositis, and some forms of inclusion 
body myopathy. A final pattern, recognized because of preferential 
distal extremity weakness, is seen in the distal myopathies.
It is important to examine functional capabilities to help disclose 
certain patterns of weakness (Table 441-1 and Table 441-2). The Gower 
sign (Fig. 441-4) is particularly useful. Observing the gait of an indi-
vidual may disclose a lordotic posture caused by combined trunk and 
hip weakness, frequently exaggerated by toe walking (Fig. 441-5). A 
waddling gait is caused by the inability of weak hip muscles to prevent 
hip drop or hip dip. Hyperextension of the knee (genu recurvatum or 
back-kneeing) is characteristic of quadriceps muscle weakness; and a 
steppage gait, due to footdrop, accompanies distal weakness.
Late onset central core (RYR1 mutations)
Sporadic lat onset nemaline rod with or without a monoclonal gammopathy
Metabolic (late onset Pompe, McArdle disease, lipid storage, mitochondrial)
Hyperparathyroidism/ostemalacia/vitamin D deficiency
Myasthenia gravis
Eye Muscle Weakness (Ptosis/Ophthalmoparesis)
Ptosis without ophthalmoparesis
  Myotonic dystrophy
  Congenital myopathies
  Neuromuscular junction disorders
Ptosis with ophthalmoparesis
  Oculopharyngeal dystrophy
  Mitochondrial myopathy
  hIBM type 3
  Neuromuscular junction disorders
Episodic Weakness or Myoglobinuria
Related to exercise
  Glycogenoses (e.g., McArdle disease, etc.)
  Lipid disorders (e.g., CPT2 deficiency)
  Mitochondrial myopathies (e.g., cytrochrome B deficiency)
Not Related to Exercise
  Malignant hyperthermia
  Drugs/toxins (e.g., statins)
  Prolonged/intensive eccentric exercise
  Inflammatory (e.g., PM/DM—rare, viral/bacterial infections)
Delayed or unrelated to exercise
  Periodic paralysis (e.g., hereditary hyper- or hyokalemic, thyrotoxic, 
associated renal tubular acidosis, acquired electrolyte imbalance)
  NMJ disorders
Muscle Stiffness/Decreased Ability To Relax
Myotonic dystrophy 1 and 2
Myotonia congenita
Paramyotonia congenita
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis with myotonia
Potassium aggravated myotonia
Schwartz-Jampel syndrome
Other: rippling muscle disease (acquired and hereditary), acquired 
neuromyotonia (Isaacs syndrome), stiff-person syndrome, Brody disease
 
Proximal (Limb-Girdle) Weakness
Most dystrophies (e.g., dystrophinophies, limb-girdle, myotonic dystrophy  
type 2, rare FSHD)
Congenital myopathies (e.g., central core, multiminicore, centronuclear, 
nemaline rod)
Metabolic myopathies (e.g., glycogen and lipid storage diseases)
Mitochondrial myopathies
Inflammatory myopathies (DM, PM, IMNM)
Toxic myopathies (see Table 441-6)
Endocrine myopathies
Neuromuscular junction disorders (myasthenia gravis, LEMS, congenital 
myasthenia, botulism, see Chap. 440)
Distal Weakness
Distal muscular dystrophies/myofibrillar myopathy (see Table 441-5)
Congenital myopathies (e.g., late onset centronuclear and nemaline rod 
myopathies)
Metabolic
  Glygogen storage disease (e.g., brancher and debrancher deficiency, rarely 
McArdle disease)
  Lipid storage disease (e.g., neutral lipid storage myopathy, 
multiacyldehydrogenase deficiency)
NMJ disorders (e.g., rare myasthenia gravis and congenital myasthenia)
Proximal Arm/Distal Leg Weakness (Scapuloperoneal or 
Humeroperonal) Weakness
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD)
Scapuloperoneal myopathy and neuropathy
Myofibrillar myopathies
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD)
Bethlem myopathy
Distal Arm/Proximal Leg Weakness
Inclusion body myositis (usually wrist and finger flexors in arms, hip flexors 
and knee extensors in legs, and asymmetric)
Myotonic dystrophy (uncommon presentation)
Axial Muscle Weakness
Inflammatory (cervico-brachial myositis)
sIBM and hIBM
Myotonic dystrophy 2
Isolated neck extensor myopathy/bent spine syndrome
FSHD
Myopathies by Pattern of Weakness/Muscle Involvement
TABLE 441-1


--- PDF PAGE 3287 ---

CHAPTER 441 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
3241
Intermittent weakness
Myoglobinuria
Variable weakness includes
  EOMs, ptosis, bulbar and limb muscles
Yes
No
Exam normal between attacks
Proximal > distal weakness during attacks
Exam usually normal between attacks
Proximal > distal weakness during attacks
Forearm exercise
DNA test confirms diagnosis
Low potassium
level
Normal or elevated
  potassium level
Hypokalemic PP
Hyperkalemic PP
Paramyotonia congenita
Reduced lactic acid rise
Consider glycolytic defect
Normal lactic acid rise
Consider CPT deficiency
or other fatty acid
metabolism disorders
No
Yes
AChR or Musk AB positive
Acquired seropositive
MG
Check chest CT
for thymoma
Lambert-Eaton
myasthenic syndrome
Check:
 Voltage gated Ca
 channel Abs
 Chest CT for lung Ca
Yes
No
Yes
No
Decrement on 2–3 Hz repetitive
nerve stimulation (RNS) or
increased jitter on single fiber
EMG (SFEMG)
Consider:
 Seronegative MG
 Congenital
 myasthenia*
 Psychosomatic
 weakness**
*Genetic testing
  (Chap. 440)
**If Abs, RNS, SFEMG
  are all normal or negative
EKG
Abnormal
Check for dysmorphic
features
Genetic testing for
Anderson-Tawil syndrome
Normal
Myotonia on exam
Genetic testing
No diagnosis
Muscle biopsy
FIGURE 441-1  Diagnostic evaluation of intermittent weakness. AChR AB, acetylcholine receptor antibody; CPT, carnitine palmitoyltransferase; EOMs, extraocular 
muscles; MG, myasthenia gravis; PP, periodic paralysis.
Persistent Weakness
Patterns of Weakness on Neurologic Exam
Myopathic EMG confirms muscle disease and excludes ALS
Repetitive nerve stimulation abnormalities suggest a neuromuscular
junction disorder (e.g., MG, LEMS, botulism)
CK elevation supports myopathy
May need DNA testing for further distinction of inherited myopathies
Muscle biopsy will help distinguish many disorders
Proximal > distal
  IMNM; PM; DM;
 
muscular
    dystrophies;
 
mitochondrial
 
and metabolic
 
myopathies;
 
toxic, endocrine
 
myopathies
Facial, distal, 
  quadriceps;
  handgrip myotonia
  Myotonic muscular
    dystrophy
Proximal & distal
(hand grip), and
quadriceps
 IBM
Ptosis, EOMs
  OPMD;
  mitochondrial
  myopathy;
  myotubular
  myopathy
Facial and
scapular winging
 (FSHD)
Dropped head/
Axial
  MG; PM; ALS;
 hyperpara-
 thyroid;
  Axial myopathy
Distal
  Distal myopathy
  (see Table
  441-1)
FIGURE 441-2  Diagnostic evaluation of persistent weakness. Examination reveals one of seven patterns of weakness. The pattern of weakness in combination 
with the laboratory evaluation leads to a diagnosis. ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; CK, creatine kinase; DM, dermatomyositis; EMG, electromyography; EOMs, 
extraocular muscles; FSHD, facioscapulohumeral dystrophy; IBM, inclusion body myositis; IMNM, immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy; MG, myasthenia gravis; 
OPMD, oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy; PM, polymyositis.
Any disorder causing muscle weakness may be accompanied by 
fatigue, referring to an inability to maintain or sustain a force (pathologic 
fatigability). This condition must be differentiated from asthenia, a type 
of fatigue caused by excess tiredness or lack of energy. Associated symp-
toms may help differentiate asthenia and pathologic fatigability. Asthe-
nia is often accompanied by a tendency to avoid physical activities, 
complaints of daytime sleepiness, necessity for frequent naps, and diffi-
culty concentrating on activities such as reading. There may be feelings 
of overwhelming stress and depression. In contrast, pathologic fatigabil-
ity occurs in disorders of neuromuscular transmission and in disorders 
altering energy production, including defects in glycolysis, lipid metab-
olism, or mitochondrial energy production. Pathologic fatigability also 
occurs in chronic myopathies because of difficulty accomplishing a task 
with less muscle. Pathologic fatigability is accompanied by abnormal 
clinical or laboratory findings. Fatigue without those supportive fea-
tures almost never indicates a primary muscle disease.
Muscle Pain (Myalgias), Cramps, and Stiffness 
Some 
myopathies can be associated with muscle pain, cramps, contractures, 
stiff or rigid muscles, or inability to relax the muscles (e.g., myotonia) 
(Table 441-1). Muscle cramps are abrupt in onset, short in duration, 
triggered by voluntary muscle contraction, and may cause abnormal 
posturing of the joint. Muscle cramps often occur in neurogenic disor-
ders, especially motor neuron disease (Chap. 429), radiculopathies and 
polyneuropathies (Chap. 438), but are not a feature of most primary 
muscle diseases.


--- PDF PAGE 3288 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3242
A muscle contracture is different from a muscle cramp. In both con-
ditions, the muscle becomes hard, but a contracture is associated with 
energy failure in glycolytic disorders. The muscle is unable to relax 
after an active muscle contraction. The EMG shows electrical silence. 
Confusion is created because contracture also refers to a muscle that 
cannot be passively stretched to its proper length (fixed contracture) 
because of fibrosis. In some muscle disorders, especially in Emery- 
Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and Bethlem myopathy, fixed contrac-
tures occur early and represent distinctive features of the disease.
Myotonia is a condition of prolonged muscle contraction followed 
by slow muscle relaxation. It always follows muscle activation (action 
myotonia), usually voluntary, but may be elicited by mechanical stim-
ulation (percussion myotonia) of the muscle. Myotonia typically causes 
difficulty in releasing objects after a firm grasp. In myotonic muscular 
dystrophy type 1 (DM1), distal weakness usually accompanies myoto-
nia, whereas in DM2, proximal muscles are more affected. Myotonia 
also occurs with myotonia congenita (a chloride channel disorder), but in 
this condition muscle weakness is not prominent. Myotonia may also 
be seen in individuals with sodium channel mutations (hyperkalemic 
periodic paralysis or potassium-sensitive myotonia). Another sodium chan-
nelopathy, paramyotonia congenita (PC), also is associated with muscle 
stiffness. In contrast to other disorders associated with myotonia in 
which the myotonia is eased by repetitive activity, PC is named for a 
FIGURE 441-3  Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy with prominent scapular winging.
paradoxical phenomenon whereby the myotonia worsens with repet-
itive activity. Potassium-aggravated myotonia is an allelic disorder in 
which myotonia is brought on by consumption of too much potassium-
containing foods.
Muscle stiffness can refer to different phenomena. Some patients 
with inflammation of joints and periarticular surfaces feel stiff. This 
condition is different from the disorders of hyperexcitable motor nerves 
causing stiff or rigid muscles. In stiff-person syndrome, spontaneous 
discharges of the motor neurons of the spinal cord cause involuntary 
muscle contractions mainly involving the axial (trunk) and proximal 
lower extremity muscles. The gait becomes stiff and labored, with 
hyperlordosis of the lumbar spine. Superimposed episodic muscle 
spasms are precipitated by sudden movements, unexpected noises, 
and emotional upset. The muscles relax during sleep. Serum antibod-
ies against glutamic acid decarboxylase are present in approximately 
two-thirds of cases. In acquired neuromyotonia (Isaacs syndrome), there is 
hyperexcitability of the peripheral nerves manifesting as continuous 
muscle fiber activity in the form of widespread fasciculations and 
myokymia with impaired muscle relaxation. Muscles of the leg are stiff, 
and the constant contractions of the muscle cause increased sweating of 
the extremities. This peripheral nerve hyperexcitability is mediated by 
antibodies that target voltage-gated potassium channels.
TABLE 441-2  Observations on Examination That Disclose  
Muscle Weakness
FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT
MUSCLE WEAKNESS
Inability to forcibly close eyes
Upper facial muscles
Impaired pucker
Lower facial muscles
Inability to raise head from prone 
position
Neck extensor muscles
Inability to raise head from supine 
position
Neck flexor muscles
Inability to raise arms above head
Proximal arm muscles (may be only 
scapular stabilizing muscles)
Inability to walk without 
hyperextending knee (back-kneeing or 
genu recurvatum)
Knee extensor muscles
Inability to walk with heels touching 
the floor (toe walking)
Shortening of the Achilles tendon
Inability to lift foot while walking 
(steppage gait or footdrop)
Anterior compartment of leg
Inability to walk without a waddling 
gait
Hip muscles
Inability to get up from the floor 
without climbing up the extremities 
(Gowers’ sign)
Hip, thigh, and trunk muscles
Inability to get up from a chair without 
using arms
Hip muscles
FIGURE 441-4  Gowers sign showing a patient using his arms to climb up the legs 
in attempting to get up from the floor.


--- PDF PAGE 3289 ---

CHAPTER 441 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
3243
There are two painful muscle conditions of particular importance, 
neither of which is associated with muscle weakness. Fibromyalgia is a 
common, yet poorly understood myofascial pain syndrome in which 
patients complain of severe muscle pain and tenderness, severe fatigue, 
and often poor sleep. Serum CK, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 
EMG, and muscle biopsy are normal (Chap. 366). Polymyalgia rheu-
matica occurs mainly in patients aged >50 years and is characterized 
by stiffness and pain in the shoulders, lower back, hips, and thighs 
(Chap. 356). The ESR and CRP are elevated, while serum CK, EMG, 
and muscle biopsy are normal.
Muscle Enlargement and Atrophy  In most myopathies mus-
cle tissue is replaced by fat and connective tissue, but the size of the 
muscle is usually not affected. However, in many limb-girdle mus-
cular dystrophies, enlarged calf muscles are typical. The enlargement 
represents true muscle hypertrophy; thus the term pseudohypertrophy 
should be avoided when referring to these patients. The calf muscles 
remain very strong even late in the course of these disorders. Muscle 
enlargement can also result from infiltration by sarcoid granulomas, 
amyloid deposits, bacterial and parasitic infections, and focal myosi-
tis. In contrast, muscle atrophy is characteristic of other myopathies. 
In dysferlinopathies (LGMD2B) and anoctaminopathies (LGMD2L), 
there is a predilection for early atrophy of the gastrocnemius muscles, 
particularly the medial aspect. Atrophy of the humeral muscles is char-
acteristic of FSHD and EDMD.
■
■LABORATORY EVALUATION
Various tests can be used to evaluate a suspected myopathy, including 
CK levels, endocrine studies (e.g, thyroid function tests, parathyroid 
hormone and vitamin D levels), autoantibodies (associated with myo-
sitis and systemic disorders), forearm exercise test, muscle biopsy, and 
genetic testing. Electrodiagnostic studies can be useful to differentiate 
FIGURE 441-5  Lordotic posture, exaggerated by standing on toes, associated 
with trunk and hip weakness.
muscle disorders from other motor unit diseases but in most instances 
do not help distinguish the specific type of myopathy.
Serum Enzymes  CK is the most sensitive measure of muscle 
damage. The MM isoenzyme predominates in skeletal muscle, whereas 
creatine kinase-myocardial bound (CK-MB) is the marker for cardiac 
muscle. Serum CK can be elevated in normal individuals without 
provocation, presumably on a genetic basis or after strenuous activity, 
trauma, a prolonged muscle cramp, or a generalized seizure. Aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aldolase, and 
lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) are enzymes sharing an origin in both 
muscle and liver. Problems arise when the levels of these enzymes 
are found to be elevated in a routine screening battery, leading to the 
erroneous assumption that liver disease is present when in fact muscle 
could be the cause. An elevated γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) helps 
to establish a liver origin because this enzyme is not found in muscle.
Electrodiagnostic Studies  EMG, repetitive nerve stimulation, 
and nerve conduction studies (NCS) (Chap. 438) are helpful in dif-
ferentiating myopathies from neuropathies and neuromuscular junc-
tion diseases. Routine NCS are typically normal in myopathies but 
reduced amplitudes of compound muscle action potentials may be 
seen in atrophied muscles. The needle EMG may reveal irritability on 
needle insertion and spontaneously that is suggestive of a necrotizing 
myopathy (inflammatory myopathies, dystrophies, toxic myopathies, 
myotonic myopathies), whereas a lack of irritability is characteristic of 
long-standing myopathic disorders (muscular dystrophies with severe 
fibro-fatty replacement, endocrine myopathies, disuse atrophy, and 
many of the metabolic myopathies). In addition, the EMG may demon-
strate myotonic discharges that will narrow the differential diagnosis 
(Table 441-1). Another important EMG finding is the presence of short-
duration, small-amplitude, polyphasic motor unit action potentials 
(MUAPs). In myopathies, the MUAPs fire early but at a normal rate to 
compensate for the loss of individual muscle fibers, whereas in neuro-
genic disorders the MUAPs fire faster. An EMG is usually normal in 
steroid or disuse myopathy, both of which are associated with type 2 
fiber atrophy; this is because the EMG preferentially assesses the phys-
iologic function of type 1 fibers. The EMG can supplement the clinical 
examination in choosing an appropriately affected muscle to biopsy.
Genetic Testing  This is increasingly available and is the gold 
standard for diagnosing patients with hereditary myopathies.
Forearm Exercise Test  With exercise-induced muscle pain and 
myoglobinuria, there may be a defect in glycolysis. For safety, the 
test should not be performed under ischemic conditions to avoid an 
unnecessary insult to the muscle, causing rhabdomyolysis. The test is 
performed by placing a small indwelling catheter into an antecubital 
vein. A baseline blood sample is obtained for lactic acid and ammonia. 
The forearm muscles are exercised by asking the patient to vigorously 
open and close the hand for 1 min. Blood is then obtained at intervals of 
1, 2, 4, 6, and 10 min for comparison with the baseline sample. A three- 
to fourfold rise of lactic acid is typical. The simultaneous measurement 
of ammonia serves as a control because it should also rise with exercise. 
In patients with myophosphorylase deficiency and certain other glyco-
lytic defects, the lactic acid rise will be absent or below normal, while 
the rise in ammonia will reach control values. If there is lack of effort, 
neither lactic acid nor ammonia will rise. Patients with selective failure 
to increase ammonia may have myoadenylate deaminase deficiency. 
This condition has been reported to be a cause of myoglobinuria, but 
deficiency of this enzyme in asymptomatic individuals makes interpre-
tation controversial.
Muscle Biopsy  Muscle biopsy is extremely helpful in evaluation 
of acquired myopathies but is performed less frequently in suspected 
hereditary myopathies as genetic testing has become more widely 
available. Almost any superficial muscle can be biopsied, but it is 
important to biopsy one that is affected clinically but not too severely 
(for example grade 4 out of 5 strength or movement against moderate 
resistance by manual muscle testing [Chap. 415]). A specific diagnosis 
can be established in many disorders.


--- PDF PAGE 3290 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3244 HEREDITARY MYOPATHIES
Muscular dystrophy refers to a group of hereditary progressive diseases 
each with unique phenotypic and genetic features (Tables 441-3, 441-4, 
441-5, and Fig. 441-6). The prognosis of dystrophies is slow progressive 
weakness, though the severity and course is variable between and 
even within subtypes. Some are associated with cardiac and ventila-
tory muscle involvement, which are the leading cause of mortality. 
Unfortunately, there are no specific medical therapies for most of the 
muscular dystrophies and treatment is aimed at maintaining function 
with physical and occupational therapy. Non-invasive ventilation and 
tracheostomy may be warranted. Those with cardiomyopathy may 
require afterload reduction, antiarrhythmic agents, pacemakers or 
intracardiac defibrillators, and occasionally cardiac transplantation. We 
will focus primarily on those that manifest in adulthood.
■
■DUCHENNE AND BECKER MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY 
(DMD AND BMD)
DMD and BMD are X-linked recessive muscular dystrophies caused by 
mutations in the dystrophin gene. Affecting 1/3,000 male births, DMD 
is the most common mutational disease affecting boys. The incidence 
of BMD is ~5 per 100,000.
Clinical Features 
Proximal muscles, especially of the lower 
extremities, are prominently involved in both disorders. This becomes 
evident in DMD very early; boys with DMD have difficulty climbing 
stairs and never run well. As the disease progresses, weakness becomes 
more generalized. Hypertrophy of muscles, particularly in the calves, 
is an early and prominent finding. Most patients with BMD first expe-
rience difficulties between ages 5 and 15 years, although onset in the 
third or fourth decade or even later can occur. Life expectancy for DMD 
and BMD is reduced, but most BMD cases survive into the fourth or 
fifth decade. Mental retardation may occur in both disorders, but is less 
common in BMD. Cardiac involvement is common in both DMD and 
BMD and may result in heart failure; some BMD patients manifest with 
only heart failure. Other less common presentations of dystrophinop-
athy are asymptomatic hyper-CK-emia, myalgias without weakness, 
and myoglobinuria.
Laboratory Features  Serum CK levels are usually elevated. Mus-
cle biopsies demonstrate dystrophic features. Western blot analysis of 
muscle biopsy samples demonstrate absent dystrophin in DMD, or 
reduction in levels or size of dystrophin in BMD. In both disorders, 
mutations can be established using DNA from peripheral blood 
leukocytes. In most cases, muscle biopsies are no longer performed 
when DMD or BMD is suspected, as genetic testing is less invasive, 
less costly, and routinely available. Deletions within or duplica-
tions of the dystrophin gene are common in both DMD and BMD; in 
~95% of cases, the mutation does not alter the translational reading 
frame of messenger RNA. These “in-frame” mutations allow for pro-
duction of some dystrophin, which accounts for the presence of altered 
rather than absent dystrophin on Western blot analysis and a milder 
clinical phenotype.
TREATMENT
Duchenne and Becker Muscular Dystrophy
Glucocorticoids slow progression in DMD but their use has not been 
adequately studied in Becker dystrophy. Physical and occupational 
therapy are important in helping maintain function. As patients 
TABLE 441-3  Autosomal Dominant Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMDs)
DISEASE
CLINICAL FEATURES
LABORATORY FEATURES
ABNORMAL PROTEIN
LGMD1A
Onset second to eighth decade
Serum CK 2× normal
Myotilin
Muscle weakness affects proximal and distal limb muscles, 
vocal cords, and pharyngeal muscles
EMG myopathic and may have pseudomotonic 
discharges
Muscle biopsy: features of MFM
LGMD1B
Onset first or second decade
Serum CK 3–5× normal
Lamin A/C
Proximal lower limb weakness and cardiomyopathy with 
conduction defects
EMG myopathic
Some cases indistinguishable from Emery-Dreifuss 
muscular dystrophy with joint contractures
LGMD1C
Onset in early childhood
Serum CK 4–25× normal
Caveolin-3
Proximal weakness
EMG myopathic
Gower sign, calf hypertrophy, rippling muscles
Exercise-related muscle cramps
LGMD1D
Onset second to sixth decade
Serum CK 2–3× normal
DNAJB6
Proximal and distal muscle weakness
EMG myopathic
Muscle biopsy: features of MFM
LGMD1E
Onset first to sixth decade
Serum CK 2–4× normal
Desmin
Proximal or distal muscle weakness
EMG myopathic and may have pseudomotonic 
discharges
Cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias
Muscle biopsy: features of MFM
LGMD1F
Onset infancy to sixth decade
Proximal or distal weakness
May have early contractures resembling Emery-Dreifuss 
syndrome
Serum CK normal to 20× normal
EMG myopathic
Muscle biopsy may show enlarged nuclei with 
central pallor, rimmed vacuoles, and filamentous 
inclusions
TNPO3
LGMD1G
Onset teens to sixth decade
Proximal weakness contractures of fingers and toes
Muscle biopsies show rimmed vaculoes
CK normal to 9× normal
HNRNPDL
LGMD1H
Onset teens to sixth decade. Proximal weakness
Muscle biopsy with many COX negative/SDH 
positive fibers
LGMD1I
Onset in teens to eighties, proximal weakness, scapular 
winging
Allelic to LGMD2A but milder phenotype
CK normal to 50× normal 
EMG myopathic
Calpain-3
Abbreviations: CK, creatine kinase; EMG, electromyography; MFM, myofibrillar myopathy; NCS, nerve conduction studies; HNRNPDL, heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein D-like protein.


--- PDF PAGE 3291 ---

CHAPTER 441 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
3245
TABLE 441-4  Autosomal Recessive Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMDs)
DISEASE
CLINICAL FEATURES
LABORATORY FEATURES
ABNORMAL PROTEIN
LGMD2A
Onset first or second decade
Serum CK 3–15× normal
Calpain-3
Scapular winging; no calf hypertrophy; no cardiac or respiratory 
muscle weakness
EMG myopathic
Proximal and distal weakness; may have contractures at elbows, 
wrists, and fingers
Muscle biopsy may show lobulated muscle 
fibers
LGMD2B
Onset second or third decade
Serum CK 3–100× normal
Dysferlin
Proximal muscle weakness at onset, later distal (calf) muscles 
affected
EMG myopathic
Miyoshi’s myopathy is variant of LGMD2B with calf muscles 
affected at onset
Inflammation on muscle biopsy may 
simulate polymyositis
LGMD2C–F
Onset in childhood to teenage years
Serum CK 5–100× normal
γ, α, β, δ sarcoglycans
Clinical condition similar to Duchenne and Becker muscular 
dystrophies
EMG myopathic
Cognitive function normal
LGMD2G
Onset age 10–15
Serum CK 3–17× normal
Telethonin
Proximal and distal muscle weakness
EMG myopathic
Muscle biopsy may show rimmed vacuoles
LGMD2H
Onset first to third decade
Serum CK 2–25× normal
TRIM32 gene
Allelic to sarcotubular congenital myopathy
Proximal muscle weakness
EMG myopathic
Muscle biopsy reveals dilated T-tubules
LGMD2I
Onset first to third decade
Serum CK 10–30× normal
Fukutin-related protein
Clinical condition similar to Duchenne or Becker dystrophies
EMG myopathic
Cardiomyopathy and respiratory failure may occur early before 
significant weakness
Cognitive function normal
LGMD2Ja
Onset first to third decade
Serum CK 1.5–2× normal
Titin
Proximal lower limb weakness
EMG myopathic
Mild distal weakness
Muscle biopsy reveals rimmed vacuoles
Progressive weakness causes loss of ambulation
LGMD2K
Usually presents in infancy as Walker-Warburg syndrome but can 
present in early adult life with proximal weakness and only minor 
CNS abnormalities
CK 10–20× normal
EMG myopathic
POMT1
LGMD2L
Presents in childhood or adult life
CK 8–20× normal
Anoctamin 5
May manifest with quadriceps atrophy and myalgia
EMG myopathic
Some present with early involvement of the calves in the 
second decade of life, resembling Miyoshi myopathy type 1 
(dysferlinopathy)
LGMD2M
Usually presents in infancy as Fukuyama congenital muscular 
dystrophy but can present in early adult life with proximal 
weakness and only minor CNS abnormalities
CK 10–50× normal
EMG myopathic
Fukutin
LGMD2N
Usually presents in infancy as muscle-eye-brain disease but can 
present in early adult life with proximal weakness and only minor 
CNS abnormalities
CK 5–20× normal
EMG myopathic
POMGnT1
LGMD2O
Usually presents in infancy as Walker-Warburg syndrome but can 
present in early adult life with proximal weakness and only minor 
CNS abnormalities
CK 5–20× normal
EMG myopathic
POMT2
LGMD2P
One case reported presenting in early childhood
CK >10× normal
α-Dystroglycan
LGMD2Q
Onset in infancy to fourth decade; proximal weakness; may have 
ptosis and extraocular weakness; epidermolysis bullosa (also 
considered a congenital myasthenic syndrome)
CK variable, but usually only mildly elevated
EMG myopathic
Repetitive nerve stimulation may show 
decrement
Plectin 1
LGMD2R
See LGMD1E (Table 441-6)
See LGMD1E
Desmin
LGMD2S
Onset in infancy to sixth decade
Proximal weakness
Eye abnormalities common; truncal ataxia and chorea
Mild to moderate intellectual disability
Hutterite descent
CK 1.5–20× normal
TRAPC11
LGMD2T
Onset in early childhood to fourth decade
Proximal weakness
CNS abnormalities, cataracts, cardiomyopathy, and neuromuscular 
junction dysfunction
CK3-> 10× normal
EMG myopathic
GMPPB
aUdd type distal myopathy is a form of titin deficiency with only distal muscle weakness (see Table 441-9).
Abbreviations: CK, creatine kinase; EMG, electromyography; GMPPB; guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-mannose pyrophosphorylase B; NCS, nerve conduction studies; 
POMGNT1, O-linked mannose beta 1,2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase; POMT1, protein-O-mannosyltransferase 1; POMT2, protein-O-mannosyltransferase 2;  
TNPO3, transportin 3; TRAPC11, transport (trafficking) protein particle complex, subunit 11.


--- PDF PAGE 3292 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3246
TABLE 441-5  Distal Myopathies
DISEASE
CLINICAL FEATURES
LABORATORY FEATURES
ABNORMAL PROTEIN
Welander distal myopathy
Onset in fifth decade
Weakness begins in hands
Slow progression with spread to distal 
lower extremities
Lifespan normal
Serum CK 2–3× normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Muscle biopsy shows dystrophic 
features and rimmed vacuoles
AD
TIA1
Tibial muscular dystrophy (Udd)
Onset fourth to eighth decade
Distal lower extremity weakness (tibial 
distribution)
Upper extremities usually normal
Lifespan normal
Serum CK 2–4× normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Muscle biopsy shows dystrophic 
features and rimmed vacuoles
Titin absent in M-line of muscle
AD
Titin
AR (associated with more proximal 
weakness—LGMD2J)
Markesbery-Griggs distal myopathy
Onset fourth to eighth decade
Distal lower extremity weakness (tibial 
distribution) with progression to distal 
arms and proximal muscles
Serum CK is usually mildly elevated
EMG reveals irritative myopathy
Muscle biopsies demonstrate rimmed 
vacuoles and features of MFM
AD
Z-band alternatively spliced PDX motif-
containing protein (ZASP)
Laing distal myopathy
Onset childhood to third decade
Distal lower extremity weakness 
(anterior tibial distribution) and neck 
flexors affected early
May have cardiomyopathy
Serum CK is normal or slightly 
elevated
Muscle biopsies do not typically show 
rimmed vacuoles, but may show 
hyaline bodies with accumulation of 
myosin
Large deposits of myosin heavy chain 
are seen in type 1 muscle fibers
AD
Myosin heavy chain 7
GNE myopathy (Nonaka distal 
myopathy and autosomal recessive 
hereditary inclusion body myopathy)
Onset: second to third decade
Distal lower extremity weakness 
(anterior tibial distribution)
Mild distal upper limb weakness may 
be present early
Progression to other muscles sparing 
quadriceps
Ambulation may be lost in 10–15 y
Serum CK 3–10× normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Dystrophic features on muscle biopsy 
plus rimmed vacuoles and 15- to 
19-nm filaments within vacuoles
AR
GNE gene: UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 
2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine 
kinase
Allelic to hereditary inclusion body 
myopathy
Miyoshi myopathya
Onset: second to third decade
Lower extremity weakness in posterior 
compartment muscles
Progression leads to weakness in 
other muscle groups
Ambulation lost after 10–15 y in about 
one-third of cases
Serum CK 20–100× normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Muscle biopsy shows nonspecific 
dystrophic features often with 
prominent inflammatory cell infiltration; 
no rimmed vacuoles
AR
Dysferlin (allelic to LGMD2B)
ANO-5 (allelic to LGMD2L)
Williams myopathy
Distal lower extremity weakness 
(anterior tibial distribution)
Muscle biopsy may show rimmed 
vacuoles and features of MFM
X-linked
Filamin-C
Myofibrillar myopathies
Onset from early childhood to late 
adult life
Weakness may be distal, proximal, or 
generalized
Cardiomyopathy and respiratory 
involvement is not uncommon
Serum CKs can be normal or 
moderately elevated
EMG is myopathic and often 
associated with myotonic discharges
Muscle biopsy demonstrates abnormal 
accumulation of desmin and other 
proteins, rimmed vacuoles, and 
myofibrillar degeneration
Genetically heterogeneous
AD
  Myotilin (also known as LGMD 1A)
  ZASP (see Markesbery-Griggs distal 
myopathy)
  Filamin-C
  Desmin
  Alpha B crystallin
  Bag3
  Titin
  DNAJB6
  TNPO3
AR
  Desmin
X-linked
  FHL1
aMiyoshi myopathy phenotype may also be seen with mutations in ANO-5 that encodes for anoctamin 5 (allelic to LGMD2L).
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CK, creatine kinase; EMG, electromyography; MFM, myofibrillar myopathy; NCS, nerve conduction 
studies.
often die from the associated cardiomyopathy, it is important to 
follow patients with a cardiologist and treat appropriately. Recent 
studies suggest that there is clinical benefit in selected cases of DMD 
from short oligonucleotides that permit skipping of mutant exons, 
leading to expression of a short but nonetheless functional dystro-
phin protein. In parallel, other studies suggest that small molecules 
may permit read-through of protein-truncating mutations in some 
Duchenne cases, again with clinical benefit.


--- PDF PAGE 3293 ---

CHAPTER 441 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
3247
FIGURE 441-6  Proteins involved in the muscular dystrophies. This schematic shows the location of various sarcolemmal, sarcomeric, nuclear, and enzymatic proteins 
associated with muscular dystrophies. The diseases associated with mutations in the genes responsible for encoding these proteins are shown in boxes. Dystrophin, 
via its interaction with the dystroglycan complex, connects the actin cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix. Extracellularly, the sarcoglycan complex interacts with 
biglycan, which connects this complex to the dystroglycan complex and the extracellular matrix collagen. Various enzymes are important in the glycosylation of the 
α-dystroglycan and mediate its binding to the extracellular matrix and usually cause a congenital muscular dystrophy with severe brain and eye abnormalities but may 
cause milder LGMD phenotype. Mutations in genes that encode for sarcomeric and Z-disk proteins cause forms of LGMD and distal myopathies (including myofibrillar 
myopathy, forms of hereditary inclusion body myopathy) as well as nemaline rod myopathy and other “congenital” myopathies. Mutations affecting nuclear membrane 
proteins are responsible for most forms of EDMD. Mutations in other nuclear genes cause other forms of dystrophy. (Used with permission from AA Amato, J Russell 
(eds): Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Figure 27-1, p 657.)
■
■LIMB-GIRDLE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
The LGMDs are a genetically heterogenous group of dystrophies in 
which males and females are affected equally, with onset ranging from 
late in the first decade to the fourth decade. The LGMDs typically 
manifest with progressive weakness of pelvic and shoulder girdle 
musculature and are often clinically indistinguishable from DMD and 
BMD. Respiratory insufficiency from weakness of the diaphragm may 
occur, as may cardiomyopathy. Serum CKs are elevated and the EMG 
is myopathic. Muscle biopsy reveal dystrophic features, but the find-
ings are not specific to differentiate subtypes from one another unless 
immunohistochemistry is employed (e.g., immunostaining for various 
sarcoglycans, dysferlin, alpha-dystroglycan, merosin) or there are 
features to suggest one of the myofibrillar myopathies. Nonetheless, 
definitive diagnosis requires genetic testing.
A systematic classification of LGMD is based on autosomal dom-
inant (LGMD1) and autosomal recessive (LGMD2) inheritance. 
Superimposed on the backbone of LGMD1 and LGMD2, the classi-
fication uses a sequential alphabetical lettering system (LGMD1A, 
LGMD2A, etc.) based on genotype. This results in an ever-expanding 
list of conditions summarized in Tables 441-3 and 441-4. The prevalence 
of LGMD ranges from 80 to 700 per 100,000 while estimated preva-
lence of individual specific subtypes LGMDs vary. The most common 
types of adult-onset LGMD are calpainopathy (LGMD2A), Fukutin- 
related protein (FKRP) deficiency (LGMD2I), and anoctaminopathy 
(LGMD2L). LGMD2A, the most common cause of LGMD in those with 
ancestry from Spain, France, Italy, and Great Britain, is associated with 
marked scapular winging, lack of calf muscle hypertrophy, and lack of 
cardiac and lung involvement. LGMD2I is more common in those from 
northern European ancestry, is associated with calf muscle hypertro-
phy, and can have cardiac and lung involvement out of proportion to 
extremity weakness. LGMD2L is becoming increasingly recognized as 
a common form of LGMD; as seen in dysferlinopathies (LGMD2B and 
Miyoshi myopathy type 1), anoctaminopathy has an early predilection 
for medial calf atrophy and weakness.
■
■EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY (EDMD)
There are at least five genetically distinct forms of EDMD. Emerin 
mutations are the most common cause of X-linked EDMD, although 
mutations in FHL1 may also be associated with a similar phenotype, 
which is X-linked as well. Mutations involving the gene for lamin 
A/C are the most common cause of autosomal dominant EDMD (also 
known as LGMD1B) and are also a common cause of hereditary car-
diomyopathy. Less commonly, autosomal dominant EDMD has been 
reported with mutations in nesprin-1, nesprin-2, and TMEM43 genes.
Clinical Features  Prominent contractures can be recognized in 
early childhood and teenage years, often preceding muscle weakness. 
The contractures persist throughout the course of the disease and 


--- PDF PAGE 3294 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3248 are present at the elbows, ankles, and neck. Muscle weakness affects 
humeral and peroneal muscles at first and later spreads to a limb- 
girdle distribution (Table 441-1). The cardiomyopathy is potentially 
life threatening and may result in sudden death. A spectrum of atrial 
rhythm and conduction defects includes atrial fibrillation and paralysis 
and atrioventricular heart block. Some patients have a dilated cardio-
myopathy. Female carriers of the X-linked variant may manifest with 
a cardiomyopathy.
Laboratory Features  Serum CK is usually slightly elevated and 
the EMG is myopathic. Muscle biopsy usually shows nonspecific dys-
trophic features, although cases associated with FHL1 mutations have 
features of myofibrillar myopathy. Immunohistochemistry reveals 
absent emerin staining of myonuclei in X-linked EDMD due to emerin 
mutations. ECGs demonstrate atrial and atrioventricular rhythm 
disturbances.
X-linked EDMD usually arises from defects in the emerin gene 
encoding a nuclear envelope protein. FHL1 mutations are also a cause 
of X-linked scapuloperoneal dystrophy, but can also present with an 
X-linked form of EDMD. The autosomal dominant disease can be 
caused by mutations in the LMNA gene encoding lamin A and C; in 
the synaptic nuclear envelope protein 1 (SYNE1) or 2 (SYNE2) encod-
ing nesprin-1 and nesprin-2, respectively; and in TMEM43 encoding 
LUMA. These proteins are essential components of the filamentous 
network underlying the inner nuclear membrane. Loss of structural 
integrity of the nuclear envelope from defects in emerin, lamin A/C, 
nesprin-1, nesprin-2, and LUMA accounts for overlapping phenotypes.
TREATMENT
Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy
Supportive care should be offered for neuromuscular disability, 
including ambulatory aids, if necessary. Stretching of contractures 
is difficult. Management of cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias (e.g., 
early use of a defibrillator or cardiac pacemaker) may be lifesaving.
■
■MYOTONIC DYSTROPHY
There are two distinct forms of myotonic dystrophy (dystrophia 
myotonica or DM), namely myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), and myo-
tonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) also called proximal myotonic myopathy 
(PROMM).
Clinical Features  The clinical expression of DM1 varies widely 
and involves many systems other than muscle. Affected patients may 
have a “hatchet-faced” appearance due to temporalis, masseter, and 
facial muscle atrophy and weakness. Frontal baldness is frequent. 
Weakness of wrist and fingers occurs early as does footdrop. Proximal 
muscles are less affected. Palatal, pharyngeal, and tongue involvement 
can lead to dysarthria and dysphagia. Some patients have diaphragm 
and intercostal muscle weakness, resulting in ventilatory insufficiency. 
Myotonia is usually apparent by the age of 5 years and is best demon-
strable by percussion of the thenar eminence or asking patients to close 
their fingers very tightly and then relax.
ECG abnormalities include first-degree heart block and more exten-
sive conduction system involvement. Complete heart block and sud-
den death can occur. Congestive heart failure occurs infrequently but 
may result from cor pulmonale secondary to respiratory failure. Other 
associated features include intellectual impairment, hypersomnia, pos-
terior subcapsular cataracts, gonadal atrophy, insulin resistance, and 
decreased esophageal and colonic motility.
Congenital myotonic dystrophy is a more severe form of DM1 and 
occurs in ~25% of infants of affected mothers. It is characterized by 
severe facial and bulbar weakness, transient neonatal respiratory insuf-
ficiency, and mental retardation.
DM2 or PROMM involves mainly proximal muscles. Other fea-
tures of the disease overlap with DM1, including cataracts, testicular 
atrophy, insulin resistance, constipation, hypersomnia, and cognitive 
defects. Cardiac conduction defects occur but are less common. The 
hatchet face and frontal baldness are also less consistent features. A 
very striking difference is the failure to clearly identify a congenital 
form of DM2.
Laboratory Features  The diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy can 
usually be made on the basis of clinical findings. Serum CK levels may 
be normal or mildly elevated. EMG evidence of myotonia is present in 
most cases of DM1 but is more patchy in DM2. Muscle biopsy is not 
typically performed for diagnosis but is sometimes done when the clin-
ical features and electrophysiological features are not recognized. The 
major histopathological feature in both DM1 and DM2 are numerous 
internalized nuclei can be seen in individual muscle fibers combined 
with many atrophic fibers with pyknotic nuclear clumps.
DM1 and DM2 are autosomal dominant disorders. DM1 is trans-
mitted by an intronic mutation consisting of an unstable expansion of 
a CTG trinucleotide repeat in a serine-threonine protein kinase gene 
(named DMPK). An increase in the severity of the disease phenotype 
in successive generations (genetic anticipation) is accompanied by an 
increase in the number of trinucleotide repeats. The unstable triplet 
repeat in myotonic dystrophy can be used for prenatal diagnosis. Con-
genital disease occurs almost exclusively in infants born to affected 
mothers.
DM2 is caused by a DNA expansion mutation consisting of a CCTG 
repeat in intron 1 of the CNBP gene encoding the CCHC-type zinc 
finger nucleic acid binding protein. The DNA expansions in DM1 and 
DM2 impair muscle function by a toxic gain of function of the mutant 
mRNA. In both DM1 and DM2, the mutant RNA appears to form 
intranuclear inclusions composed of aberrant RNA. These RNA inclu-
sions sequester RNA-binding proteins essential for proper splicing 
of a variety of other mRNAs. This leads to abnormal transcription of 
multiple proteins in a variety of tissues/organ systems, in turn causing 
the systemic manifestations of DM1 and DM2.
TREATMENT
Myotonic Dystrophy
The myotonia in DM1 and DM2 is usually not so bothersome to 
warrant treatment, but when it is mexiletine may be helpful. A car-
diac pacemaker or implantable cardioverter defibrillator should be 
considered for patients with significant arrhythmia. Molded ankle-
foot orthoses help stabilize gait in patients with foot drop. Excessive 
daytime somnolence with or without sleep apnea is not uncommon. 
Sleep studies, noninvasive respiratory support (biphasic positive 
airway pressure [BiPAP]), and treatment with modafinil may be 
beneficial.
■
■FACIOSCAPULOHUMERAL (FSH)  
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
There are two forms of FSHD that have similar pathogenesis. Most 
patients have FSHD type 1 (95%), whereas ~5% have FSHD2. Both 
forms are clinically and histopathologically identical. The prevalence 
FSHD is ~5 per 100,000 individuals.
Clinical Features  FSHD typically presents in childhood or young 
adulthood. In most cases, facial weakness is the initial manifestation, 
appearing as an inability to smile, whistle, or fully close the eyes. Loss 
of scapular stabilizer muscles makes arm elevation difficult. Scapular 
winging (Fig. 441-3) becomes apparent with attempts at abduction and 
forward movement of the arms. Biceps and triceps muscles may be 
severely affected, with relative sparing of the deltoid muscles. Weak-
ness is invariably worse for wrist extension than for wrist flexion, 
and weakness of the anterior compartment muscles of the legs may 
lead to footdrop. In 20% of patients, weakness progresses to involve 
the pelvic muscles, and severe functional impairment and possible 
wheelchair dependency result. The heart is not involved but there can 
be ventilatory muscle weakness in 5% of affected individuals. There is 
an increased incidence of nerve deafness. Coats’ disease, a disorder con-
sisting of telangiectasia, exudation, and retinal detachment, also occurs.


--- PDF PAGE 3295 ---

CHAPTER 441 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
3249
Laboratory Features  The serum CK level may be normal or 
mildly elevated. EMG and muscle biopsy show nonspecific abnormal-
ities but on occasion can reveal a prominent inflammatory infiltrate 
leading to an incorrect diagnosis of myositis (Chap. 358).
FSHD1 is associated with deletions of tandem 3.3-kb repeats at 4q35. 
The deletion reduces the number of repeats to a fragment of <35 kb in 
most patients. Within these repeats lies the DUX4 gene, which usually 
is not expressed after early muscle development. In patients with 
FSHD1 these deletions in the setting of a specific polymorphism leads 
to hypomethylation of the region and toxic expression of the DUX4 
gene. In patients with FSHD2, there is no deletion, but a mutation in 
SMCHD1, leading to hypomethylation of the DUX4 region and the 
permissive expression of the DUX4 gene. In both FSHD1 and FSHD2, 
there is overexpression of the DUX4 transcript.
TREATMENT
Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy
No specific treatment is available; ankle-foot orthoses are helpful 
for footdrop. Scapular stabilization procedures improve scapular 
winging but may not improve function.
■
■OCULOPHARYNGEAL DYSTROPHY (OPMD)
OPMD represents one of several disorders characterized by progres-
sive external ophthalmoplegia, which consists of slowly progressive 
ptosis and limitation of eye movements with sparing of pupillary reac-
tions for light and accommodation. Patients usually do not complain 
of diplopia, in contrast to patients having conditions with a more acute 
onset of ocular muscle weakness (e.g., myasthenia gravis).
Clinical Features  OPMD has a late onset; it usually presents in 
the fourth to sixth decade with ptosis or dysphagia. The extraocular 
muscle impairment is less prominent in the early phase but may 
become severe over time. The swallowing problem may lead to aspira-
tion. Weakness of the neck and proximal extremities can develop but is 
usually mild in degree.
Laboratory Features  The serum CK level may be two to three 
times normal. EMG can identify myopathic changes in weak muscles. 
Muscle biopsies are no longer necessary for diagnosis in most cases, 
but when performed demonstrate muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles. 
On electron microscopy, a distinctive feature of OPMD is the presence 
of 8.5 nm tubular filaments in some muscle cell nuclei.
OPMD is an autosomal dominant disorder that has a high incidence 
in certain populations (e.g., French-Canadians, individuals of Spanish 
ancestry, and Ashkenazi Jews). The molecular defect in OPMD is an 
expansion of a polyalanine repeat tract in a poly-RNA-binding protein 
(PABP2) gene.
TREATMENT
Oculopharyngeal Dystrophy
Dysphagia can lead to significant undernourishment and aspi-
ration. Cricopharyngeal myotomy may improve swallowing. 
Eyelid crutches can improve vision when ptosis obstructs vision; 
candidates for ptosis surgery must be carefully selected—those with 
severe facial weakness are not suitable.
■
■DISTAL MYOPATHIES / DYSTROPHIES
The distal myopathies are notable for their preferential distal dis-
tribution of muscle weakness in contrast to most muscle conditions 
associated with proximal weakness. The major distal myopathies are 
summarized in Tables 441-1 and 441-5.
Clinical Features  Welander, Udd, and Markesbery-Griggs type 
distal myopathies are all late-onset, dominantly inherited disorders of 
distal limb muscles, usually beginning after age 40 years. Welander 
distal myopathy preferentially involves the wrist and finger extensors, 
whereas the others are associated with anterior tibial weakness leading 
to progressive footdrop. Laing distal myopathy is also a dominantly 
inherited disorder heralded by tibial weakness; however, it is distin-
guished by onset in childhood or early adult life. GNE myopathy (also 
known as Nonaka distal myopathy and autosomal recessive hereditary 
inclusion body myopathy) and Miyoshi myopathy are distinguished by 
autosomal recessive inheritance and onset in the late teens or twen-
ties. GNE and Williams myopathy produce prominent anterior tibial 
weakness, whereas Miyoshi myopathy is unique in that gastrocnemius 
muscles are preferentially affected at onset. Finally, the myofibrillar 
myopathies (MFMs) are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group 
of muscular dystrophies that can be associated with prominent distal 
weakness; they can be inherited in an autosomal dominant or recessive 
pattern. Of note, Markesbery-Griggs myopathy (caused by mutations 
in ZASP) and LGMD1B (caused by mutations in myotilin) are subtypes 
of myofibrillar myopathy (MFM).
Laboratory Features  Serum CK levels are markedly elevated in 
Miyoshi myopathy, but in the other conditions, serum CK is only slightly 
increased. EMGs are myopathic and can be irritable with myotonic dis-
charges in MFM. Muscle biopsy shows nonspecific dystrophic features 
and, with the exception of Laing and Miyoshi myopathies, often shows 
rimmed vacuoles. MFM is associated with the accumulation of dense 
inclusions and amorphous material best seen on Gomori trichrome 
staining along with myofibrillar disruption on electron microscopy. 
Immune staining sometimes demonstrates accumulation of desmin and 
other proteins in MFM, large deposits of myosin heavy chain in the 
subsarcolemmal region of type 1 muscle fibers in Laing myopathy, and 
reduced or absent dysferlin in Miyoshi myopathy type 1.
TREATMENT
Distal Myopathies
Occupational therapy is offered for loss of hand function; ankle-
foot orthoses can support distal lower limb muscles. The MFMs 
can be associated with cardiomyopathy (congestive heart failure or 
arrhythmias) and respiratory failure that may require medical man-
agement. Laing-type distal myopathy can also be associated with a 
cardiomyopathy.
DISORDERS OF MUSCLE ENERGY 
METABOLISM
There are two principal sources of energy for skeletal muscle—fatty 
acids and glucose. Abnormalities in either glucose or lipid utilization 
can be associated with distinct clinical presentations that can range 
from an acute, painful syndrome with rhabdomyolysis and myoglobi-
nuria to a chronic, progressive muscle weakness simulating muscular 
dystrophy (Table 441-1). As with the muscular dystrophies there are no 
specific medical treatments available.
■
■GLYCOGEN STORAGE AND GLYCOLYTIC DEFECTS
Disorders of Glycogen Storage Causing Progressive 
Weakness 
• 
`-GLUCOSIDASE, OR ACID MALTASE, DEFICIENCY 
(POMPE DISEASE)  Three clinical forms of α-glucosidase, or acid 
maltase, deficiency (type II glycogenosis) can be distinguished. The 
infantile form is the most common, with onset of symptoms in the first 
3 months of life. Infants develop severe muscle weakness, cardiomeg-
aly, hepatomegaly, and respiratory insufficiency. Glycogen accumu-
lation in motor neurons of the spinal cord and brainstem contributes 
to muscle weakness. Death usually occurs by 1.5 years of age. In the 
childhood form, the picture resembles Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
with delayed motor milestones resulting from proximal limb muscle 
weakness and involvement of respiratory muscles. The heart may 
be involved, but the liver and brain are unaffected. The adult form 
usually begins in the third or fourth decade but can present as late as 
the seventh decade. Ventilatory weakness can be the initial and only 
manifestation in 20–30% of late-onset cases.


--- PDF PAGE 3296 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3250
The serum CK level is 2–10 times normal in infantile or childhood- 
onset Pompe’s disease but can be normal in adult-onset cases. EMG 
can demonstrate muscle membrane irritability, particularly in the 
paraspinal muscles. The muscle biopsy in infants typically reveals 
vacuoles containing glycogen and the lysosomal enzyme acid phos-
phatase. Electron microscopy reveals membrane-bound and free tissue 
glycogen. However, muscle biopsies in late-onset Pompe disease may 
demonstrate only nonspecific abnormalities. Enzyme analysis of dried 
blood spots is a sensitive technique to screen for Pompe’s disease. A 
definitive diagnosis is established by genetic testing.
Pompe disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by mutations of the α-glucosidase gene. Enzyme replacement 
therapy (ERT) with IV recombinant human α-glucosidase is beneficial 
in infantile-onset Pompe disease. In late-onset cases, ERT has a more 
modest benefit.
OTHER GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASES WITH PROGRESSIVE WEAKNESS  In 
de-branching enzyme deficiency (type III glycogenosis), a slowly pro-
gressive form of muscle weakness can develop after puberty. Rarely, 
myoglobinuria may be seen. Patients are usually diagnosed in infancy, 
however, because of hypotonia and delayed motor milestones; 
hepatomegaly, growth retardation, and hypoglycemia are other man-
ifestations. Branching enzyme deficiency (type IV glycogenosis) is a rare 
and fatal glycogen storage disease characterized by failure to thrive 
and hepatomegaly. Hypotonia and muscle wasting may be present, but 
the skeletal muscle manifestations are minor compared to liver failure.
Disorders of Glycolysis Causing Exercise Intolerance  
Several glycolytic defects are associated with recurrent myoglobinuria. 
The most common is McArdle disease caused by mutations in the PYGM 
gene leading to myophosphorylase deficiency. Symptoms of muscle pain 
and stiffness usually begin in adolescence. With severe episodes myo-
globinuria can occur.
Certain features help distinguish some enzyme defects. In McArdle 
disease, exercise tolerance can be enhanced by a slow induction 
phase (warm-up) or brief periods of rest, allowing for the start of the 
“second-wind” phenomenon (switching to utilization of fatty acids). 
Varying degrees of hemolytic anemia accompany deficiencies of both 
phosphofructokinase (mild) and phosphoglycerate kinase (severe). In 
phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency, the usual clinical presentation is a 
seizure disorder associated with mental retardation; exercise intoler-
ance is an infrequent manifestation.
In all of these conditions, the serum CK levels fluctuate widely and 
may be elevated even during symptom-free periods. CK levels >100 
times normal are expected accompanying myoglobinuria. A forearm 
exercise test reveals a blunted rise in venous lactate with a normal rise 
in ammonia. A definitive diagnosis of glycolytic disease can be made 
by muscle biopsy with appropriate staining and enzyme assays, but 
genetic testing is now done in lieu of biopsy in most cases.
Training may enhance exercise tolerance, perhaps by increasing 
perfusion to muscle. Dietary intake of free glucose or fructose prior to 
activity may improve function but care must be taken to avoid obesity 
from ingesting too many calories.
■
■LIPID AS AN ENERGY SOURCE AND  
ASSOCIATED DEFECTS
Lipid is an important muscle energy source during rest and during pro-
longed, submaximal exercise. Oxidation of fatty acids occurs in the mito-
chondria. To enter the mitochondria, a fatty acid must first be converted 
to an “activated fatty acid,” acyl-CoA. The acyl-CoA must be linked 
with carnitine by the enzyme CPT for transport into the mitochondria.
Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase 2 Deficiency  CPT2 defi-
ciency is the most common recognizable cause of recurrent myoglobi-
nuria. Onset is usually in the teenage years or early twenties. Muscle 
pain and myoglobinuria typically occur after prolonged exercise but 
can also be precipitated by fasting or infections; up to 20% of patients 
do not exhibit myoglobinuria, however. Strength is normal between 
attacks. In contrast to disorders caused by defects in glycolysis, in 
which muscle cramps follow short, intense bursts of exercise, the 
muscle pain in CPT2 deficiency does not occur until the limits of uti-
lization have been exceeded and muscle breakdown has already begun.
Serum CK levels and EMG findings are both usually normal 
between episodes. A normal rise of venous lactate during forearm exer-
cise distinguishes this condition from glycolytic defects. Muscle biopsy 
does not show lipid accumulation and is usually normal between 
attacks. The diagnosis requires direct measurement of muscle CPT or 
genetic testing. Attempts to improve exercise tolerance with frequent 
meals and a low-fat, high-carbohydrate diet, or by substituting medi-
um-chain triglycerides in the diet, have not proven to be beneficial.
MITOCHONDRIAL MYOPATHIES
Mitochondria play a key role in energy production. Oxidation of the 
major nutrients derived from carbohydrate, fat, and protein leads to the 
generation of reducing equivalents. The latter are transported through 
the respiratory chain in the process known as oxidative phosphorylation. 
The energy generated by the oxidation-reduction reactions of the 
respiratory chain is stored in an electrochemical gradient coupled to 
ATP synthesis.
A novel feature of mitochondria is their genetic composition. Each 
mitochondrion possesses a DNA genome that is distinct from that of 
the nuclear DNA. Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) consists of a 
double-strand, circular molecule comprising 16,569 base pairs. It codes 
for 22 transfer RNAs, 2 ribosomal RNAs, and 13 polypeptides of the 
respiratory chain enzymes. The genetics of mitochondrial diseases dif-
fer from the genetics of chromosomal disorders. The DNA of mitochon-
dria is directly inherited from the cytoplasm of the gametes, mainly 
from the oocyte. The sperm contributes very little of its mitochondria to 
the offspring at the time of fertilization. Thus, mitochondrial genes are 
derived almost exclusively from the mother, accounting for maternal 
inheritance of some mitochondrial disorders.
Patients with mitochondrial myopathies have clinical manifesta-
tions that usually fall into three groups: chronic progressive external 
ophthalmoplegia (CPEO), skeletal muscle–CNS syndromes, and pure 
myopathy simulating muscular dystrophy or metabolic myopathy. 
Unfortunately, no specific medical therapies are clearly beneficial, 
although Co-enzyme Q10 supplements are often prescribed.
Kearn-Sayre Syndrome (KSS)  This is a widespread multi-organ 
system disorder with a defined triad of clinical findings: onset before 
age 20, CPEO, and pigmentary retinopathy, plus one or more of the fol-
lowing features: complete heart block, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein 
>1 g/L (100 mg/dL), or cerebellar ataxia. The cardiac disease includes 
syncopal attacks and cardiac arrest related to the abnormalities in 
the cardiac conduction system: prolonged intraventricular conduc-
tion time, bundle branch block, and complete atrioventricular block. 
Death attributed to heart block occurs in ~20% of the patients. Varying 
degrees of progressive limb muscle weakness and easy fatigability 
affect activities of daily living. Many affected individuals have intellec-
tual disabilities. Endocrine abnormalities are also common, including 
gonadal dysfunction in both sexes with delayed puberty, short stature, 
and infertility. Diabetes mellitus occurs in ~13% of KSS patients. Other 
less common endocrine disorders include thyroid disease, hyperal-
dosteronism, Addison disease, and hypoparathyroidism.
Serum CK and lactate levels are normal or slightly elevated. EMG 
is myopathic. NCS may be abnormal related to an associated neuropa-
thy. Muscle biopsies reveal ragged red fibers and cytochrome oxidase 
(COX) negative fibers. By electron microscopy, there are increased 
numbers of mitochondria that often appear enlarged and contain 
paracrystalline inclusions.
KSS is a sporadic disorder caused by single mtDNA deletions that 
are presumed to arise spontaneously in the ovum or zygote. The most 
common deletion, occurring in about one-third of patients, removes 
4977 bp of contiguous mtDNA. Monitoring for cardiac conduction 
defects is critical. Prophylactic pacemaker implantation is indicated 
when ECGs demonstrate a bifascicular block.
Progressive External Ophthalmoplegia (PEO)  PEO can be 
caused by nuclear DNA mutations affecting mtDNA and thus inherited 
in a Mendelian fashion or by mutations in mtDNA. Onset is usually 


--- PDF PAGE 3297 ---

CHAPTER 441 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
3251
after puberty. Fatigue, exercise intolerance, dysphagia, and complaints 
of muscle weakness are typical. The neurologic examination confirms 
the ptosis and ophthalmoplegia, usually asymmetric in distribution. 
Patients do not complain of diplopia. Mild facial, neck flexor, and 
proximal weakness are typical. Rarely, respiratory muscles may be 
progressively affected and may be the direct cause of death.
Serum CK and lactate can be normal or mildly elevated. The EMG 
can myopathic. Ragged red and COX-negative fibers are prominently 
displayed in the muscle biopsy.
This autosomal dominant form of CPEO is most commonly caused 
by mutations in the genes encoding adenine nucleotide translocator 1 
(ANT1), twinkle gene (C10orf2), and mtDNA polymerase 1(POLG1). 
Autosomal recessive PEO can also be caused by mutations in POLG1. 
Point mutations have been identified within various mitochondrial 
tRNA (Leu, Ile, Asn, Trp) genes in families with maternal inheritance 
of PEO.
There is no specific medical treatment available; exercise may 
improve function but will depend on the patient’s ability to participate.
Myoclonic Epilepsy with Ragged Red Fibers (MERRF)  
The onset of MERRF is variable, ranging from late childhood to middle 
adult life. Characteristic features include myoclonic epilepsy, cerebellar 
ataxia, and progressive proximal muscle weakness. The seizure disor-
der is an integral part of the disease and may be the initial symptom. 
Cerebellar ataxia precedes or accompanies epilepsy. Other more vari-
able features include dementia, peripheral neuropathy, optic atrophy, 
hearing loss, and diabetes mellitus.
Serum CK levels and lactate may be normal or elevated. EMG 
is myopathic, and in some patients NCS show a neuropathy. The 
electroencephalogram is abnormal, corroborating clinical findings of 
epilepsy. Typical ragged red fibers are seen on muscle biopsy. MERRF is 
caused by maternally inherited point mutations of mitochondrial tRNA 
genes. The most common mutation found in 80% of MERRF patients 
is an A to G substitution at nucleotide 8344 of tRNA lysine (A8344G 
tRNAlys). Only supportive treatment is possible, with special attention 
to epilepsy.
Mitochondrial Myopathy, Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis, 
and Stroke-like Episodes (MELAS)  MELAS is the most com-
mon mitochondrial encephalomyopathy. The term stroke-like is appro-
priate because the cerebral lesions do not conform to a strictly vascular 
distribution. The onset in the majority of patients is before age 20. 
Seizures, usually partial motor or generalized, are common and may 
represent the first clearly recognizable sign of disease. The cerebral 
insults that resemble strokes cause hemiparesis, hemianopia, and cor-
tical blindness. A presumptive stroke occurring before age 40 should 
place this mitochondrial encephalomyopathy high in the differential 
diagnosis. Associated conditions include hearing loss, diabetes mel-
litus, hypothalamic pituitary dysfunction causing growth hormone 
deficiency, hypothyroidism, and absence of secondary sexual charac-
teristics. In its full expression, MELAS leads to dementia, a bedridden 
state, and a fatal outcome. Serum lactic acid is typically elevated.
The CSF protein is also increased but is usually ≤1 g/L (100 mg/dL). 
Muscle biopsies show ragged red fibers. Neuroimaging demonstrates 
basal ganglia calcification in a high percentage of cases. Focal lesions 
that mimic infarction are present predominantly in the occipital and 
parietal lobes. Strict vascular territories are not respected, and cerebral 
angiography fails to demonstrate lesions of the major cerebral blood 
vessels.
MELAS is usually caused by maternally inherited point muta-
tions of mitochondrial tRNA genes. The A3243G point mutation in 
tRNALeu(UUR) is the most common, occurring in ~80% of MELAS cases. 
No specific treatment is available. Supportive treatment is essential for 
the strokelike episodes, seizures, and endocrinopathies.
Mitochondrial DNA Depletion Syndromes  Mitochondrial 
DNA depletion syndrome (MDS) is a heterogeneous group of disorders 
that are inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and can present in 
infancy or adults. MDS can be caused by mutations in several genes 
(TK2, DGUOK, RRM2B, TYMP, SUCLA1, and SUCLA2) that lead to 
depletion of mitochondrial deoxyribonucleotides (dNTP) necessary 
for mtDNA replication. The other major cause of MDS is a set of 
mutations in genes essential for mtDNA replication (e.g., POLG1 and 
C10orf2). The clinical phenotypes associated with MDS vary. Patients 
may develop a severe encephalopathy (e.g., Leigh’s syndrome), PEO, 
an isolated myopathy, myo-neuro-gastrointestinal-encephalopathy 
(MNGIE), and a sensory neuropathy with ataxia.
DISORDERS OF MUSCLE MEMBRANE 
EXCITABILITY
Muscle membrane excitability is affected in a group of disorders 
referred to as channelopathies. These disorders usually present with epi-
sodic muscle weakness (periodic paralysis) and sometimes myotonia 
or paramyotonia (Table 441-1).
■
■CALCIUM CHANNEL DISORDERS OF MUSCLE
Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis (HypoKPP)  This is an 
autosomal dominant disorder with onset in adolescence. Males are 
more often affected because of decreased penetrance in females. Epi-
sodic weakness with onset after age 25 is almost never due to periodic 
paralyses, with the exception of thyrotoxic periodic paralysis. Attacks 
are often provoked by meals high in carbohydrates or sodium and may 
accompany rest following prolonged exercise. Weakness usually affects 
proximal limb muscles more than distal. Ocular and bulbar muscles are 
less likely to be affected. Respiratory muscles are usually spared, but 
when they are involved, the condition may prove fatal. Weakness may 
take as long as 24 h to resolve. Life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias 
related to hypokalemia may occur during attacks. As a late compli-
cation, patients commonly develop severe, disabling proximal lower 
extremity weakness.
Attacks of thyrotoxic periodic paralysis resemble those of primary 
HypoKPP. Despite a higher incidence of thyrotoxicosis in women, men, 
particularly those of Asian descent, are more likely to manifest this 
complication. Attacks abate with treatment of the underlying thyroid 
condition.
A low serum potassium level during an attack, excluding secondary 
causes, establishes the diagnosis. In the midst of an attack of weak-
ness, motor conduction studies may demonstrate reduced amplitudes, 
whereas EMG may show electrical silence in severely weak muscles. 
In between attacks, the EMG and routine NCS are normal. However, 
a long exercise NCS test may demonstrate decrementing amplitudes.
HypoKPP type 1 is the most common form, and is caused by muta-
tions in the voltage-sensitive, skeletal muscle calcium channel gene, 
CALCL1A3. Approximately 10% of cases are HypoKPP type 2, arising 
from mutations in the voltage-sensitive sodium channel gene (SCN4A). 
In both forms the mutations lead to an abnormal gating pore current 
that predisposes the muscle cell to depolarize when potassium levels 
are low.
TREATMENT
Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis
Mild attacks usually do not require medical treatment. However, 
severe attacks of weakness can be improved by the administration 
of potassium. Oral KCl (0.2–0.4 mmol/kg) can be given every  
30 min. Only rarely is IV therapy necessary (e.g., when swallowing 
problems or vomiting is present). The long-term goal of therapy is to 
avoid attacks. Patients should be made aware of the importance of 
a low-carbohydrate, low-sodium diet, and consequences of intense 
exercise. Prophylactic administration of acetazolamide or dichlor-
phenamide can reduce attacks of periodic weakness. However, in 
patients with HypoKPP type 2, attacks of weakness can be exacer-
bated with these medications.
■
■SODIUM CHANNEL DISORDERS OF MUSCLE
Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis (HyperKPP)  The term 
hyperkalemic is misleading because patients are often normokalemic 


--- PDF PAGE 3298 ---

PART 13
Neurologic Disorders
3252 during attacks. That attacks are precipitated by potassium administra-
tion best defines the disease. The onset is usually in the first decade; 
males and females are affected equally. Attacks are brief and mild, 
usually lasting 30 min to several hours. Weakness affects proximal 
muscles, sparing bulbar muscles. Attacks are precipitated by rest fol-
lowing exercise and fasting.
Potassium may be slightly elevated or normal during an attack. As in 
HypoKPP, NCS in HyperKPP muscle may demonstrate reduced motor 
amplitudes and the EMG may be silent in very weak muscles. A long 
exercise NCS test can reveal diminished amplitudes as well. The EMG 
may demonstrate myotonic discharges. HyperKPP is caused by muta-
tions of the voltage-gated sodium channel SCN4A gene. Acetazolamide 
or dichlorphenamide can reduce the frequency and severity of attacks. 
Mexiletine to be helpful in patients with significant clinical myotonia.
Paramyotonia Congenita  In PC, the attacks of weakness are 
cold-induced or occur spontaneously and are mild. Myotonia is a 
prominent feature but worsens with muscle activity (paradoxical 
myotonia). This is in contrast to classic myotonia in which exercise 
alleviates the condition. Attacks of weakness are seldom severe enough 
to require emergency room treatment. Over time patients develop 
interattack weakness as they do in other forms of periodic paralysis.
Serum CK is usually mildly elevated. Routine NCS are normal. Short 
exercise NCS test may be abnormal however, and cooling of the muscle 
often dramatically reduces the amplitude of the compound muscle 
action potentials. EMG reveals diffuse myotonic potentials in PC. Upon 
local cooling of the muscle, the myotonic discharges disappear as the 
patient becomes unable to activate MUAPs.
PC is inherited as an autosomal dominant condition; voltage-gated 
sodium channel mutations are responsible, and thus this disorder is 
allelic with HyperKPP. Mexiletine is reported to be helpful in reducing 
the myotonia.
■
■POTASSIUM CHANNEL DISORDERS
Andersen-Tawil Syndrome  This rare disease is characterized 
by episodic weakness, cardiac arrhythmias, and dysmorphic features 
(short stature, scoliosis, clinodactyly, hypertelorism, small or prom-
inent low-set ears, micrognathia, and broad forehead). The cardiac 
arrhythmias are potentially serious and life threatening. They include 
long QT, ventricular ectopy, bidirectional ventricular arrhythmias, and 
tachycardia. The disease is most commonly caused by mutations of 
the inwardly rectifying potassium channel (Kir 2.1) gene that heighten 
muscle cell excitability. The episodes of weakness may differ between 
patients because of potassium variability. Acetazolamide may decrease 
the attack frequency and severity.
■
■CHLORIDE CHANNEL DISORDERS
Two forms of this disorder, autosomal dominant (Thomsen disease) and 
autosomal recessive (Becker disease) are both caused by mutations in 
the chloride channel 1 gene (CLCN1). Symptoms are noted in infancy 
and early childhood. The severity lessens in the third to fourth decade. 
Myotonia is worsened by cold and improved by activity. The gait may 
appear slow and labored at first but improves with walking. In Thom-
sen disease, muscle strength is normal, but in Becker disease, which is 
usually more severe, there may be muscle weakness. Muscle hypertro-
phy is usually present. Myotonic discharges are prominently displayed 
by EMG recordings. Serum CK is normal or mildly elevated. Mexiletine 
is helpful in relieving the myotonia.
ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIC MYOPATHIES
Endocrinopathies can cause weakness, but fatigue is more common 
than true weakness. The serum CK level is often normal (except in 
hypothyroidism) and the muscle histology is characterized by atrophy 
rather than destruction of muscle fibers. Nearly all endocrine myopa-
thies respond to treatment.
■
■THYROID DISORDERS
Hypothyroidism (Chap. 376)  Patients with hypothyroidism 
have frequent muscle complaints, and about one-third have proximal 
muscle weakness. Muscle cramps, pain, and stiffness are common. 
Some patients have enlarged muscles. Features of slow muscle con-
traction and relaxation occur in 25% of patients; the relaxation phase 
of muscle stretch reflexes is characteristically prolonged and best 
observed at the ankle or biceps brachii reflexes. The serum CK level 
is often elevated (up to 10 times normal). EMG is typically normal. 
Muscle biopsy shows no distinctive morphologic abnormalities.
Hyperthyroidism (Chap. 377)  Patients who are thyrotoxic 
commonly have proximal muscle weakness, but they rarely complain 
of myopathic symptoms. Activity of deep tendon reflexes may be 
enhanced. Fasciculations may be apparent and, when coupled with 
increased muscle stretch reflexes, may lead to an erroneous diagnosis 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. A form of hypokalemic periodic paral-
ysis can occur in patients who are thyrotoxic. Mutations in the KCNJ18 
gene that encodes for the inwardly rectifying potassium channel, Kir 
2.6, have been discovered in up to a third of cases.
■
■PARATHYROID DISORDERS (SEE ALSO CHAP. 403)
Hyperparathyroidism  Proximal muscle weakness, muscle wast-
ing, and brisk muscle stretch reflexes are the main features of this 
endocrinopathy. Some patients develop neck extensor weakness (part 
of the dropped head syndrome). Serum CK levels are usually normal 
or slightly elevated. Serum parathyroid hormone levels are elevated, 
while vitamin D and calcium levels are usually reduced. Muscle 
biopsies show only mild type 2 fiber atrophy.
Hypoparathyroidism  An overt myopathy due to hypocalce-
mia rarely occurs. Neuromuscular symptoms are usually related to 
localized or generalized tetany. Serum CK levels may be increased 
secondary to muscle damage from sustained tetany. Hyporeflexia or 
areflexia is usually present and contrasts with the hyperreflexia in 
hyperparathyroidism.
■
■ADRENAL DISORDERS (SEE ALSO CHAP. 379)
Conditions associated with glucocorticoid excess cause a myopathy; 
steroid myopathy is the most commonly diagnosed endocrine mus-
cle disease. Proximal muscle weakness combined with a cushingoid 
appearance are the key clinical features. Serum CK and EMG are nor-
mal. Muscle biopsy, not typically done for diagnostic purposes, reveals 
type 2b muscle fiber atrophy. In primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn’s 
syndrome), neuromuscular complications are due to potassium deple-
tion. The clinical picture is one of persistent muscle weakness. Long-
standing hyperaldosteronism may lead to proximal limb weakness and 
wasting. Serum CK levels may be elevated, and a muscle biopsy may 
demonstrate necrotic fibers. These changes relate to hypokalemia and 
are not a direct effect of aldosterone on skeletal muscle.
■
■PITUITARY DISORDERS (SEE ALSO CHAP. 373)
Patients with acromegaly usually have mild proximal weakness. Mus-
cles often appear enlarged but exhibit decreased force generation. The 
duration of acromegaly, rather than the serum growth hormone levels, 
correlates with the degree of myopathy.
■
■DIABETES MELLITUS (SEE ALSO CHAP. 398)
Neuromuscular complications of diabetes mellitus are most often 
related to neuropathy. The only notable myopathy is ischemic infarc-
tion of leg muscles, usually involving one of the thigh muscles but on 
occasion affecting the distal leg. This condition occurs in patients with 
poorly controlled diabetes and presents with the abrupt onset of pain, 
tenderness, and edema of a thigh or calf. The area of muscle infarc-
tion is hard and indurated. The muscles most often affected include 
the vastus lateralis, thigh adductors, and biceps femoris. Computed 
tomography (CT) or MRI can demonstrate focal abnormalities in the 
affected muscle. Diagnosis by imaging is preferable to muscle biopsy, 
if possible, as hemorrhage into the biopsy site can occur.
MYOPATHIES OF SYSTEMIC ILLNESS
Systemic illnesses such as chronic respiratory, cardiac, or hepatic failure 
are frequently associated with severe muscle wasting and complaints 


--- PDF PAGE 3299 ---

CHAPTER 441 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
3253
of weakness. Fatigue is usually a more significant problem than weak-
ness, which is typically mild.
DRUG-INDUCED OR TOXIC MYOPATHIES
The most common toxic myopathies are caused by the cholesterol- 
lowering agents and glucocorticoids. Others impact practice to a lesser 
degree but are important to consider in specific situations. Table 441-6 
provides a comprehensive list of drug-induced myopathies with their 
distinguishing features.
■
■MYOPATHY FROM LIPID-LOWERING AGENTS
All classes of lipid-lowering agents have been implicated in muscle tox-
icity, including HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), and to a much 
lesser extent, fibrates, niacin, and ezetimibe. Myalgia and elevated CKs 
are the most common manifestations. Rarely patients exhibit proximal 
weakness or myoglobinuria. Concomitant use of statins with fibrates 
and cyclosporine increase the risk of severe myotoxicity. EMG dem-
onstrates irritability and myopathic units and muscle biopsies reveal 
necrotic muscle fibers in weak muscles. Severe myalgia, weakness, 
marked elevations in serum CK (>3–5 times baseline), and myoglobi-
nuria are indications for stopping the drug. Patients usually improve 
with drug cessation, although this may take several weeks. Rare cases 
continue to progress after the offending agent is discontinued. It is 
possible that in such cases the statin may have triggered an immune-
mediated necrotizing myopathy, as these individuals require aggres-
sive immunotherapy (e.g., prednisone and sometimes other agents) 
to improve and often relapse when these therapies are discontinued 
(Chap. 358). Interestingly, antibodies directed against HMG-CoA 
reductase have been identified in many of these cases.
■
■GLUCOCORTICOID-RELATED MYOPATHIES
Glucocorticoid myopathy occurs with chronic treatment or as “acute 
quadriplegic” myopathy secondary to high-dose IV glucocorticoid use. 
Chronic administration produces proximal weakness accompanied 
by cushingoid manifestations, which can be quite debilitating; the 
chronic use of prednisone at a daily dose of ≥30 mg/d is most often 
associated with toxicity. Patients taking fluorinated glucocorticoids 
(triamcinolone, betamethasone, dexamethasone) appear to be at espe-
cially high risk for myopathy. In chronic steroid myopathy, the serum 
CK is usually normal. Serum potassium may be low. The muscle biopsy 
in chronic cases shows preferential type 2 muscle fiber atrophy; this is 
not reflected in the EMG, which is usually normal.
Patients receiving high-dose IV glucocorticoids for status asthmati-
cus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, organ transplantation, or 
other indications may develop severe generalized weakness (critical 
illness myopathy). This myopathy, also known as acute quadriplegic 
myopathy, can also occur in the setting of sepsis. Involvement of the 
diaphragm and intercostal muscles causes ventilatory muscle weak-
ness and is usually appreciated when patients are unable to be weaned 
off a ventilatory in the ICU. NCS demonstrate reduced compound 
muscle action potentials in the setting of relatively preserved sensory 
potentials. EMG can demonstrate abnormal insertional and sponta-
neous activity and early recruitment of myopathic appearing units in 
those muscles that can be activated. Muscle biopsy can show a distinc-
tive loss of thick filaments (myosin) by electron microscopy. Treatment 
is withdrawal of glucocorticoids and physical therapy but the recovery 
is slow. Patients require supportive care and rehabilitation.
■
■OTHER DRUG-INDUCED MYOPATHIES
Certain drugs produce painless, largely proximal, muscle weak-
ness. These drugs include the amphophilic cationic drugs (amiodar-
one, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine) and antimicrotubular drugs 
(colchicine) (Table 441-6). Muscle biopsy can be useful in the identifica-
tion of toxicity because autophagic vacuoles are prominent pathologic 
features of these toxins.
■
■GLOBAL ISSUES
As previously discussed, certain dystrophies have an increased 
prevalence in different parts of the world. LGMD2A is the 
most common LGMD in individuals from Spain, France, Italy, 
and Great Britain; LGMD2I is more common in those with northern 
European ancestry. GNE myopathy is the most common form of distal 
myopathy in Japan but is also prevalent in the Ashkenazi population. 
OPMD is most comment in those with ancestry from Spain and French-
Canada as well as among Ashkenazi. Epidemiological studies are 
lacking regarding other forms of myopathy and their prevalence in 
different areas of the world.
■
■FURTHER READING
Amato AA, Russell JA (eds): Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. 
New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2016.
Finsterer J et al: Secondary myopathy due to systemic diseases. Acta 
Neurol Scand 134:388, 2016.
Iyadurai SJ, Kissel JT: The limb-girdle muscular dystrophies and the 
dystrophinopathies. Continuum (Minneap Minn) 22:1954, 2016.
Katzberg HD, Kassardjian CD: Toxic and endocrine myopathies. 
Continuum (Minneap Minn) 22:1815, 2016.
Mah JK et al: A systematic review and meta-analysis on the epidemiol-
ogy of the muscular dystrophies. Can J Neurol Sci 43:163, 2016.
Narayanaswami P et al: Summary of evidence-based guideline: Diag-
nosis and treatment limb-girdle and distal muscular dystrophies. 
Neurology 83:1453, 2014.
Rosow LK, Amato AA: The role of electrodiagnostic testing, imaging, 
and muscle biopsy in the investigation of muscle disease. Continuum 
(Minneap Minn) 22:1787, 2016.
Sansone VA: The dystrophic and nondystrophic myotonias. Contin-
uum (Minneap Minn) 22:1889, 2016.
TABLE 441-6  Drug-Induced Myopathies
DRUGS
MAJOR TOXIC REACTION
Lipid-lowering agents
  HMG-CoA reductase 
inhibitors
  Fibric acid derivatives
  Niacin (nicotinic acid)
Drugs belonging to all three of the major 
classes of lipid-lowering agents can produce 
a spectrum of toxicity: asymptomatic 
serum creatine kinase elevation, myalgias, 
exercise-induced pain, rhabdomyolysis, and 
myoglobinuria.
Glucocorticoids
Acute, high-dose glucocorticoid treatment can 
cause acute quadriplegic myopathy. These 
high doses of steroids are often combined 
with nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking 
agents but the weakness can occur without 
their use. Chronic steroid administration 
produces predominantly proximal weakness.
Nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular blocking 
agents
Acute quadriplegic myopathy can occur with or 
without concomitant glucocorticoids.
Zidovudine
Mitochondrial myopathy with ragged red fibers
Drugs of abuse
  Alcohol
  Amphetamines
  Cocaine
  Heroin
  Phencyclidine
  Meperidine
All drugs in this group can lead to widespread 
muscle breakdown, rhabdomyolysis, and 
myoglobinuria.
Local injections cause muscle necrosis, skin 
induration, and limb contractures.
Autoimmune myopathy
  Statins
  Check point inhibitors
 
d-Penicillamine
Use of statins may cause an immune 
mediated necrotizing myopathy associated 
with HMG-CoA reductase antibodies. Check 
point inhibitors can be complicated by 
myositis, myasthenia gravis, and immune-
mediated neuropathies. Myasthenia gravis 
has also been reported with penicillamine.
Amphophilic cationic drugs
  Amiodarone
  Chloroquine
  Hydroxychloroquine
All amphophilic drugs have the potential 
to produce painless, proximal weakness 
associated with necrosis and autophagic 
vacuoles in the muscle biopsy.
Antimicrotubular drugs
  Colchicine
This drug produces painless, proximal 
weakness especially in the setting of renal 
failure. Muscle biopsy shows necrosis and 
fibers with autophagic vacuoles.
