

================================================================================
CH8: NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES (PARKINSON'S, ALZHEIMER'S)
Pages 295-335 (PDF page numbers)
================================================================================

8
Drugs for Neurodegenerative Diseases
Jose A. Rey
295
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Overview
Most drugs that affect the central nervous system (CNS) act by altering some step in the neurotransmission process.
Drugs affecting the CNS may act presynaptically by influencing the production, storage, release, or termination of
action of neurotransmitters. Other agents may activate or block postsynaptic receptors. This chapter provides an
overview of the CNS, with a focus on those neurotransmitters that are involved in the actions of the clinically useful
CNS drugs. These concepts are useful in understanding the etiology and treatment strategies for the
neurodegenerative disorders that respond to drug therapy: Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, multiple sclerosis
(MS), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Figure 8.1).
296
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 8.1 Summary of agents used in the treatment of Parkinson disease, Alzheimer
disease, multiple sclerosis, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
297
www.webofpharma.com

II.  Neurotransmission in the CNS
The basic functioning of neurons in the CNS is similar to that of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) described in
Chapter 3. For example, transmission of information in both the CNS and in the periphery involves the release of
neurotransmitters that diffuse across the synaptic cleft to bind to specific receptors on the postsynaptic neuron. In
both systems, the recognition of the neurotransmitter by the membrane receptor of the postsynaptic neuron triggers
intracellular changes. However, several major differences exist between neurons in the peripheral ANS and those in
the CNS. The circuitry of the CNS is more complex than that of the ANS, and the number of synapses in the CNS is
far greater. The CNS, unlike the peripheral ANS, contains networks of inhibitory neurons that are constantly active
in modulating the rate of neuronal transmission. In addition, the CNS communicates through the use of multiple
neurotransmitters, whereas the ANS uses only two primary neurotransmitters, acetylcholine, and norepinephrine.
298
www.webofpharma.com

III.  Synaptic Potentials
In the CNS, receptors in most synapses are coupled to ion channels. Binding of the neurotransmitter to the
postsynaptic membrane receptors results in a rapid but transient opening of ion channels. Open channels allow
specific ions inside and outside the cell membrane to flow down their concentration gradients. The resulting change
in the ionic composition across the membrane of the neuron alters the postsynaptic potential, producing either
depolarization or hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic membrane, depending on the specific ions and the direction
of their movement.
299
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Excitatory pathways
Neurotransmitters can be classified as either excitatory or inhibitory, depending on the nature of the action they
elicit. Stimulation of excitatory neurons causes a movement of ions that results in a depolarization of the
postsynaptic membrane. These excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSP) are generated by the following: 1)
Stimulation of an excitatory neuron causes the release of neurotransmitters, such as glutamate or acetylcholine,
which bind to receptors on the postsynaptic cell membrane. This causes a transient increase in the permeability of
sodium (Na+) ions. 2) The influx of Na+ causes a weak depolarization, or EPSP, that moves the postsynaptic
potential toward its firing threshold. 3) If the number of stimulated excitatory neurons increases, more excitatory
neurotransmitter is released. This ultimately causes the EPSP depolarization of the postsynaptic cell to pass a
threshold, thereby generating an all-or-none action potential. [Note: The generation of a nerve impulse typically
reflects the activation of synaptic receptors by thousands of excitatory neurotransmitter molecules released from
many nerve fibers.] Figure 8.2 shows an example of an excitatory pathway.
Figure 8.2 Binding of the excitatory neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, causes
300
www.webofpharma.com

depolarization of the neuron.
301
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Inhibitory pathways
Stimulation of inhibitory neurons causes movement of ions that results in a hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic
membrane. These inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSP) are generated by the following: 1) Stimulation of
inhibitory neurons releases neurotransmitters, such as γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) or glycine, which bind to
receptors on the postsynaptic cell membrane. This causes a transient increase in the permeability of specific ions,
such as potassium (K+) and chloride (Cl−). 2) The influx of Cl− and efflux of K+ cause a weak hyperpolarization, or
IPSP, that moves the postsynaptic potential away from its firing threshold. This diminishes the generation of action
potentials. Figure 8.3 shows an example of an inhibitory pathway.
302
www.webofpharma.com

303
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 8.3 Binding of the inhibitory neurotransmitter, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA),
causes hyperpolarization of the neuron.
304
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Combined effects of the EPSP and IPSP
Most neurons in the CNS receive both EPSP and IPSP input. Thus, several different types of neurotransmitters may
act on the same neuron, but each binds to its own specific receptor. The overall action is the summation of the
individual actions of the various neurotransmitters on the neuron. The neurotransmitters are not uniformly
distributed in the CNS but are localized in specific clusters of neurons, the axons of which may synapse with
specific regions of the brain. Many neuronal tracts, thus, seem to be chemically coded, and this may offer greater
opportunity for selective pharmacological modulation of certain neuronal pathways.
305
www.webofpharma.com

IV.  Neurodegenerative Diseases
Neurodegenerative diseases of the CNS include Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, MS, and ALS. These
devastating illnesses are characterized by the progressive loss of selected neurons in discrete brain areas, resulting in
characteristic disorders of movement, cognition, or both.
306
www.webofpharma.com

V.  Overview of Parkinson Disease
Parkinsonism is a progressive neurological disorder of muscle movement, characterized by tremors, muscular
rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural and gait abnormalities. Most cases involve people over the age of 65, among
whom the incidence is about 1 in 100 individuals.
307
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Etiology
The cause of Parkinson disease is unknown for most patients. The disease is correlated with destruction of
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra with a consequent reduction of dopamine actions in the corpus
striatum, parts of the basal ganglia system that are involved in motor control.
1.  Substantia nigra
The substantia nigra, part of the extrapyramidal system, is the source of dopaminergic neurons (shown in red in
Figure 8.4) that terminate in the neostriatum. Each dopaminergic neuron makes thousands of synaptic contacts
within the neostriatum and therefore modulates the activity of a large number of cells. These dopaminergic
projections from the substantia nigra fire tonically rather than in response to specific muscular movements or
sensory input. Thus, the dopaminergic system appears to serve as a tonic, sustaining influence on motor activity,
rather than participating in specific movements.
Figure 8.4 Role of substantia nigra in Parkinson disease. ACh = acetylcholine; DA =
dopamine; GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid.
2.  Neostriatum
Normally, the neostriatum is connected to the substantia nigra by neurons (shown in orange in Figure 8.4) that
secrete the inhibitory transmitter GABA at their termini. In turn, cells of the substantia nigra send neurons back to
the neostriatum, secreting the inhibitory transmitter dopamine at their termini. This mutual inhibitory pathway
normally maintains a degree of inhibition of both areas. In Parkinson disease, destruction of cells in the substantia
nigra results in the degeneration of the nerve terminals that secrete dopamine in the neostriatum. Thus, the normal
inhibitory influence of dopamine on cholinergic neurons in the neostriatum is significantly diminished, resulting in
overproduction, or a relative overactivity, of acetylcholine by the stimulatory neurons (shown in green in Figure
308
www.webofpharma.com

8.4). This triggers a chain of abnormal signaling, resulting in loss of the control of muscle movements.
3.  Secondary parkinsonism
Drugs such as the phenothiazines and haloperidol, whose major pharmacologic action is blockade of dopamine
receptors in the brain, may produce parkinsonian symptoms (also called pseudoparkinsonism). These drugs should
be used with caution in patients with Parkinson disease.
309
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Strategy of treatment
In addition to an abundance of inhibitory dopaminergic neurons, the neostriatum is also rich in excitatory
cholinergic neurons that oppose the action of dopamine (Figure 8.4). Many of the symptoms of parkinsonism reflect
an imbalance between the excitatory cholinergic neurons and the greatly diminished number of inhibitory
dopaminergic neurons. Therapy is aimed at restoring dopamine in the basal ganglia and antagonizing the excitatory
effect of cholinergic neurons, thus reestablishing the correct dopamine/acetylcholine balance.
310
www.webofpharma.com

VI.  Drugs Used in Parkinson Disease
Many currently available drugs aim to maintain CNS dopamine levels, or signaling, as constant as possible. These
agents offer temporary relief from the symptoms of the disorder, but they do not arrest or reverse the neuronal
degeneration caused by the disease.
311
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Levodopa and carbidopa
Levodopa [lee-voe-DOE-pa] is a metabolic precursor of dopamine (Figure 8.5). It restores dopaminergic
neurotransmission in the neostriatum by enhancing the synthesis of dopamine in the surviving neurons of the
substantia nigra. In early disease, the number of residual dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (typically
about 20% of normal) is adequate for conversion of levodopa to dopamine. Thus, in new patients, the therapeutic
response to levodopa is consistent, and the patient rarely complains that the drug effects “wear off.” Unfortunately,
with time, the number of neurons decreases, and fewer cells are capable of converting exogenously administered
levodopa to dopamine. Consequently, motor control fluctuation develops. Relief provided by levodopa is only
symptomatic, and it lasts only while the drug is present in the body.
Figure 8.5 Synthesis of dopamine from levodopa in the absence and presence of
carbidopa, an inhibitor of dopamine decarboxylase in the peripheral tissues. (GI =
gastrointestinal.)
1.  Mechanism of action
a.  Levodopa
Dopamine does not cross the blood–brain barrier, but its immediate precursor, levodopa, is actively transported into
the CNS and converted to dopamine (Figure 8.5). Levodopa must be administered with carbidopa [kar-bi-DOE-pa].
Without carbidopa, much of the drug is decarboxylated to dopamine in the periphery, resulting in diminished effect,
nausea, vomiting, cardiac arrhythmias, and hypotension.
b.  Carbidopa
Carbidopa, a dopamine decarboxylase inhibitor, diminishes the metabolism of levodopa in the periphery, thereby
increasing the availability of levodopa to the CNS. The addition of carbidopa lowers the dose of levodopa needed
by four- to five-fold and, consequently, decreases the severity of adverse effects arising from peripherally formed
dopamine.
2.  Therapeutic uses
Levodopa in combination with carbidopa is an efficacious drug regimen for the treatment of Parkinson disease. It
decreases rigidity, tremors, and other symptoms of parkinsonism. In approximately two-thirds of patients with
Parkinson disease, levodopa–carbidopa substantially reduces the severity of symptoms for the first few years of
treatment. Patients typically experience a decline in response during the 3rd to 5th year of therapy. Withdrawal from
the drug must be gradual.
3.  Absorption and metabolism
The drug is absorbed rapidly from the small intestine (when empty of food). Levodopa has an extremely short half-
life (1 to 2 hours), which causes fluctuations in plasma concentration. This may produce fluctuations in motor
response, which generally correlate with the plasma concentration of levodopa, or perhaps give rise to the more
troublesome “on–off” phenomenon, in which the motor fluctuations are not related to plasma levels in a simple way.
Motor fluctuations may cause the patient to suddenly lose normal mobility and experience tremors, cramps, and
immobility. Ingestion of meals, particularly if high in protein, interferes with the transport of levodopa into the CNS.
Thus, levodopa should be taken on an empty stomach, typically 30 minutes before a meal.
4.  Adverse effects
312
www.webofpharma.com

a.  Peripheral effects
Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting occur because of stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone (Figure 8.6).
Tachycardia and ventricular extrasystole result from dopaminergic action on the heart. Hypotension may also
develop. Adrenergic action on the iris causes mydriasis. In some individuals, blood dyscrasias and a positive
reaction to the Coombs test are seen. Saliva and urine may turn brownish color because of the melanin pigment
produced from catecholamine oxidation.
313
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 8.6 Adverse effects of levodopa.
b.  CNS effects
314
www.webofpharma.com

Visual and auditory hallucinations and abnormal involuntary movements (dyskinesias) may occur. These effects are
the opposite of parkinsonian symptoms and reflect overactivity of dopamine in the basal ganglia. Levodopa can also
cause mood changes, depression, psychosis, and anxiety.
5.  Interactions
The vitamin pyridoxine (B6) increases the peripheral breakdown of levodopa and diminishes its effectiveness
(Figure 8.7). Concomitant administration of levodopa and nonselective monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs),
such as phenelzine, can produce a hypertensive crisis caused by enhanced catecholamine production. Therefore,
concomitant administration of these agents is contraindicated. In many psychotic patients, levodopa exacerbates
symptoms, possibly through the buildup of central catecholamines. Cardiac patients should be carefully monitored
for the possible development of arrhythmias. Antipsychotic drugs are generally contraindicated in Parkinson disease,
because they potently block dopamine receptors and may augment parkinsonian symptoms. However, low doses of
atypical antipsychotics, such as quetiapine or clozapine, are sometimes used to treat levodopa-induced psychotic
symptoms.
Figure 8.7 Some drug interactions observed with levodopa. MAO = monoamine oxidase.
315
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Selegiline, rasagiline, and safinamide
Selegiline [seh-LEDGE-ah-leen], also called deprenyl [DE-pre-nill], selectively inhibits monoamine oxidase (MAO)
type B, the enzyme that metabolizes dopamine. It does not inhibit MAO type A (metabolizes norepinephrine and
serotonin) unless given above recommended doses, where it loses its selectivity. By decreasing the metabolism of
dopamine, selegiline increases dopamine levels in the brain (Figure 8.8). When selegiline is administered with
levodopa, it enhances the actions of levodopa and substantially reduces the required dose. Unlike nonselective
MAOIs, selegiline at recommended doses has little potential for causing hypertensive crises. However, the drug
loses selectivity at high doses, and there is a risk for severe hypertension. Selegiline is metabolized to
methamphetamine and amphetamine, whose stimulating properties may produce insomnia if the drug is
administered later than mid-afternoon. Rasagiline [ra-SA-gi-leen], an irreversible and selective inhibitor of brain
MAO type B, has five times the potency of selegiline. Unlike selegiline, rasagiline is not metabolized to an
amphetamine-like substance. Safinamide [sa-FIN-a-mide] is also a selective inhibitor of MAO type B indicated for
use as an adjunct to levodopa–carbidopa.
Figure 8.8 Action of selegiline (deprenyl) in dopamine metabolism. (MAO B =
monoamine oxidase type B.)
316
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors
Normally, the methylation of levodopa by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) to 3-O-methyldopa is a minor
pathway for levodopa metabolism. However, when peripheral dopamine decarboxylase activity is inhibited by
carbidopa, a significant concentration of 3-O-methyldopa is formed that competes with levodopa for active transport
into the CNS (Figure 8.9). Entacapone [en-TAK-a-pone] and tolcapone [TOLE-ka-pone] selectively and reversibly
inhibit COMT. Inhibition of COMT by these agents leads to decreased plasma concentrations of 3-O-methyldopa,
increased central uptake of levodopa, and greater concentrations of brain dopamine. Both of these agents reduce the
symptoms of “wearing-off” phenomena seen in patients on levodopa–carbidopa. The two drugs differ primarily in
their pharmacokinetic and adverse effect profiles.
Figure 8.9 Effect of entacapone on dopa concentration in the central nervous system
(CNS). COMT = catechol-O- methyltransferase.
1.  Pharmacokinetics
Oral absorption of both drugs occurs readily and is not influenced by food. They are extensively bound to plasma
albumin, with a limited volume of distribution. Tolcapone has a relatively long duration of action (probably due to
its affinity for the enzyme) compared to entacapone, which requires more frequent dosing. Both drugs are
extensively metabolized and eliminated in feces and urine. The dosage may need to be adjusted in patients with
moderate or severe cirrhosis.
2.  Adverse effects
Both drugs exhibit adverse effects that are observed in patients taking levodopa–carbidopa, including diarrhea,
postural hypotension, nausea, anorexia, dyskinesias, hallucinations, and sleep disorders. Most seriously, fulminating
hepatic necrosis is associated with tolcapone use. Therefore, it should be used, along with appropriate hepatic
function monitoring, only in patients in whom other modalities have failed. Entacapone does not exhibit this toxicity
and has largely replaced tolcapone in clinical practice.
317
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Dopamine receptor agonists
This group of antiparkinsonian compounds includes bromocriptine [broe-moe-KRIP-teen], an ergot derivative, and
the nonergot drugs, ropinirole [roe-PIN-i-role], pramipexole [pra-mi-PEX-ole], rotigotine [ro-TIG-oh-teen], and
apomorphine [A-poe-more-feen]. These agents have a longer duration of action than that of levodopa and are
effective in patients exhibiting fluctuations in response to levodopa. Initial therapy with these drugs is associated
with less risk of developing dyskinesias and motor fluctuations as compared to patients started on levodopa.
Bromocriptine, pramipexole, and ropinirole are effective in patients with Parkinson disease complicated by motor
fluctuations and dyskinesias. However, these drugs are ineffective in patients who have not responded to levodopa.
Apomorphine is an injectable dopamine agonist that is used in severe and advanced stages of the disease to
supplement oral medications. Adverse effects severely limit the utility of the dopamine agonists (Figure 8.10).
318
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 8.10 Some adverse effects of dopamine agonists.
1.  Bromocriptine
319
www.webofpharma.com

The actions of the ergot derivative bromocriptine are similar to those of levodopa, except that hallucinations,
confusion, delirium, nausea, and orthostatic hypotension are more common, whereas dyskinesia is less prominent. In
psychiatric illness, bromocriptine may cause the mental condition to worsen. It should be used with caution in
patients with a history of myocardial infarction or peripheral vascular disease due to the risk of vasospasm. Because
bromocriptine is an ergot derivative, it has the potential to cause pulmonary and retroperitoneal fibrosis.
2.  Apomorphine, pramipexole, ropinirole, and rotigotine
These are nonergot dopamine agonists that are approved for the treatment of Parkinson disease. Ropinirole is also
indicated for the treatment of restless legs syndrome. Pramipexole and ropinirole are orally active agents.
Apomorphine and rotigotine are available in injectable and transdermal delivery systems, respectively. Apomorphine
is used for acute management of the hypomobility “off” phenomenon in advanced Parkinson disease. Rotigotine is
administered as a once-daily transdermal patch that provides even drug levels over 24 hours. These agents alleviate
the motor deficits in patients who have never taken levodopa and also in patients with advanced Parkinson disease
who are treated with levodopa. Dopamine agonists may delay the need to use levodopa in early Parkinson disease
and may decrease the dose of levodopa in advanced Parkinson disease. Unlike the ergotamine derivatives, these
agents do not exacerbate peripheral vascular disorders or cause fibrosis. Nausea, hallucinations, insomnia, dizziness,
constipation, and orthostatic hypotension are adverse effects of these drugs, but dyskinesias are less frequent than
with levodopa (Figure 8.11). Pramipexole is mainly excreted unchanged in the urine, and dosage adjustments are
needed in renal dysfunction. The fluoroquinolone antibiotics and other inhibitors of the cytochrome P450 (CYP450)
1A2 isoenzyme (for example, fluvoxamine) may inhibit the metabolism of ropinirole, requiring an adjustment in
ropinirole dosage. Figure 8.12 summarizes some properties of dopamine agonists.
320
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 8.11 Motor complications in patients treated with levodopa or dopamine agonists.
Figure 8.12 Pharmacokinetic properties of dopamine agonists pramipexole, ropinirole,
and rotigotine. Vd = volume of distribution. 1Increases to 12 hours in patients older than
65 years. 2Less than 10% excreted unchanged. 3Administered as a once-daily transdermal
patch.
321
www.webofpharma.com

322
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Amantadine
It was accidentally discovered that the antiviral drug amantadine [a-MAN-ta-deen] has an antiparkinsonian action.
Amantadine has several effects on a number of neurotransmitters implicated in parkinsonism, including increasing
the release of dopamine, blocking cholinergic receptors, and inhibiting the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) type of
glutamate receptors. The drug may cause restlessness, agitation, confusion, and hallucinations, and, at high doses, it
may induce acute toxic psychosis. Orthostatic hypotension, urinary retention, peripheral edema, and dry mouth also
may occur. Amantadine is less efficacious than levodopa, and tolerance develops more readily. However,
amantadine has fewer adverse effects.
323
www.webofpharma.com

F.  Antimuscarinic agents
The antimuscarinic agents are much less efficacious than levodopa and play only an adjuvant role in
antiparkinsonism therapy. The actions of benztropine [BENZ-troe-peen] and trihexyphenidyl [tri-hex-ee-FEN-i-dill]
are similar, although individual patients may respond more favorably to one drug or the other. Blockade of
cholinergic transmission produces effects similar to augmentation of dopaminergic transmission, since it helps to
correct the imbalance in the dopamine/acetylcholine activity (Figure 8.4). These agents can induce mood changes
and confusion, and produce xerostomia, constipation, and visual problems typical of muscarinic blockers (see
Chapter 5). They interfere with gastrointestinal peristalsis and are contraindicated in patients with glaucoma,
prostatic hyperplasia, or pyloric stenosis.
324
www.webofpharma.com

VII.  Drugs Used in Alzheimer Disease
Dementia of the Alzheimer type has three distinguishing features: 1) accumulation of senile plaques (β-amyloid
accumulations), 2) formation of numerous neurofibrillary tangles, and 3) loss of cortical neurons, particularly
cholinergic neurons. Current therapies aim to either improve cholinergic transmission within the CNS or prevent
excitotoxic actions resulting from overstimulation of NMDA-glutamate receptors in selected areas of the brain.
Pharmacologic intervention for Alzheimer disease is only palliative and provides modest short-term benefit. None of
the available therapeutic agents alter the underlying neurodegenerative process.
325
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
Numerous studies have linked the progressive loss of cholinergic neurons and, presumably, cholinergic transmission
within the cortex to the memory loss that is a hallmark symptom of Alzheimer disease. It is postulated that inhibition
of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) within the CNS improves cholinergic transmission, at least at those neurons that are
still functioning. The reversible AChE inhibitors approved for the treatment of Alzheimer disease include donepezil
[doe-NE-peh-zil], galantamine [ga-LAN-ta-meen], and rivastigmine [ri-va-STIG-meen]. These agents have some
selectivity for AChE in the CNS, as compared to the periphery. Galantamine may also augment the action of
acetylcholine at nicotinic receptors in the CNS. At best, these compounds may provide a modest reduction in the
rate of loss of cognitive functioning in Alzheimer patients. Rivastigmine is the only agent approved for the
management of dementia associated with Parkinson disease and also the only AChE inhibitor available as a
transdermal formulation. Rivastigmine is hydrolyzed by AChE to a carbamylated metabolite and has no interactions
with drugs that alter the activity of CYP450 enzymes. The other agents are substrates for CYP450 and have a
potential for such interactions. Common adverse effects include nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, anorexia, tremors,
bradycardia, and muscle cramps (Figure 8.13).
326
www.webofpharma.com

327
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 8.13 Adverse effects of AChE inhibitors.
328
www.webofpharma.com

B.  NMDA receptor antagonist
Stimulation of glutamate receptors in the CNS appears to be critical for the formation of certain memories.
However, overstimulation of glutamate receptors, particularly of the NMDA type, may result in excitotoxic effects
on neurons and is suggested as a mechanism for neurodegenerative or apoptotic (programmed cell death) processes.
Binding of glutamate to the NMDA receptor assists in the opening of an ion channel that allows Ca2+ to enter the
neuron. Excess intracellular Ca2+ can activate a number of processes that ultimately damage neurons and lead to
apoptosis. Memantine [meh-MAN-teen] is an NMDA receptor antagonist indicated for moderate to severe
Alzheimer disease. It acts by blocking the NMDA receptor and limiting Ca2+ influx into the neuron, such that toxic
intracellular levels are not achieved. Memantine is well tolerated, with few dose-dependent adverse events. Expected
adverse effects, such as confusion, agitation, and restlessness, are often indistinguishable from the symptoms of
Alzheimer disease. Given its different mechanism of action and possible neuroprotective effects, memantine is often
given in combination with an AChE inhibitor.
329
www.webofpharma.com

VIII.  Drugs Used in Multiple Sclerosis
MS is an autoimmune inflammatory demyelinating disease of the CNS. The course of MS is variable. For some, MS
may consist of one or two acute neurologic episodes. In others, it is a chronic, relapsing, or progressive disease that
may span 10 to 20 years. Historically, corticosteroids (for example, dexamethasone and prednisone) have been used
to treat acute exacerbations of the disease. Chemotherapeutic agents, such as cyclophosphamide and azathioprine,
have also been used.
330
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Disease-modifying therapies
Drugs currently approved for MS are indicated to decrease relapse rates or, in some cases, to prevent accumulation
of disability. The major target of these medications is to modify the immune response through inhibition of white
blood cell–mediated inflammatory processes that eventually lead to myelin sheath damage and decreased or
inappropriate axonal communication between cells.
1.  Interferon b1a and interferon b1b
The immunomodulatory effects of interferon [in-ter-FEER-on] help to diminish the inflammatory responses that
lead to demyelination of the axon sheaths. Adverse effects of these medications may include depression, local
injection site reactions, increases in hepatic enzymes, and flu-like symptoms.
2.  Glatiramer
Glatiramer [gluh-TEER-a-mur] is a synthetic polypeptide that resembles myelin protein and may act as a decoy to
T-cell attack. Some patients experience a postinjection reaction that includes flushing, chest pain, anxiety, and
itching. It is usually self-limiting.
3.  Fingolimod
Fingolimod [fin-GO-li-mod] is an oral drug that alters lymphocyte migration, resulting in fewer lymphocytes in the
CNS. Fingolimod may cause first-dose bradycardia and is associated with an increased risk of infection and macular
edema.
4.  Teriflunomide
Teriflunomide [te-ree-FLOO-no-mide] is an oral pyrimidine synthesis inhibitor that leads to a lower concentration of
active lymphocytes in the CNS. Teriflunomide may cause elevated liver enzymes. It should be avoided in pregnancy.
5.  Dimethyl fumarate
Dimethyl fumarate [dye-METH-il FOO-ma-rate] is an oral agent that may alter the cellular response to oxidative
stress to reduce disease progression. Flushing and abdominal pain are the most common adverse events.
6.  Monoclonal antibodies
Alemtuzumab [AL-em-TOOZ-ue-mab], daclizumab [dah-KLIH-zyoo-mab], natalizumab [na-ta-LIZ-oo-mab], and
ocrelizumab [OK-re-LIZ-ue-mab] are monoclonal antibodies indicated for the treatment of MS. Ocrelizumab is the
first agent to be approved for primary progressive forms of the disease. These agents can be associated with
significant toxicities, such as progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy with natalizumab, serious infections with
daclizumab and alemtuzumab, and autoimmune disorders with alemtuzumab. As such, these agents may be reserved
for patients who have failed other therapies.
331
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Symptomatic treatment
Many different classes of drugs are used to manage symptoms of MS such as spasticity, constipation, bladder
dysfunction, and depression. Dalfampridine [DAL-fam-pre-deen], an oral potassium channel blocker, improves
walking speeds in patients with MS. It is the first drug approved for this use.
332
www.webofpharma.com

IX.  Drugs Used in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
ALS is characterized by progressive degeneration of motor neurons, resulting in the inability to initiate or control
muscle movement. Riluzole [RIL-ue-zole] and edaravone [e-DAR-a-vone] are indicated for the management of
ALS. Riluzole, an oral NMDA receptor antagonist, is believed to act by inhibiting glutamate release and blocking
sodium channels. Riluzole may improve survival time in patients suffering from ALS. Edaravone is an intravenous
free radical scavenger and antioxidant that may slow the progression of ALS.
333
www.webofpharma.com

8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
A 75-year-old man with moderate Parkinson disease is no longer responding to anticholinergic treatment for
his tremors and bradykinesia. Which combination of antiparkinsonian drugs is an appropriate treatment plan?
A.  Amantadine, carbidopa, and entacapone
B.  Levodopa, carbidopa, and entacapone
C.  Pramipexole, carbidopa, and entacapone
D.  Ropinirole, carbidopa, and selegiline
Correct answer = B. To reduce the dose of levodopa and its peripheral side effects, the peripheral decarboxylase
inhibitor, carbidopa, is coadministered. As a result of this combination, more levodopa is available for
metabolism by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) to 3-O-methyldopa, which competes with levodopa for the
active transport processes into the CNS. By administering entacapone (an inhibitor of COMT), the competing
product is not formed, and more levodopa enters the brain. The other choices are not appropriate because neither
peripheral decarboxylase, nor COMT, nor monoamine oxidase metabolizes amantadine or the direct-acting
dopamine agonists ropinirole and pramipexole; thus carbidopa and entacapone should only be given with
levodopa, otherwise they are not contributing to the clinical response of the patient.
Peripheral adverse effects of levodopa, including nausea, hypotension, and cardiac arrhythmias, can be
diminished by including which drug in the therapy?
A.  Amantadine
B.  Ropinirole
C.  Carbidopa
D.  Entacapone
Correct answer = C. Carbidopa inhibits the peripheral decarboxylation of levodopa to dopamine, thereby
diminishing the gastrointestinal and cardiovascular side effects of levodopa. The other agents listed do not
ameliorate adverse effects of levodopa.
Which antiparkinsonian drug may cause vasospasm?
A.  Amantadine
B.  Bromocriptine
C.  Entacapone
D.  Ropinirole
Correct answer = B. Bromocriptine is a dopamine receptor agonist that may cause vasospasm. It is
contraindicated in patients with peripheral vascular disease. Ropinirole directly stimulates dopamine receptors,
but it does not cause vasospasm. The other drugs do not act directly on dopamine receptors.
Modest improvement in the memory of patients with Alzheimer disease may occur with drugs that increase
transmission at which receptor?
A.  Adrenergic
B.  Cholinergic
C.  Dopaminergic
D.  Serotonergic
Correct answer = B. AChE inhibitors, such as galantamine, increase cholinergic transmission in the CNS and may
cause a modest delay in the progression of Alzheimer disease. Increased transmission at the other types of
receptors listed does not result in improved memory.
A 70-year-old woman with moderate to severe dementia of the Alzheimer type has been treated with an
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor for 6 months at maximum dosing with minimal effect. Which medication is a
glutamate receptor antagonist that could provide added benefit for management of her moderate to severe
symptoms of Alzheimer disease?
A.  Rivastigmine
B.  Pramipexole
C.  Memantine
D.  Galantamine
Correct answer = C. When combined with an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, memantine has modest efficacy in
keeping patients with Alzheimer disease at or above baseline for at least 6 months and may delay disease
progression. It is currently not approved for mild cognitive impairment or mild AD.
An 80-year-old male patient with moderate Alzheimer disease had a short trial of an oral medication for
Alzheimer disease and experienced frequent nausea, along with difficulty swallowing the medication. Which
agent is best for management of Alzheimer disease in this patient?
334
www.webofpharma.com

8.7
8.8
8.9
8.10
A.  Rivastigmine
B.  Donepezil
C.  Memantine
D.  Rotigotine
Correct answer = A. Rivastigmine is the only agent available as a transdermal delivery system (patch) for the
treatment of Alzheimer disease. It may also be used for dementia associated with Parkinson disease. Daily use of
the rivastigmine patch provides steady drug levels to treat Alzheimer disease, with a possible reduced incidence
of nausea. Rotigotine is available as a transdermal delivery system; however, it is indicated for Parkinson disease
and not for Alzheimer disease.
Which medication would benefit a 55-year-old female patient recently diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS)?
A.  Pramipexole
B.  Galantamine
C.  Riluzole
D.  Glatiramer
Correct answer = C. Riluzole is approved for the debilitating and lethal illness of ALS. It is used to, ideally, delay
the progression and need for ventilator support in severe patients. It is believed to work by decreasing the release
of glutamate from the presynaptic terminal.
A 48-year-old woman with relapsing multiple sclerosis has had intolerable adverse reactions to interferon
beta (depression) and dimethyl fumarate (angioedema) and now requires an alternative treatment option.
Which medication is most appropriate for this patient?
A.  Riluzole
B.  Rotigotine
C.  Teriflunomide
D.  Galantamine
Correct answer = C. Teriflunomide is believed to exert its disease modifying and anti-inflammatory effects by
inhibiting the enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase to reduce pyrimidine synthesis. Teriflunomide may provide
an alternative treatment option with a different side effect profile compared to the prior two attempted treatments.
The other agents are not indicated for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
Which agent may cause tremors as an adverse effect and, thus, should be used with caution in patients with
Parkinson disease, even though it is also indicated for the treatment of dementia associated with Parkinson
disease?
A.  Benztropine
B.  Rotigotine
C.  Rivastigmine
D.  Dimethyl fumarate
Correct answer = C. Though rivastigmine is an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, which can cause tremors as an
adverse effect, its use is not contraindicated in patients with Parkinson disease, as this agent is also the only
medication approved for dementia associated with Parkinson disease. It should be used with caution, as it may
worsen the parkinsonian-related tremors. A risk–benefit discussion should occur with the patient and the
caregiver before rivastigmine is used.
A 50-year-old male patient with secondary progressive multiple sclerosis reports continued difficulty
walking and the distance that he can walk before being overcome by fatigue. Which agent may be beneficial
to improve walking speed and disability in this patient?
A.  Dalfampridine
B.  Donepezil
C.  Riluzole
D.  Bromocriptine
Correct answer = A. Dalfampridine is a potassium channel blocker that exerts its therapeutic effect in multiple
sclerosis via potassium channel blockade and has been proven to improve walking speed and disability in patients
with multiple sclerosis. It is the only agent that is indicated to improve walking speed in patients with MS. The
other agents are not indicated for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
335
www.webofpharma.com



================================================================================
CH9: ANXIOLYTIC AND HYPNOTIC DRUGS
Pages 336-373 (PDF page numbers)
================================================================================

9
Anxiolytic and Hypnotic Drugs
Jose A. Rey
336
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Overview
Disorders involving anxiety are among the most common mental disorders. Anxiety is an unpleasant state of
tension, apprehension, or uneasiness (a fear that arises from either a known or an unknown source). The physical
symptoms of severe anxiety are similar to those of fear (such as tachycardia, sweating, trembling, and palpitations)
and involve sympathetic activation. Episodes of mild anxiety are common life experiences and do not warrant
treatment. However, severe, chronic, debilitating anxiety may be treated with antianxiety drugs (sometimes called
anxiolytics) and/or some form of psychotherapy. Because many antianxiety drugs also cause some sedation, they
may be used clinically as both anxiolytic and hypnotic (sleep-inducing) agents. Figure 9.1 summarizes the anxiolytic
and hypnotic agents. Some antidepressants are also indicated for certain anxiety disorders; however, they are
discussed with the antidepressants (see Chapter 10).
337
www.webofpharma.com

338
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 9.1 Summary of anxiolytic and hypnotic drugs.
339
www.webofpharma.com

II.  Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines are widely used anxiolytic drugs. They have largely replaced barbiturates and meprobamate in the
treatment of anxiety and insomnia, because benzodiazepines are generally considered to be safer and more effective
(Figure 9.2). Though benzodiazepines are commonly used, they are not necessarily the best choice for anxiety or
insomnia. Certain antidepressants with anxiolytic action, such as the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),
are preferred in many cases, and nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics and antihistamines may be preferable for insomnia.
Figure 9.2 Ratio of lethal dose to effective dose for morphine (an opioid, see Chapter
14), chlorpromazine (an antipsychotic, see Chapter 11), and the anxiolytic, hypnotic
drugs, phenobarbital and diazepam.
340
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Mechanism of action
The targets for benzodiazepine actions are the γ-aminobutyric acid (GABAA) receptors. [Note: GABA is the major
inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS).] The GABAA receptors are composed of a
combination of five α, β, and γ subunits that span the postsynaptic membrane (Figure 9.3). For each subunit, many
subtypes exist (for example, there are six subtypes of the α subunit). Binding of GABA to its receptor triggers an
opening of the central ion channel, allowing chloride through the pore. The influx of chloride ions causes
hyperpolarization of the neuron and decreases neurotransmission by inhibiting the formation of action potentials.
Benzodiazepines modulate GABA effects by binding to a specific, high-affinity site (distinct from the GABA-
binding site) located at the interface of the α subunit and the γ subunit on the GABAA receptor (Figure 9.3).
Benzodiazepines increase the frequency of channel openings produced by GABA. The clinical effects of individual
benzodiazepines correlate well with the binding affinity of each drug for the GABA receptor–chloride ion channel
complex.
Figure 9.3 Schematic diagram of benzodiazepine–GABA–chloride ion channel complex.
GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid.
341
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Actions
All benzodiazepines exhibit the following actions to some extent:
1.  Reduction of anxiety
At low doses, the benzodiazepines are anxiolytic. They are thought to reduce anxiety by selectively enhancing
GABAergic transmission in neurons having the α2 subunit in their GABAA receptors, thereby inhibiting neuronal
circuits in the limbic system of the brain.
2.  Sedative/hypnotic
All benzodiazepines have sedative and calming properties, and some can produce hypnosis (artificially produced
sleep) at higher doses. The hypnotic effects are mediated by the α1-GABAA receptors.
3.  Anterograde amnesia
Temporary impairment of memory with the use of the benzodiazepines is also mediated by the α1-GABAA
receptors. The ability to learn and form new memories is also impaired.
4.  Anticonvulsant
This effect is partially, although not completely, mediated by α1-GABAA receptors.
5.  Muscle relaxant
At high doses, the benzodiazepines relax the spasticity of skeletal muscle, probably by increasing presynaptic
inhibition in the spinal cord, where the α2-GABAA receptors are largely located. [Note: Baclofen [BAK-loe-fen] is a
muscle relaxant that is believed to affect GABA receptors at the level of the spinal cord.]
342
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Therapeutic uses
The individual benzodiazepines show small differences in their relative anxiolytic, anticonvulsant, and sedative
properties. However, pharmacokinetic considerations are often important in choosing one benzodiazepine over
another.
1.  Anxiety disorders
Benzodiazepines are effective for the treatment of anxiety associated with panic disorder, generalized anxiety
disorder (GAD), social anxiety disorder, performance anxiety, and extreme phobias, such as fear of flying. The
benzodiazepines are also useful in treating anxiety related to depression and schizophrenia. These drugs should be
reserved for severe anxiety and should not be used to manage the stress of everyday life. Because of their addictive
potential, they should only be used for short periods of time. The longer-acting agents, such as clonazepam [kloe-
NAZ-e-pam], lorazepam [lor-AZ-e-pam], and diazepam [dye-AZ-e-pam], are often preferred in patients with
anxiety that require prolonged treatment. The antianxiety effects of the benzodiazepines are less subject to tolerance
than the sedative and hypnotic effects. [Note: Tolerance is decreased responsiveness to repeated doses of the drug
that occurs when used for more than 1 to 2 weeks.] For panic disorders, alprazolam [al-PRAY-zoe-lam] is effective
for short- and long-term treatment, although it may cause withdrawal reactions in approximately 30% of patients.
2.  Sleep disorders
Benzodiazepine hypnotics decrease the latency to sleep onset and increase stage II of non–rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep. Both REM sleep and slow-wave sleep are decreased. In the treatment of insomnia, it is important to
balance the sedative effect needed at bedtime with the residual sedation (“hangover”) upon awakening. Short-acting
triazolam [try-AY-zoe-lam] is effective in treating individuals who have problems falling asleep. The risk of
withdrawal and rebound insomnia is higher with triazolam than with other agents. Intermediate-acting temazepam
[te-MAZ-e-pam] is useful for patients who experience frequent awakenings and have difficulty staying asleep.
Temazepam should be administered 1 to 2 hours before the desired bedtime. Long-acting flurazepam [flure-AZ-e-
pam] is rarely used, due to its extended half-life, which may result in excessive daytime sedation and accumulation
of the drug, especially in the elderly. Estazolam [eh-STAY-zoe-lam] and quazepam [QUAY-ze-pam] are considered
intermediate- and long-acting agents, respectively. In general, hypnotics should be used for only a limited time,
usually 1 to 3 weeks.
3.  Amnesia
The shorter-acting agents are often employed as premedication for anxiety-provoking and unpleasant procedures,
such as endoscopy, dental procedures, and angioplasty. They cause a form of conscious sedation, allowing the
patient to be receptive to instructions during these procedures. Midazolam [mi-DAY-zoe-lam] is a benzodiazepine
used to facilitate anterograde amnesia while providing sedation prior to anesthesia.
4.  Seizures
Clonazepam is occasionally used as an adjunctive therapy for certain types of seizures, whereas lorazepam and
diazepam are the drugs of choice in terminating status epilepticus (see Chapter 12). Due to cross-tolerance,
chlordiazepoxide [klor-di-az-e-POX-ide], clorazepate [klor-AZ-e-pate], diazepam, lorazepam, and oxazepam [ox-
AZ-e-pam] are useful in the acute treatment of alcohol withdrawal and reduce the risk of withdrawal-related
seizures.
5.  Muscular disorders
Diazepam is useful in the treatment of skeletal muscle spasms and in treating spasticity from degenerative disorders,
such as multiple sclerosis and cerebral palsy.
343
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Pharmacokinetics
1.  Absorption and distribution
The benzodiazepines are lipophilic. They are rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration, distribute
throughout the body, and penetrate into the CNS.
2.  Duration of action
The half-lives of the benzodiazepines are important clinically, because the duration of action may determine the
therapeutic usefulness. The benzodiazepines can be roughly divided into short-, intermediate-, and long-acting
groups (Figure 9.4). The longer-acting agents form active metabolites with long half-lives. However, with some
benzodiazepines, the clinical duration of action does not correlate with the actual half-life (otherwise, a dose of
diazepam could conceivably be given only every other day, given its long half-life and active metabolites). This may
be due to receptor dissociation rates in the CNS and subsequent redistribution to fatty tissues and other areas.
344
www.webofpharma.com

345
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 9.4 Comparison of the durations of action of the benzodiazepines.
3.  Fate
Most benzodiazepines, including chlordiazepoxide and diazepam, are metabolized by the hepatic microsomal
system to compounds that are also active. For these benzodiazepines, the apparent half-life of the drug represents the
combined actions of the parent drug and its metabolites. The benzodiazepines are excreted in the urine as
glucuronides or oxidized metabolites. All benzodiazepines cross the placenta and may depress the CNS of the
newborn if given before birth. The benzodiazepines are not recommended for use during pregnancy. Nursing infants
may also be exposed to the drugs in breast milk.
346
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Dependence
Psychological and physical dependence can develop if high doses of benzodiazepines are given for a prolonged
period. All benzodiazepines are controlled substances. Abrupt discontinuation of these agents results in withdrawal
symptoms, including confusion, anxiety, agitation, restlessness, insomnia, tension, and (rarely) seizures.
Benzodiazepines with a short elimination half-life, such as triazolam, induce more abrupt and severe withdrawal
reactions than those seen with drugs that are slowly eliminated such as flurazepam (Figure 9.5).
Figure 9.5 Frequency of rebound insomnia resulting from discontinuation of
benzodiazepine therapy.
347
www.webofpharma.com

F.  Adverse effects
Drowsiness and confusion are the most common adverse effects of the benzodiazepines. Ataxia occurs at high doses
and precludes activities that require fine motor coordination, such as driving an automobile. Cognitive impairment
(decreased recall and retention of new knowledge) can occur with use of benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines should
be used cautiously in patients with liver disease. Alcohol and other CNS depressants enhance the sedative–hypnotic
effects of the benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines are, however, considerably less dangerous than the older anxiolytic
and hypnotic drugs. As a result, a drug overdose is seldom lethal unless other central depressants, such as alcohol or
opioids, are taken concurrently.
348
www.webofpharma.com

III.  Benzodiazepine Antagonist
Flumazenil [floo-MAZ-eh-nill] is a GABA receptor antagonist that rapidly reverses the effects of benzodiazepines.
The drug is available for intravenous (IV) administration only. Onset is rapid, but the duration is short, with a half-
life of about 1 hour. Frequent administration may be necessary to maintain reversal of a long-acting benzodiazepine.
Administration of flumazenil may precipitate withdrawal in dependent patients or cause seizures if a benzodiazepine
is used to control seizure activity. Seizures may also result if the patient has a mixed ingestion with tricyclic
antidepressants or antipsychotics. Dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and agitation are the most common adverse effects.
349
www.webofpharma.com

IV.  Other Anxiolytic Agents
350
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Antidepressants
Many antidepressants are effective in the treatment of chronic anxiety disorders and should be considered as first-
line agents, especially in patients with concerns for addiction or dependence. SSRIs (such as escitalopram or
paroxetine) or serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs, such as venlafaxine or duloxetine) may be used
alone or prescribed in combination with a benzodiazepine during the first week of treatment (Figure 9.6). After 4 to
6 weeks, when the antidepressant begins to produce an anxiolytic effect, the benzodiazepine dose can be tapered.
While only certain SSRIs or SNRIs have been approved for the treatment of anxiety disorders such as GAD, the
efficacy of these drugs is most likely a class effect. Long-term use of antidepressants and benzodiazepines for
anxiety disorders is often required to maintain ongoing benefit and prevent relapse.
Figure 9.6 Treatment guideline for persistent anxiety.
351
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Buspirone
Buspirone [byoo-SPYE-rone] is useful for the chronic treatment of GAD and has an efficacy comparable to that of
benzodiazepines. It has a slow onset of action and is not effective for short-term or “as-needed” treatment of acute
anxiety. The actions of buspirone appear to be mediated by serotonin (5-HT1A) receptors, although it also displays
some affinity for D2 dopamine receptors and 5-HT2A serotonin receptors. Thus, its mode of action differs from that
of the benzodiazepines. In addition, buspirone lacks the anticonvulsant and muscle-relaxant properties of the
benzodiazepines. The frequency of adverse effects is low, with the most common effects being headache, dizziness,
nervousness, nausea, and light-headedness. Sedation and psychomotor and cognitive dysfunction are minimal, and
dependence is unlikely. Buspirone does not potentiate the CNS depression of alcohol. Figure 9.7 compares common
adverse effects of buspirone and the benzodiazepine alprazolam.
352
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 9.7 Comparison of common adverse effects of buspirone and alprazolam. Results
are expressed as the percentage of patients showing each symptom.
353
www.webofpharma.com

354
www.webofpharma.com

V.  Barbiturates
The barbiturates were formerly the mainstay of treatment to sedate patients or to induce and maintain sleep. They
have been largely replaced by the benzodiazepines, primarily because barbiturates induce tolerance and physical
dependence, are lethal in overdose, and are associated with severe withdrawal symptoms. All barbiturates are
controlled substances.
355
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Mechanism of action
The sedative–hypnotic action of the barbiturates is due to their interaction with GABAA receptors, which enhances
GABAergic transmission. The binding site of barbiturates on the GABA receptor is distinct from that of the
benzodiazepines. Barbiturates potentiate GABA action on chloride entry into the neuron by prolonging the duration
of the chloride channel openings. In addition, barbiturates can block excitatory glutamate receptors. These molecular
actions lead to decreased neuronal activity.
356
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Actions
Barbiturates are classified according to their duration of action (Figure 9.8). Long-acting phenobarbital [fee-noe-
BAR-bi-tal] has a duration of action greater than a day. Pentobarbital [pen-toe-BAR-bi-tal], secobarbital [see-koe-
BAR-bi-tal], amobarbital [am-oh-BAR-bi-tal], and butalbital [bu-TAL-bi-tal] are short-acting barbiturates.
Figure 9.8 Barbiturates classified according to their durations of action.
357
www.webofpharma.com

1.  Depression of CNS
At low doses, the barbiturates produce sedation (have a calming effect and reduce excitement). At higher doses, the
drugs cause hypnosis, followed by anesthesia (loss of feeling or sensation), and, finally, coma and death. Thus, any
degree of depression of the CNS is possible, depending on the dose. Barbiturates do not raise the pain threshold and
have no analgesic properties. They may even exacerbate pain. Chronic use leads to tolerance.
2.  Respiratory depression
Barbiturates suppress the hypoxic and chemoreceptor response to CO2, and overdose is followed by respiratory
depression and death.
358
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Therapeutic uses
1.  Anesthesia
The ultra–short-acting barbiturates have been historically used intravenously to induce anesthesia but have been
replaced by other agents.
2.  Anticonvulsant
Phenobarbital has specific anticonvulsant activity that is distinguished from the nonspecific CNS depression.
However, phenobarbital can depress cognitive development in children and decrease cognitive performance in
adults, and it should be used for seizures only if other therapies have failed. Similarly, phenobarbital may be used
for the treatment of refractory status epilepticus.
3.  Sedative/hypnotic
Barbiturates have been used as mild sedatives to relieve anxiety, nervous tension, and insomnia. When used as
hypnotics, they suppress REM sleep more than other stages. However, the use of barbiturates for insomnia is no
longer generally accepted, given their adverse effects and potential for tolerance. Butalbital is commonly used in
combination products (with acetaminophen and caffeine or aspirin and caffeine) as a sedative to assist in the
management of tension or migraine headaches.
359
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Pharmacokinetics
Barbiturates are well absorbed after oral administration and distribute throughout the body. All barbiturates
redistribute from the brain to the splanchnic areas, to skeletal muscle, and, finally, to adipose tissue. Barbiturates
readily cross the placenta and can depress the fetus. These agents are metabolized in the liver, and inactive
metabolites are excreted in urine.
360
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Adverse effects
Barbiturates cause drowsiness, impaired concentration, and mental and psychomotor impairment (Figure 9.9). The
CNS depressant effects of barbiturates synergize with those of ethanol.
361
www.webofpharma.com

362
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 9.9 Adverse effects of barbiturates.
Hypnotic doses of barbiturates produce a drug “hangover” that may lead to impaired ability to function normally for
many hours after waking. Occasionally, nausea and dizziness occur. Barbiturates induce cytochrome P450
(CYP450) microsomal enzymes in the liver. Therefore, chronic barbiturate administration diminishes the action of
many drugs that are metabolized by the CYP450 system. Barbiturates are contraindicated in patients with acute
intermittent porphyria. Abrupt withdrawal from barbiturates may cause tremors, anxiety, weakness, restlessness,
nausea and vomiting, seizures, delirium, and cardiac arrest. Withdrawal is much more severe than that associated
with opioids and can result in death. Death may also result from overdose. Severe depression of respiration and
central cardiovascular depression results in a shock-like condition with shallow, infrequent breathing. Treatment
includes supportive care and gastric decontamination for recent ingestions.
363
www.webofpharma.com

VI.  Other Hypnotic Agents
364
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Zolpidem
The hypnotic zolpidem [ZOL-pi-dem] is not structurally related to benzodiazepines, but it binds to GABAA
receptors with relative selectivity for those with the α1 subunit. Zolpidem has no anticonvulsant or muscle-relaxing
properties at hypnotic doses. It shows few withdrawal effects, exhibits minimal rebound insomnia, and little
tolerance occurs with prolonged use. Zolpidem is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. It has a rapid onset of
action and short elimination half-life (about 2 to 3 hours). The drug provides a hypnotic effect for approximately 5
hours (Figure 9.10). [Note: A lingual spray and an extended-release formulation are also available. A sublingual
tablet formulation may be used for middle-of-the-night awakening.] Zolpidem undergoes hepatic oxidation by the
CYP450 system to inactive products. Thus, drugs such as rifampin, which induce this enzyme system, shorten the
half-life of zolpidem, and drugs that inhibit the CYP3A4 isoenzyme may increase the half-life. Adverse effects of
zolpidem include headache, dizziness, anterograde amnesia, and next-morning impairment (especially with
extended-release formulations). Sleep-walking, sleep-driving, and performing other activities while not fully awake
have been reported. Unlike the benzodiazepines, at usual hypnotic doses, the nonbenzodiazepine drugs, zolpidem,
zaleplon, and eszopiclone, do not significantly alter the various sleep stages and, hence, are often the preferred
hypnotics. All three agents are controlled substances.
Figure 9.10 Onset and duration of action of the commonly used nonbenzodiazepine
hypnotic agents.
365
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Zaleplon
Zaleplon [ZAL-e-plon] is an oral nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic similar to zolpidem; however, zaleplon causes fewer
residual effects on psychomotor and cognitive function compared to zolpidem or the benzodiazepines. This may be
due to its rapid elimination, with a half-life of approximately 1 hour. The drug is metabolized by CYP3A4.
366
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Eszopiclone
Eszopiclone [es-ZOE-pi-clone] is an oral nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic that has been shown to be effective for
insomnia for up to 6 months. Eszopiclone is rapidly absorbed (time to peak, 1 hour), extensively metabolized by
oxidation and demethylation via the CYP450 system, and mainly excreted in urine. Elimination half-life is
approximately 6 hours. Adverse events with eszopiclone include anxiety, dry mouth, headache, peripheral edema,
somnolence, and unpleasant taste.
367
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Melatonin receptor agonists
Ramelteon [ram-EL-tee-on] and tasimelteon [tas-i-MEL-tee-on] are selective agonists at the MT1 and MT2 subtypes
of melatonin receptors. Melatonin is a hormone secreted by the pineal gland that helps to maintain the circadian
rhythm underlying the normal sleep–wake cycle. Stimulation of MT1 and MT2 receptors by ramelteon and
tasimelteon is thought to induce and promote sleep. They have minimal potential for abuse, and no evidence of
dependence or withdrawal has been observed. Therefore, ramelteon and tasimelteon can be administered long-term.
Ramelteon is indicated for the treatment of insomnia characterized by difficulty falling asleep (increased sleep
latency). Common adverse effects of ramelteon include dizziness, fatigue, and somnolence. Ramelteon may also
increase prolactin levels. Tasimelteon is indicated for non–24-hour sleep–wake disorder, often experienced by
patients who are blind. The most common adverse effects of tasimelteon are headache, abnormal dreams, increase in
liver function tests, and possible upper respiratory tract infections. CYP450 1A2 and 3A4 are the principle
isoenzymes required for metabolism of ramelteon and tasimelteon, and, thus, drug–drug interactions are possible
with inducers or inhibitors of these enzymes.
368
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Antihistamines
Antihistamines with sedating properties, such as diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, and doxylamine, are effective in
treating mild situational insomnia (see Chapter 37). However, they have undesirable adverse effects (such as
anticholinergic effects) that make them less useful than the benzodiazepines and the nonbenzodiazepines. Sedative
antihistamines are marketed in numerous over-the-counter products.
369
www.webofpharma.com

F.  Antidepressants
The use of sedating antidepressants with strong antihistamine profiles has been ongoing for decades. Doxepin
[DOX-e-pin], an older tricyclic agent with SNRI mechanisms of antidepressant and anxiolytic action, is approved at
low doses for the management of insomnia. Other antidepressants, such as trazodone [TRAZ-oh-done], mirtazapine
[mir-TAZ-a-pine], and other older tricyclic antidepressants with strong antihistamine properties are used off-label
for the treatment of insomnia (see Chapter 10).
370
www.webofpharma.com

G.  Suvorexant
Suvorexant [soo-voe-REX-ant] is an antagonist of the orexin receptor. Orexin is a neuropeptide that promotes
wakefulness. Antagonism of the effects of orexin suppresses the wake drive from this neuropeptide. This
antagonism may also explain the adverse events that are similar to signs of narcolepsy and cataplexy. The loss of
orexin-producing neurons is believed to be an underlying pathology for narcolepsy. Daytime somnolence and
increased suicidal ideation are other reported adverse effects. Suvorexant is mainly metabolized by CYP450 3A4,
and, thus, it may have drug interactions with CYP3A4 inducers or inhibitors.
Figure 9.11 summarizes the therapeutic disadvantages and advantages of some of the anxiolytic and hypnotic
drugs.
Figure 9.11 Therapeutic disadvantages and advantages of some anxiolytic and hypnotic
agents. CNS = central nervous system.
371
www.webofpharma.com

9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
Which one of the following statements is correct regarding benzodiazepines?
A.  Benzodiazepines directly open chloride channels.
B.  Benzodiazepines show analgesic actions.
C.  Clinical improvement of anxiety requires 2 to 4 weeks of treatment with benzodiazepines.
D.  All benzodiazepines have some sedative effects.
Correct answer = D. Although all benzodiazepines can cause sedation, the drugs labeled “benzodiazepines” in
Figure 9.1 are promoted for the treatment of sleep disorder. Benzodiazepines enhance the binding of GABAA to
its receptor, which increases the permeability of chloride. The benzodiazepines do not relieve pain but may reduce
the anxiety associated with pain. Unlike the tricyclic antidepressants and the monoamine oxidase inhibitors, the
benzodiazepines are effective within hours of administration. Benzodiazepines do not produce general anesthesia
and therefore are relatively safe drugs with a high therapeutic index.
Which one of the following is a short-acting hypnotic?
A.  Phenobarbital
B.  Diazepam
C.  Chlordiazepoxide
D.  Triazolam
Correct answer = D. Triazolam is a short-acting hypnotic agent. It causes little daytime sedation. The other
medications listed are longer acting with longer half-lives.
Which one of the following statements is correct regarding the anxiolytic and hypnotic agents?
A.  Diazepam and phenobarbital induce the cytochrome P450 enzyme system.
B.  Phenobarbital is useful in the treatment of acute intermittent porphyria.
C.  Phenobarbital induces respiratory depression, which is enhanced by the consumption of ethanol.
D.  Buspirone has actions similar to those of benzodiazepines.
Correct answer = C. Barbiturates and ethanol are a potentially lethal combination because of a high risk for
respiratory depression. Only phenobarbital strongly induces the synthesis of the hepatic cytochrome P450 drug-
metabolizing system. Phenobarbital is contraindicated in the treatment of acute intermittent porphyria. Buspirone
lacks the anticonvulsant and muscle-relaxant properties of the benzodiazepines and causes only minimal sedation.
A 45-year-old man who has been injured in a car accident is brought into the emergency department. His
blood alcohol level at admission is 275 mg/dL. Hospital records show a prior hospitalization for alcohol-
related seizures. His wife confirms that he has been drinking heavily for 3 weeks. What treatment should be
provided to the patient if he goes into withdrawal?
A.  No pharmacological treatment is necessary.
B.  Lorazepam.
C.  Phenytoin.
D.  Buspirone.
Correct answer = B. It is important to treat the seizures associated with alcohol withdrawal. Benzodiazepines such
as chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, or the shorter-acting lorazepam are effective in controlling this problem. They are
less sedating than phenytoin, have fewer adverse effects, and are cross-tolerant with alcohol. Buspirone will not
prevent the seizures associated with alcohol withdrawal.
A 36-year-old male patient reports difficulty falling asleep for the past 2 weeks but needs to be able to wake
up at 6 AM for work and doesn’t want any daytime sedation. Which medication is best to recommend for the
treatment of his insomnia?
A.  Temazepam
B.  Flurazepam
C.  Zaleplon
D.  Buspirone
Correct answer = C. Zaleplon has the shortest half-life and duration of action. Buspirone is not effective as a
hypnotic agent. Temazepam and flurazepam have a longer duration of action and reduce nighttime awakenings
but have a greater risk of daytime sedation or hangover effect compared with zaleplon.
A 45-year-old woman reports constant daytime anxiety about work and family problems. This is causing
difficulties functioning and participating in necessary daily activities. Which of the following agents has a
rapid anxiolytic effect and is best for the acute management of her anxiety?
A.  Buspirone
372
www.webofpharma.com

9.7
9.8
9.9
9.10
B.  Venlafaxine
C.  Lorazepam
D.  Escitalopram
Correct answer = C. The benzodiazepines have same-day, first-dose efficacy for anxiety, whereas the other agents
require 2 to 8 weeks for clinically significant improvement in anxiety to occur.
Which of the following sedative–hypnotic agents utilizes melatonin receptor agonist as the mechanism of
action to induce sleep?
A.  Zolpidem
B.  Eszopiclone
C.  Estazolam
D.  Tasimelteon
Correct answer = D. Tasimelteon is a melatonin receptor agonist to promote sleep, especially in those individuals
with non–24-hour sleep–wake disorder. Zolpidem, eszopiclone, and estazolam all utilize the benzodiazepine
receptor.
A 50-year-old man presents with insomnia not responsive to sleep hygiene interventions. He has a long
history of alcohol and opioid abuse. He has been successfully sober for 10 years but is very concerned about
future addiction and dependence. Which is most appropriate to address insomnia and minimize the risk for
dependence in this patient?
A.  Zaleplon
B.  Flurazepam
C.  Doxepin
D.  Zolpidem
Correct answer = C. Only doxepin, a tricyclic agent with significant antihistaminergic properties, is considered to
have no risk of addiction or dependence. The other agents are all controlled substances with some risk for
addiction or dependence, especially when used for extended periods.
A 68-year-old female patient is demonstrating signs and symptoms of insomnia, especially difficulty falling
asleep. She is afraid of taking a medication that can negatively affect her memory and concentration, as she
is still working as a bookkeeper. She has been taking temazepam for the past 4 days and has noticed a
memory problem and would like to discontinue this medication. Which medication is most appropriate to
treat the insomnia and minimize the risk for cognitive impairment?
A.  Diphenhydramine
B.  Zolpidem
C.  Alprazolam
D.  Ramelteon
Correct answer = D. All of these agents, except ramelteon, have been associated with cognitive impairments,
including memory impairment. Diphenhydramine likely causes its cognitive problems from its anticholinergic
and antihistaminergic effects. Zolpidem and alprazolam are well-known causes of cognitive impairment,
including anterograde amnesia. Ramelteon is a noncontrolled hypnotic agent acting as a melatonin receptor
agonist. It is not considered to have a risk for cognitive impairment compared with the other agents listed.
An 18-year-old woman is admitted to the emergency room after an accidental overdose of alprazolam. She is
unconscious and not considered a regular user of any medications or illicit drugs. Which treatment could be
used to reverse the effect of the alprazolam overdose?
A.  Diazepam
B.  Ramelteon
C.  Flumazenil
D.  Naloxone
Correct answer = C. Flumazenil is only indicated to reverse the effects of benzodiazepines via antagonism of the
benzodiazepine receptor. It should be used with caution because of a risk of seizures if the patient has been a
long-time recipient of benzodiazepines or if the overdose attempt was with mixed drugs. Naloxone is an opioid
receptor antagonist. The other agents are not efficacious in reversing effects of benzodiazepines.
373
www.webofpharma.com



================================================================================
CH10: ANTIDEPRESSANTS
Pages 374-420 (PDF page numbers)
================================================================================

10
Antidepressants
Jose A. Rey
374
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Overview
The symptoms of depression are feelings of sadness and hopelessness, as well as the inability to experience pleasure
in usual activities, changes in sleep patterns and appetite, loss of energy, and suicidal thoughts. Mania is
characterized by the opposite behavior: enthusiasm, anger, rapid thought and speech patterns, extreme self-
confidence, and impaired judgment. This chapter provides an overview of drugs used for the treatment of depression
and mania.
375
www.webofpharma.com

II.  Mechanism of Antidepressant Drugs
Most antidepressant drugs (Figure 10.1) potentiate, either directly or indirectly, the actions of norepinephrine and/or
serotonin (5-HT) in the brain. This, along with other evidence, led to the biogenic amine theory, which proposes that
depression is due to a deficiency of monoamines, such as norepinephrine and serotonin, at certain key sites in the
brain. Conversely, the theory proposes that mania is caused by an overproduction of these neurotransmitters.
However, the biogenic amine theory of depression and mania is overly simplistic. It fails to explain the time course
for a therapeutic response, which usually occurs over several weeks compared to the immediate pharmacodynamic
effects of the agents, which are usually immediate. This suggests that decreased reuptake of neurotransmitters is
only an initial effect of the drugs, which may not be directly responsible for the antidepressant effects.
376
www.webofpharma.com

377
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 10.1 Summary of antidepressants. (Figure continues on next page)
378
www.webofpharma.com

III.  Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are a group of antidepressant drugs that specifically inhibit
serotonin reuptake, having 300- to 3000-fold greater selectivity for the serotonin transporter, as compared to the
norepinephrine transporter. This contrasts with the tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and serotonin-norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) that nonselectively inhibit the reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin (Figure 10.2).
Moreover, the SSRIs have little blocking activity at muscarinic, α-adrenergic, and histaminic H1 receptors. Because
they have different adverse effects and are relatively safe in overdose, the SSRIs have largely replaced TCAs and
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) as the drugs of choice in treating depression. The SSRIs include fluoxetine
[floo-OX-e-teen] (the prototypic drug), citalopram [sye-TAL-oh-pram], escitalopram [es-sye-TAL-oh-pram],
fluvoxamine [floo-VOX-e-meen], paroxetine [pa-ROX-e-teen], and sertraline [SER-tra-leen]. Escitalopram is the
pure S-enantiomer of citalopram.
Figure 10.2 Relative receptor specificity of some antidepressant drugs. *Venlafaxine
inhibits norepinephrine reuptake only at high doses. ++++ = very strong affinity; +++ =
strong affinity; ++ = moderate affinity; + = weak affinity; 0 = little or no affinity.
379
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Actions
The SSRIs block the reuptake of serotonin, leading to increased concentrations of the neurotransmitter in the
synaptic cleft. Antidepressants, including SSRIs, typically take at least 2 weeks to produce significant improvement
in mood, and maximum benefit may require up to 12 weeks or more (Figure 10.3).
Figure 10.3 Onset of therapeutic effects of the major antidepressant drugs requires
several weeks.
380
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Therapeutic uses
The primary indication for SSRIs is depression. A number of other psychiatric disorders also respond favorably to
SSRIs, including obsessive–compulsive disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, posttraumatic stress
disorder, social anxiety disorder, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, and bulimia nervosa (only fluoxetine is approved
for bulimia).
381
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Pharmacokinetics
All of the SSRIs are well absorbed after oral administration. Peak levels are seen in approximately 2 to 8 hours on
average. Food has little effect on absorption (except with sertraline, for which food increases its absorption). The
majority of SSRIs have plasma half-lives that range between 16 and 36 hours. Metabolism by cytochrome P450
(CYP450)–dependent enzymes and glucuronide or sulfate conjugation occur extensively. Fluoxetine differs from the
other members of the class by having a much longer half-life (50 hours), and the half-life of its active metabolite S-
norfluoxetine is quite long, averaging 10 days. Fluoxetine and paroxetine are potent inhibitors of a CYP450
isoenzyme (CYP2D6). Other CYP450 isoenzymes (CYP2C9/19, CYP3A4, and CYP1A2) are involved with SSRI
metabolism and may also be inhibited to various degrees by the SSRIs.
382
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Adverse effects
Although the SSRIs are considered to have fewer and less severe adverse effects than the TCAs and MAOIs, the
SSRIs are not without adverse effects, such as headache, sweating, anxiety and agitation, hyponatremia,
gastrointestinal (GI) effects (nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea), weakness and fatigue, sexual dysfunction, changes in
weight, sleep disturbances (insomnia and somnolence), and the above-mentioned potential for drug–drug
interactions (Figure 10.4).
383
www.webofpharma.com

384
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 10.4 Some commonly observed adverse effects of selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors.
1.  Sleep disturbances
Paroxetine and fluvoxamine are generally more sedating than activating, and they may be useful in patients who
have difficulty sleeping. Conversely, patients who are fatigued or complaining of excessive somnolence may benefit
from one of the more activating SSRIs, such as fluoxetine or sertraline.
2.  Sexual dysfunction
Sexual dysfunction, which may include loss of libido, delayed ejaculation, and anorgasmia, is common with the
SSRIs.
3.  Use in children and teenagers
Antidepressants should be used cautiously in children and teenagers, because of reports of suicidal ideation as a
result of SSRI treatment. Pediatric patients should be observed for worsening depression and suicidal thinking with
initiation or dosage change of any antidepressant. Fluoxetine, sertraline, and fluvoxamine are approved for use in
children to treat obsessive–compulsive disorder, and fluoxetine and escitalopram are approved to treat childhood
depression.
4.  Overdose
Overdose with SSRIs does not usually cause cardiac arrhythmias, with the exception of citalopram, which may
cause QT prolongation. Seizures are a possibility because all antidepressants may lower the seizure threshold. SSRIs
have the potential to cause serotonin syndrome, especially when used in the presence of an MAOI or other highly
serotonergic drug. Serotonin syndrome may include the symptoms of hyperthermia, muscle rigidity, sweating,
myoclonus (clonic muscle twitching), and changes in mental status and vital signs.
5.  Discontinuation syndrome
SSRIs have the potential to cause a discontinuation syndrome after their abrupt withdrawal, particularly the agents
with shorter half-lives and inactive metabolites. Fluoxetine has the lowest risk of causing an SSRI discontinuation
syndrome due to its longer half-life and active metabolite. Possible signs and symptoms of SSRI discontinuation
syndrome include headache, malaise and flu-like symptoms, agitation and irritability, nervousness, and changes in
sleep pattern.
385
www.webofpharma.com

IV.  Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors
Venlafaxine [VEN-la-fax-een], desvenlafaxine [dez-VEN-la-fax-een], levomilnacipran [lee-voe-mil-NA-si-pran],
and duloxetine [doo-LOX-e-teen] inhibit the reuptake of both serotonin and norepinephrine (Figure 10.5) and, thus,
are termed SNRIs. Depression is often accompanied by chronic pain, such as backache and muscle aches, for which
SSRIs are relatively ineffective. This pain is, in part, modulated by serotonin and norepinephrine pathways in the
central nervous system. With dual inhibition of serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake, both the SNRIs and the
TCAs may be effective in relieving pain. These agents are also used in the treatment of pain syndromes, such as
diabetic peripheral neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, fibromyalgia, and low back pain. The SNRIs, unlike the
TCAs, have little activity at α-adrenergic, muscarinic, or histamine receptors and, thus, have fewer receptor-
mediated adverse effects than the TCAs. The SNRIs may precipitate a discontinuation syndrome if treatment is
abruptly stopped.
Figure 10.5 Proposed mechanism of action of selective serotonin-norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor antidepressant drugs.
386
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Venlafaxine and desvenlafaxine
Venlafaxine is an inhibitor of serotonin reuptake and, at medium to higher doses, is an inhibitor of norepinephrine
reuptake. Venlafaxine has minimal inhibition of the CYP450 isoenzymes and is a substrate of the CYP2D6
isoenzyme. Desvenlafaxine is the active, demethylated metabolite of venlafaxine. The most common side effects of
venlafaxine are nausea, headache, sexual dysfunction, dizziness, insomnia, sedation, and constipation. At high doses,
there may be an increase in blood pressure and heart rate. The clinical activity and adverse effect profile of
desvenlafaxine are similar to that of venlafaxine.
387
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Duloxetine
Duloxetine inhibits serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake at all doses. It is extensively metabolized in the liver to
inactive metabolites and should be avoided in patients with liver dysfunction. GI side effects are common with
duloxetine, including nausea, dry mouth, and constipation. Insomnia, dizziness, somnolence, sweating, and sexual
dysfunction are also seen. Duloxetine may increase blood pressure or heart rate. Duloxetine is a moderate inhibitor
of CYP2D6 isoenzymes and may increase concentrations of drugs metabolized by this pathway, such as
antipsychotics.
388
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Levomilnacipran
Levomilnacipran is an enantiomer of milnacipran (an older SNRI used for the treatment of depression in Europe and
fibromyalgia in the United States). The adverse effect profile of levomilnacipran is similar to other SNRIs. It is
primarily metabolized by CYP3A4, and, thus, activity may be altered by inducers or inhibitors of this enzyme
system.
389
www.webofpharma.com

V.  Atypical Antidepressants
The atypical antidepressants are a mixed group of agents that have actions at several different sites. This group
includes bupropion [byoo-PROE-pee-on], mirtazapine [mir-TAZ-a-peen], nefazodone [ne-FAZ-oh-done], trazodone
[TRAZ-oh-done], vilazodone [vil-AZ-oh-done], and vortioxetine [vor-TEE-ox-e-teen].
390
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Bupropion
Bupropion is a weak dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor that is used to alleviate the symptoms of
depression. Bupropion is also useful for decreasing cravings and attenuating withdrawal symptoms of nicotine in
patients trying to quit smoking. Side effects may include dry mouth, sweating, nervousness, tremor, and a dose-
dependent increased risk for seizures. It has a very low incidence of sexual dysfunction. Bupropion is metabolized
by the CYP2B6 pathway and has a relatively low risk for drug–drug interactions, given the few agents that
inhibit/induce this enzyme. Use of bupropion should be avoided in patients at risk for seizures or those who have
eating disorders such as bulimia.
391
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Mirtazapine
Mirtazapine enhances serotonin and norepinephrine neurotransmission by serving as an antagonist at central
presynaptic α2 receptors. Additionally, some of the antidepressant activity may be related to antagonism at 5-HT2
receptors. It is sedating because of its potent antihistaminic activity, but it does not cause the antimuscarinic side
effects of the TCAs or interfere with sexual function like the SSRIs. Sedation, increased appetite, and weight gain
frequently occur (Figure 10.6).
Figure 10.6 Some commonly observed adverse effects of mirtazapine.
392
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Nefazodone and trazodone
These drugs are weak inhibitors of serotonin reuptake and are also antagonists at the postsynaptic 5-HT2a receptor.
Both agents are sedating, probably because of their potent histamine H1-blocking activity. Trazodone is commonly
used off-label for the management of insomnia. Trazodone has been associated with priapism, and nefazodone has
been associated with a risk for hepatotoxicity. Both agents also have mild-to-moderate α1 receptor antagonism,
contributing to orthostasis and dizziness.
393
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Vilazodone
Vilazodone is a serotonin reuptake inhibitor and a 5-HT1a receptor partial agonist. Although the extent to which the
5-HT1a receptor activity contributes to its therapeutic effects is unknown, this possible mechanism of action renders
it unique from that of the SSRIs. The adverse effect profile of vilazodone is similar to the SSRIs, including a risk for
discontinuation syndrome if abruptly stopped.
394
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Vortioxetine
Vortioxetine utilizes a combination of serotonin reuptake inhibition, 5-HT1a agonism, and 5-HT3 and 5-HT7
antagonism as its suggested mechanisms of action to treat depression. It is unclear to what extent the activities other
than inhibition of serotonin reuptake influence the overall effects of vortioxetine. The common adverse effects
include nausea, constipation, and sexual dysfunction, which may be expected due to its serotonergic mechanisms.
395
www.webofpharma.com

VI.  Tricyclic Antidepressants
The TCAs inhibit norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake into the presynaptic neuron and, thus, if discovered today,
might have been referred to as SNRIs, except for their differences in adverse effects relative to this newer class of
antidepressants. The TCAs include the tertiary amines imipramine [ee-MIP-ra-meen] (the prototype drug),
amitriptyline [a-mee-TRIP-ti-leen], clomipramine [kloe-MIP-ra-meen], doxepin [DOX-e-pin], and trimipramine
[trye-MIP-ra-meen], and the secondary amines desipramine [dess-IP-ra-meen] and nortriptyline [nor-TRIP-ti-leen]
(the N-demethylated metabolites of imipramine and amitriptyline, respectively) and protriptyline [proe-TRIP-ti-
leen]. Maprotiline [ma-PROE-ti-leen] and amoxapine [a-MOX-a-peen] are related “tetracyclic” antidepressant
agents and are commonly included in the general class of TCAs.
396
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Mechanism of action
1.  Inhibition of neurotransmitter reuptake
TCAs and amoxapine are potent inhibitors of the neuronal reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin into presynaptic
nerve terminals. Maprotiline and desipramine are relatively selective inhibitors of norepinephrine reuptake.
2.  Blocking of receptors
TCAs also block serotonergic, α-adrenergic, histaminic, and muscarinic receptors. It is not known if any of these
actions produce the therapeutic benefit of the TCAs. However, actions at these receptors are likely responsible for
many of their adverse effects. Amoxapine also blocks 5-HT2 and dopamine D2 receptors.
397
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Actions
The TCAs improve mood, in 50% to 70% of individuals with major depression. The onset of the mood elevation is
slow, requiring 2 weeks or longer (Figure 10.3). Patient response can be used to adjust dosage. Tapering of these
agents is recommended to minimize discontinuation syndromes and cholinergic rebound effects.
398
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Therapeutic uses
The TCAs are effective in treating moderate to severe depression. Some patients with panic disorder also respond to
TCAs. Imipramine is used as an alternative to desmopressin or nonpharmacologic therapies (enuresis alarms) in the
treatment of bed-wetting in children. The TCAs, particularly amitriptyline, have been used to help prevent migraine
headache and treat chronic pain syndromes (for example, neuropathic pain) in a number of conditions for which the
cause of pain is unclear. Low doses of TCAs, especially doxepin, can be used to treat insomnia.
399
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Pharmacokinetics
TCAs are well absorbed upon oral administration. As a result of their variable first-pass metabolism in the liver,
TCAs have low and inconsistent bioavailability. These drugs are metabolized by the hepatic microsomal system
(and, thus, may be sensitive to agents that induce or inhibit the CYP450 isoenzymes) and conjugated with
glucuronic acid. Ultimately, the TCAs are excreted as inactive metabolites via the kidney.
400
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Adverse effects
Blockade of muscarinic receptors leads to blurred vision, xerostomia, urinary retention, sinus tachycardia,
constipation, and aggravation of angle-closure glaucoma (Figure 10.7). These agents affect cardiac conduction
similar to quinidine and may precipitate life-threatening arrhythmias in an overdose situation. The TCAs also block
α-adrenergic receptors, causing orthostatic hypotension, dizziness, and reflex tachycardia. Sedation is related to the
ability of these drugs to block histamine H1 receptors. Weight gain is a common adverse effect of the TCAs. Sexual
dysfunction occurs in a minority of patients, and the incidence is lower than that associated with the SSRIs.
401
www.webofpharma.com

402
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 10.7 Some commonly observed adverse effects of tricyclic antidepressants.
All antidepressants, including TCAs, should be used with caution in patients with bipolar disorder, even during their
depressed state, because antidepressants may cause a switch to manic behavior. The TCAs have a narrow therapeutic
index (for example, five- to six-fold the maximal daily dose of imipramine can be lethal). Depressed patients who
are suicidal should be given only limited quantities of these drugs and be monitored closely. Drug interactions with
the TCAs are shown in Figure 10.8. The TCAs may exacerbate certain medical conditions, such as benign prostatic
hyperplasia, epilepsy, and preexisting arrhythmias.
403
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 10.8 Drugs interacting with tricyclic antidepressants. CNS = central nervous
system; MAO = monoamine oxidase.
404
www.webofpharma.com

VII.  Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) is a mitochondrial enzyme found in nerve and other tissues, such as the gut and liver. In
the neuron, MAO functions as a “safety valve” to oxidatively deaminate and inactivate any excess neurotransmitters
(for example, norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin) that may leak out of synaptic vesicles when the neuron is at
rest. The MAOIs may irreversibly or reversibly inactivate the enzyme, permitting neurotransmitters to escape
degradation and, therefore, to accumulate within the presynaptic neuron and leak into the synaptic space. The four
MAOIs currently available for the treatment of depression include phenelzine [FEN-el-zeen], tranylcypromine [tran-
il-SIP-roe-meen], isocarboxazid [eye-soe-car-BOX-ih-zid], and selegiline [seh-LEDGE-ah-leen]. [Note: Selegiline
is also used for the treatment of Parkinson disease. It is the only antidepressant available in a transdermal delivery
system.] Use of MAOIs is limited due to the complicated dietary restrictions required while taking these agents.
405
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Mechanism of action
Most MAOIs, such as phenelzine, form stable complexes with the enzyme, causing irreversible inactivation. This
results in increased stores of norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine within the neuron and subsequent diffusion of
excess neurotransmitter into the synaptic space (Figure 10.9). These drugs inhibit not only MAO in the brain but
also MAO in the liver and gut that catalyzes oxidative deamination of drugs and potentially toxic substances, such as
tyramine, which is found in certain foods. The MAOIs, therefore, show a high incidence of drug–drug and drug–
food interactions. Selegiline administered as the transdermal patch may produce less inhibition of gut and hepatic
MAO at low doses because it avoids first-pass metabolism.
406
www.webofpharma.com

407
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 10.9 Mechanism of action of monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).
408
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Actions
Although MAO is fully inhibited after several days of treatment, the antidepressant action of the MAOIs, like that of
the SSRIs, SNRIs, and TCAs, is delayed several weeks. Selegiline and tranylcypromine have an amphetamine-like
stimulant effect that may produce agitation or insomnia.
409
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Therapeutic uses
The MAOIs are indicated for depressed patients who are unresponsive or intolerant of other antidepressants.
Because of their risk for drug–drug and drug–food interactions, the MAOIs are considered last-line agents in many
treatment settings.
410
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Pharmacokinetics
These drugs are well absorbed after oral administration. Enzyme regeneration, when irreversibly inactivated, varies,
but it usually occurs several weeks after termination of the drug. Thus, when switching antidepressant agents, a
minimum of 2 weeks of delay must be allowed after termination of MAOI therapy and the initiation of another
antidepressant from any other class. MAOIs are hepatically metabolized and excreted rapidly in urine.
411
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Adverse effects
Severe and often unpredictable side effects, due to drug–food and drug–drug interactions, limit the widespread use
of MAOIs. For example, tyramine, which is contained in foods, such as aged cheeses and meats, liver, pickled or
smoked fish, and red wines, is normally inactivated by MAO in the gut. Individuals receiving a MAOI are unable to
degrade tyramine obtained from the diet. Tyramine causes the release of large amounts of stored catecholamines
from nerve terminals, resulting in a hypertensive crisis, with signs and symptoms such as occipital headache, stiff
neck, tachycardia, nausea, hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias, seizures, and, possibly, stroke. Patients must,
therefore, be educated to avoid tyramine-containing foods. Other possible adverse effects of treatment with MAOIs
include drowsiness, orthostatic hypotension, blurred vision, dry mouth, and constipation. SSRIs should not be
coadministered with MAOIs due to the risk of serotonin syndrome. Both SSRIs and MAOIs require a washout
period of at least 2 weeks before the other type is administered, with the exception of fluoxetine, which should be
discontinued at least 6 weeks before an MAOI is initiated. In addition, the MAOIs have many other critical drug
interactions, and caution is required when administering these agents concurrently with other drugs. Figure 10.10
summarizes the side effects of the antidepressant drugs.
412
www.webofpharma.com

413
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 10.10 Side effects of some drugs used to treat depression.
414
www.webofpharma.com

VIII.  Serotonin–Dopamine Antagonists
While 60% to 80% of patients respond favorably to antidepressants, 20% to 40% experience a partial or poor
response to monotherapy. The serotonin–dopamine antagonists (SDAs), or atypical antipsychotics, are occasionally
used as adjunctive treatments to antidepressants in partial responders. Aripiprazole, brexpiprazole, quetiapine, and
the combination of fluoxetine and olanzapine are approved for use as adjuncts in major depressive disorder (MDD).
415
www.webofpharma.com

XI.  Treatment of Mania and Bipolar Disorder
The treatment of bipolar disorder has increased in recent years due to increased recognition of the disorder and also
an increase in the number of available medications for the treatment of mania.
416
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Lithium
Lithium salts are used acutely and prophylactically for managing bipolar patients. Lithium is effective in treating
60% to 80% of patients exhibiting mania and hypomania. Although many cellular processes are altered by treatment
with lithium, the mode of action is unknown. The therapeutic index of lithium is extremely low, and lithium can be
toxic. Common adverse effects may include headache, dry mouth, polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, GI distress, fine
hand tremor, dizziness, fatigue, dermatologic reactions, and sedation. Adverse effects due to higher plasma levels
may indicate toxicity and include ataxia, slurred speech, coarse tremors, confusion, and convulsions. Thyroid
function may be decreased and should be monitored. Lithium is renally eliminated, and though caution should be
used when dosing this drug in renally impaired patients, it may be the best choice in patients with hepatic
impairment.
417
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Other drugs
Several antiepileptic drugs, including carbamazepine, valproic acid, and lamotrigine (see Chapter 12) are approved
as mood stabilizers for bipolar disorder. Other agents that may improve manic symptoms include the older
(chlorpromazine and haloperidol) and newer antipsychotics. The atypical antipsychotics risperidone, olanzapine,
ziprasidone, aripiprazole, asenapine, cariprazine, and quetiapine (see Chapter 11) are also used for the management
of mania. Quetiapine, lurasidone, and the combination of olanzapine and fluoxetine have been approved for bipolar
depression.
418
www.webofpharma.com

10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
A 55-year-old teacher was diagnosed with depression. After 6 weeks of therapy with fluoxetine, his
symptoms improved, but he complains of sexual dysfunction. Which of the following drugs might be useful
for management of depression in this patient?
A.  Sertraline
B.  Citalopram
C.  Mirtazapine
D.  Lithium
Correct answer = C. Mirtazapine is largely free from sexual side effects. However, sexual dysfunction commonly
occurs with SSRIs (sertraline and citalopram), as well as with TCAs and SNRIs. Lithium is used for the treatment
of mania and bipolar disorder.
A 25-year-old woman has a long history of depressive symptoms accompanied by body aches and pain
secondary to a car accident. Which of the following drugs might be useful in this patient?
A.  Fluoxetine
B.  Sertraline
C.  Phenelzine
D.  Duloxetine
Correct answer = D. Duloxetine is an SNRI that can be used for depression accompanied by symptoms of pain.
SSRIs (fluoxetine and sertraline) and MAOIs (phenelzine) have little activity against pain syndromes.
A 51-year-old woman with symptoms of major depression also has angle-closure glaucoma. Which
antidepressant should be avoided in this patient?
A.  Amitriptyline
B.  Bupropion
C.  Mirtazapine
D.  Fluvoxamine
Correct answer = A. Because of its potent antimuscarinic activity, amitriptyline should not be given to patients
with glaucoma because of the risk of acute increases in intraocular pressure. The other antidepressants all lack
antagonist activity at the muscarinic receptor.
A 36-year-old man presents with symptoms of compulsive behavior. He realizes that his behavior is
interfering with his ability to accomplish his daily tasks but cannot seem to stop himself. Which drug would
be most helpful to this patient?
A.  Desipramine
B.  Paroxetine
C.  Amitriptyline
D.  Selegiline
Correct answer = B. SSRIs are particularly effective in treating obsessive–compulsive disorder, and paroxetine is
approved for this condition. The other drugs are less effective in the treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder.
Which antidepressant has, as its two proposed principal mechanisms of action, 5-HT1a receptor partial
agonism and 5-HT reuptake inhibition?
A.  Fluoxetine
B.  Aripiprazole
C.  Maprotiline
D.  Vilazodone
Correct answer = D. In addition to inhibition of serotonin reuptake, the antidepressant activity of vilazodone may
be related to its 5-HT1a receptor agonism. Though aripiprazole is also proposed to have 5-HT1a partial agonism, it
is not a serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
Which antidepressant is the most sedating?
A.  Bupropion
B.  Duloxetine
C.  Doxepin
D.  Venlafaxine
Correct answer = C. Doxepin is the most sedating of the list due to its histamine-blocking activity.
419
www.webofpharma.com

10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
Which mood stabilizer is completely renally eliminated and may be beneficial for patients with hepatic
impairment?
A.  Valproic acid
B.  Carbamazepine
C.  Lithium
D.  Risperidone
Correct answer = C. Lithium is the only agent for bipolar disorder that does not require hepatic metabolism and,
thus, may be dosed without issue in a hepatically impaired patient. However, if the patient had renal impairment,
the lithium dosage would have to be adjusted.
Which antidepressant has, as its two principal mechanisms of action, 5-HT2A receptor antagonism and α2
receptor antagonism?
A.  Fluoxetine
B.  Doxepin
C.  Maprotiline
D.  Mirtazapine
Correct answer = D. Mirtazapine is the only antidepressant with this combination of mechanisms of action that
are believed to contribute to its therapeutic effects.
Which mood-stabilizing agent is most likely to decrease the thyroid function?
A.  Carbamazepine
B.  Lithium
C.  Valproic acid
D.  Chlorpromazine
Correct answer = B. Lithium is best known for causing a drug-induced hypothyroidism in patients after long-term
use. Though it is possible with other mood stabilizers, lithium has the most reported cases, and thus, thyroid
function tests should be performed at baseline and during follow-up to monitor for this possible effect.
Which antidepressant agent has significant α1 receptor antagonism and, thus, is a poor choice in an elderly
female with depressive symptoms due to a higher risk of falls related to orthostatic hypotension?
A.  Venlafaxine
B.  Bupropion
C.  Escitalopram
D.  Amitriptyline
Correct answer = D. Venlafaxine, bupropion, and escitalopram have very little effect on decreasing blood
pressure (no α1 receptor antagonism) and are considered acceptable choices for treatment of depression in the
elderly. Amitriptyline is associated with a high risk for orthostasis in the elderly and should be avoided due to its
adverse effect profile and risk for falls.
420
www.webofpharma.com



================================================================================
CH11: ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS
Pages 421-442 (PDF page numbers)
================================================================================

11
Antipsychotic Drugs
Jose A. Rey
421
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Overview
The antipsychotic drugs are used primarily to treat schizophrenia, but they are also effective in other psychotic and
manic states. The use of antipsychotic medications involves a difficult trade-off between the benefit of alleviating
psychotic symptoms and the risk of a wide variety of adverse effects. Antipsychotic drugs (Figure 11.1) are not
curative and do not eliminate chronic thought disorders, but they often decrease the intensity of hallucinations and
delusions and permit the person with schizophrenia to function in a supportive environment.
422
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 11.1 Summary of antipsychotic agents.
423
www.webofpharma.com

II.  Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a type of chronic psychosis characterized by delusions, hallucinations (often in the form of voices),
and disturbances in thought. The onset of illness is often during late adolescence or early adulthood. It occurs in
about 1% of the population and is a chronic and disabling disorder. Schizophrenia has a strong genetic component
and probably reflects some fundamental developmental and biochemical abnormality, possibly a dysfunction of the
mesolimbic or mesocortical dopaminergic neuronal pathways.
424
www.webofpharma.com

III.  Antipsychotic Drugs
The antipsychotic drugs are usually divided into first- and second-generation agents. The first-generation drugs are
further classified as “low potency” or “high potency.” This classification does not indicate clinical effectiveness of
the drugs but rather specifies affinity for the dopamine D2 receptor, which, in turn, may influence the adverse effect
profile of the drug.
425
www.webofpharma.com

A.  First-generation antipsychotics
The first-generation antipsychotic drugs (also called conventional) are competitive inhibitors at a variety of
receptors, but their antipsychotic effects reflect competitive blockade of dopamine D2 receptors. First-generation
antipsychotics are more likely to be associated with movement disorders known as extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS),
particularly drugs that bind tightly to dopaminergic neuroreceptors, such as haloperidol [HAL-oh-PER-i-dol].
Movement disorders are somewhat less likely with medications that bind less potently, such as chlorpromazine
[klor-PROE-ma-zeen]. No one drug is clinically more effective than another.
426
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Second-generation antipsychotic drugs
The second-generation antipsychotic drugs (also called “atypical” antipsychotics) have a lower incidence of EPS
than the first-generation agents but are associated with a higher risk of metabolic adverse effects, such as diabetes,
hypercholesterolemia, and weight gain. The second-generation drugs owe their unique activity to blockade of both
serotonin and dopamine receptors.
1.  Drug selection
Second-generation agents are generally used as first-line therapy for schizophrenia to minimize the risk of
debilitating EPS associated with the first-generation drugs that act primarily at the dopamine D2 receptor. The
second-generation antipsychotics exhibit an efficacy that is equivalent to, and occasionally exceeds, that of the first-
generation antipsychotic agents. Differences in therapeutic efficacy among the second-generation drugs have not
been established, and individual patient response and comorbid conditions must often be used to guide drug
selection.
2.  Refractory patients
Approximately 10% to 20% of patients with schizophrenia have an insufficient response to first- and second-
generation antipsychotics. For these patients, clozapine [KLOE-za-peen] has shown to be an effective antipsychotic
with a minimal risk of EPS. However, its clinical use is limited to refractory patients because of serious adverse
effects. Clozapine can produce bone marrow suppression, seizures, and cardiovascular side effects, such as
orthostasis. The risk of severe agranulocytosis necessitates frequent monitoring of white blood cell counts.
427
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Mechanism of action
1.  Dopamine antagonism
All of the first-generation and most of the second-generation antipsychotic drugs block D2 dopamine receptors in the
brain and the periphery (Figure 11.2).
Figure 11.2 Dopamine-blocking actions of antipsychotic drugs.
2.  Serotonin receptor–blocking activity
Most of the second-generation agents exert part of their action through inhibition of serotonin receptors (5-HT),
particularly 5-HT2A receptors. Clozapine has high affinity for D1, D4, 5-HT2, muscarinic, and α-adrenergic
428
www.webofpharma.com

receptors, but it is also a weak dopamine D2 receptor antagonist (Figure 11.3). Risperidone [ris-PER-ih-dohn] blocks
5-HT2A receptors to a greater extent than it does D2 receptors, as does olanzapine [oh-LANZ-ah-peen]. The second-
generation antipsychotics aripiprazole [a-rih-PIP-ra-zole], brexpiprazole [brex-PIP-ra-zole], and cariprazine [kar-
IP-ra-zeen] are partial agonists at D2 and 5-HT1A receptors, as well as antagonists of 5-HT2A receptors. Quetiapine
[qwe-TY-uh-peen] is relatively weak at blockade of D2 and 5-HT2A receptors. Its low risk for EPS may also be
related to the relatively short period of time it binds to the D2 receptor. Pimavanserin [pim-a-VAN-ser-in] appears to
act as an inverse agonist and antagonist at the 5-HT2A receptor and the 5-HT2C receptor, with no appreciable affinity
for dopamine receptors. Pimavanserin is indicated for psychosis associated with Parkinson disease.
Figure 11.3 Relative affinities of clozapine, chlorpromazine, and haloperidol at D1 and
D2 dopaminergic receptors.
429
www.webofpharma.com

430
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Actions
The clinical effects of antipsychotic drugs reflect a blockade at dopamine and/or serotonin receptors. However,
many antipsychotic agents also block cholinergic, adrenergic, and histaminergic receptors (Figure 11.4). It is
unknown what role, if any, these actions have in alleviating the symptoms of psychosis. However, the undesirable
adverse effects of antipsychotic drugs often result from pharmacological actions at these other receptors.
Figure 11.4 Antipsychotic drugs block dopaminergic and serotonergic receptors as well
as adrenergic, cholinergic, and histamine-binding receptors.
1.  Antipsychotic effects
All antipsychotic drugs can reduce hallucinations and delusions associated with schizophrenia (known as “positive”
symptoms) by blocking D2 receptors in the mesolimbic system of the brain. The “negative” symptoms, such as
blunted affect, apathy, and impaired attention, as well as cognitive impairment, are not as responsive to therapy,
particularly with the first-generation antipsychotics. Many second-generation agents, such as clozapine, can
ameliorate the negative symptoms to some extent.
2.  Extrapyramidal effects
Dystonias (sustained contraction of muscles leading to twisting, distorted postures), Parkinson-like symptoms,
akathisia (motor restlessness), and tardive dyskinesia (involuntary movements, usually of the tongue, lips, neck,
trunk, and limbs) can occur with both acute and chronic treatment. Blockade of dopamine receptors in the
nigrostriatal pathway is believed to cause these unwanted movement symptoms. The second-generation
antipsychotics exhibit a lower incidence of EPS.
3.  Antiemetic effects
The antipsychotic drugs have antiemetic effects that are mediated by blocking D2 receptors of the chemoreceptor
trigger zone of the medulla (see Chapter 40). Figure 11.5 summarizes the antiemetic uses of antipsychotic agents, as
well as other drugs that combat nausea.
431
www.webofpharma.com

432
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 11.5 Therapeutic application of antiemetic agents.
4.  Anticholinergic effects
Some of the antipsychotics, particularly thioridazine [THYE-oh-RID-a-zeen], chlorpromazine, clozapine, and
olanzapine, produce anticholinergic effects. These effects include blurred vision, dry mouth (the exception is
clozapine, which increases salivation), confusion, and inhibition of gastrointestinal and urinary tract smooth muscle,
leading to constipation and urinary retention. The anticholinergic effects may actually assist in reducing the risk of
EPS with these agents.
5.  Other effects
Blockade of α-adrenergic receptors causes orthostatic hypotension and light-headedness. The antipsychotics also
alter temperature-regulating mechanisms and can produce poikilothermia (condition in which body temperature
varies with the environment). In the pituitary, antipsychotics that block D2 receptors may cause an increase in
prolactin release. Sedation occurs with those drugs that are potent antagonists of the H1-histamine receptor,
including chlorpromazine, olanzapine, quetiapine, and clozapine. Sexual dysfunction may also occur with the
antipsychotics due to various receptor-binding characteristics. Weight gain is also a common adverse effect of
antipsychotics and is more significant with the second-generation agents.
433
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Therapeutic uses
1.  Treatment of schizophrenia
The antipsychotics are the only efficacious pharmacological treatment for schizophrenia. The first-generation
antipsychotics are generally most effective in treating the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. The atypical
antipsychotics with 5-HT2A receptor–blocking activity may be effective in many patients who are resistant to the
traditional agents, especially in treating the negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
2.  Prevention of nausea and vomiting
The older antipsychotics (most commonly, prochlorperazine [PROE-klor-PER-a-zeen]) are useful in the treatment
of drug-induced nausea.
3.  Other uses
The antipsychotic drugs can be used as tranquilizers to manage agitated and disruptive behavior secondary to other
disorders. Chlorpromazine is used to treat intractable hiccups. Pimozide [PIM-oh-zide] is primarily indicated for
treatment of the motor and phonic tics of Tourette disorder. However, risperidone and haloperidol are also
commonly prescribed for this tic disorder. Also, risperidone and aripiprazole are approved for the management of
disruptive behavior and irritability secondary to autism. Many antipsychotic agents are approved for the
management of the manic and mixed symptoms associated with bipolar disorder. Lurasidone [loo-RAS-i-done] and
quetiapine are indicated for the treatment of bipolar depression. Paliperidone [pal-ee-PER-i-dohn] is approved for
the treatment of schizoaffective disorder. Some antipsychotics (aripiprazole, brexpiprazole, and quetiapine) are used
as adjunctive agents with antidepressants for treatment-refractory depression.
434
www.webofpharma.com

F.  Absorption and metabolism
After oral administration, the antipsychotics show variable absorption that is unaffected by food (except for
ziprasidone [zi-PRAS-i-done], lurasidone, and paliperidone, the absorption of which is increased with food). These
agents readily pass into the brain and have a large volume of distribution. They are metabolized to many different
metabolites, usually by the cytochrome P-450 system in the liver, particularly the CYP2D6, CYP1A2, and CYP3A4
isoenzymes. Some metabolites are active and have been developed as pharmacological agents themselves (for
example, paliperidone is the active metabolite of risperidone, and the antidepressant amoxapine is the active
metabolite of loxapine). Fluphenazine decanoate, haloperidol decanoate, risperidone microspheres, paliperidone
palmitate, aripiprazole monohydrate, aripiprazole lauroxil, and olanzapine pamoate are long-acting injectable
(LAI) formulations of antipsychotics. These formulations usually have a therapeutic duration of action of 2 to 4
weeks, with some having a duration of 6 to 12 weeks. Therefore, these LAI formulations are often used to treat
outpatients and individuals who are nonadherent with oral medications.
435
www.webofpharma.com

G.  Adverse effects
Adverse effects of the antipsychotic drugs can occur in practically all patients and are significant in about 80%
(Figure 11.6).
436
www.webofpharma.com

437
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 11.6 Adverse effects observed in individuals treated with antipsychotic drugs.
1.  Extrapyramidal effects
The inhibitory effects of dopaminergic neurons are normally balanced by the excitatory actions of cholinergic
neurons in the striatum. Blocking dopamine receptors alters this balance, causing a relative excess of cholinergic
influence, which results in extrapyramidal motor effects. The appearance of the movement disorders is generally
time- and dose dependent, with dystonias occurring within a few hours to days of treatment, followed by akathisias
occurring within days to weeks. Parkinson-like symptoms of bradykinesia, rigidity, and tremor usually occur within
weeks to months of initiating treatment. Tardive dyskinesia (see below), which can be irreversible, may occur after
months or years of treatment.
If cholinergic activity is also blocked, a new, more nearly normal balance is restored, and extrapyramidal effects
are minimized. This can be achieved by administration of an anticholinergic drug, such as benztropine [BENZ-troe-
peen]. The therapeutic trade-off is a lower incidence of EPS in exchange for the adverse effect of muscarinic
receptor blockade. Akathisia may respond better to β-blockers (for example, propranolol) or benzodiazepines, rather
than anticholinergic medications.
2.  Tardive dyskinesia
Long-term treatment with antipsychotics can cause this motor disorder. Patients display involuntary movements,
including bilateral and facial jaw movements and “fly-catching” motions of the tongue. A prolonged holiday from
antipsychotics may cause the symptoms to diminish or disappear within a few months. However, in many
individuals, tardive dyskinesia is irreversible and persists after discontinuation of therapy. Tardive dyskinesia is
postulated to result from an increased number of dopamine receptors that are synthesized as a compensatory
response to long-term dopamine receptor blockade. This makes the neuron supersensitive to the actions of
dopamine, and it allows the dopaminergic input to this structure to overpower the cholinergic input, causing excess
movement in the patient. Traditional anti-EPS medications may actually worsen this condition. Valbenazine [val-
BEN-a-zeen] and deutetrabenazine [doo-TET-ra-BEN-a-zeen] are inhibitors of the vesicular monoamine
transporter, and they are indicated for the management of tardive dyskinesia. These agents cause a decreased uptake
of monoamines into synaptic vesicles and depletion of monoamine stores, ideally focused on dopamine, to address
the symptoms of tardive dyskinesia.
3.  Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
This potentially fatal reaction to antipsychotic drugs is characterized by muscle rigidity, fever, altered mental status
and stupor, unstable blood pressure, and myoglobinemia. Treatment necessitates discontinuation of the antipsychotic
agent and supportive therapy. Administration of dantrolene or bromocriptine may be helpful.
4.  Other effects
Drowsiness occurs during the first few weeks of treatment. These agents may also cause confusion. Those
antipsychotics with potent antimuscarinic activity often produce dry mouth, urinary retention, constipation, and loss
of visual accommodation. Others may block α-adrenergic receptors, resulting in lowered blood pressure and
orthostatic hypotension. The antipsychotics depress the hypothalamus, thereby affecting thermoregulation and
causing amenorrhea, galactorrhea, gynecomastia, infertility, and erectile dysfunction. Significant weight gain is
often a reason for nonadherence. Glucose and lipid profiles should be monitored in patients taking antipsychotics, as
the second-generation agents may increase these laboratory parameters and possibly exacerbate preexisting diabetes
or hyperlipidemia. Some antipsychotics have been associated with mild to significant QT prolongation. Thioridazine
has the highest risk, and ziprasidone and iloperidone [eye-low-PER-ee-dohn] also have cautions with their use due
to this effect. Other antipsychotics have a general precaution regarding QT prolongation, even if the risk is relatively
low.
5.  Cautions and contraindications
All antipsychotics may lower the seizure threshold and should be used cautiously in patients with seizure disorders
or those with an increased risk for seizures, such as withdrawal from alcohol. These agents also carry the warning of
increased risk for mortality when used in elderly patients with dementia-related behavioral disturbances and
psychosis. Antipsychotics used in patients with mood disorders should also be monitored for worsening of mood and
suicidal ideation or behaviors.
438
www.webofpharma.com

H.  Maintenance treatment
Patients who have had two or more psychotic episodes secondary to schizophrenia should receive maintenance
therapy for at least 5 years, and some experts prefer indefinite therapy. The rate of relapse may be lower with
second-generation drugs (Figure 11.7). Figure 11.8 summarizes the therapeutic uses of some of the antipsychotic
drugs.
Figure 11.7 Rates of relapse among patients with schizophrenia after maintenance
therapy with either risperidone or haloperidol.
439
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 11.8 Summary of antipsychotic agents commonly used to treat schizophrenia.
EPS = extrapyramidal effects; LAI = long-acting injectable.
440
www.webofpharma.com

11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5
11.6
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
An adolescent male is newly diagnosed with schizophrenia. Which antipsychotic agent may have the best
chance to improve his apathy and blunted affect?
A.  Chlorpromazine
B.  Fluphenazine
C.  Haloperidol
D.  Risperidone
Correct answer = D. Risperidone is the only antipsychotic on the list that has some reported benefit in improving
the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. All of the agents have the potential to diminish the hallucinations and
delusional thought processes (positive symptoms).
Which of the following antipsychotics is a partial agonist at the dopamine D2 receptor?
A.  Brexpiprazole
B.  Clozapine
C.  Haloperidol
D.  Risperidone
Correct answer = A. Brexpiprazole is the only agent listed that acts as a partial agonist at D2 receptors.
Theoretically, the drug enhances action at these receptors under low dopamine conditions and blocks activation
when dopamine levels are high. All of the other drugs are antagonistic at D2 receptors.
A 21-year-old man has recently begun pimozide therapy for Tourette disorder. He has been having
“different-appearing tics,” such as prolonged contraction of the facial muscles, and he experiences
opisthotonos (extrapyramidal spasm of the body in which the head and heels are bent backward and the body
is bowed forward). Which of the following drugs would be beneficial in reducing these symptoms?
A.  Benztropine
B.  Bromocriptine
C.  Prochlorperazine
D.  Risperidone
Correct answer = A. The patient is experiencing EPS due to pimozide, and a muscarinic antagonist such as
benztropine would be effective in reducing the symptoms. The other drugs would have no effect or, in the case of
prochlorperazine and risperidone, might increase the adverse symptoms.
A 28-year-old woman with schizoaffective disorder (combination of mood and psychotic symptoms) reports
difficulty falling asleep. Which of the following would be most beneficial in this patient?
A.  Olanzapine
B.  Haloperidol
C.  Paliperidone
D.  Ziprasidone
Correct answer = C. Paliperidone is the only agent that is approved for schizoaffective disorder. Olanzapine has
significant sedative activity as well as antipsychotic properties and is the drug most likely to alleviate this
patient’s report of insomnia. Although other antipsychotics may benefit this patient’s disorder, paliperidone has
the indication for this disorder, and if the underlying disorder is improved, then the symptom of insomnia may
also improve without risking other unwanted adverse effects, such as the weight gain associated with olanzapine.
Which of the following antipsychotic agents is considered to be the most potent and thus have the highest
risk of extrapyramidal symptoms?
A.  Thioridazine
B.  Haloperidol
C.  Quetiapine
D.  Chlorpromazine
Correct answer = B. Among the older, conventional, or typical antipsychotics on this list, haloperidol is the most
potent and would thus be expected to have the highest incidence of EPS. The atypical antipsychotics listed
(quetiapine) could be considered low potency based on their common dosing and are considered to have the
lowest risk for EPS.
Which antipsychotic has the most sedative potential and is sometimes, questionably, used as a hypnotic agent
in certain clinical settings?
A.  Fluphenazine
B.  Thiothixene
441
www.webofpharma.com

11.7
11.8
11.9
11.10
C.  Quetiapine
D.  Haloperidol
Correct answer = C. Quetiapine has strong antihistaminergic effects causing sedation and is sometimes used at
low doses as a sedative–hypnotic, even though this use is considered off-label. The other antipsychotic agents
listed are weaker at blocking the histamine receptor and therefore are not as sedating.
A 30-year-old male patient is treated with haloperidol for schizophrenia. His psychotic symptoms are well
managed with haloperidol; however, he is reporting restlessness, the inability to sit still at the dinner table,
and his family notices that he frequently paces the hallway. Which is the best agent to treat this
antipsychotic-induced akathisia?
A.  Benztropine
B.  Dantrolene
C.  Bromocriptine
D.  Propranolol
Correct answer = D. Propranolol, a β-blocker, is considered the drug of choice for the management of
antipsychotic-induced akathisia. Benztropine is more effective for pseudoparkinsonism and acute dystonias.
Bromocriptine is more effective for Parkinson-like symptoms, and dantrolene is a muscle relaxant that is best
reserved for managing some symptoms of neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Which antipsychotic agent is available in an LAI formulation that may be useful for patients with difficulty
adhering to therapy?
A.  Asenapine
B.  Chlorpromazine
C.  Clozapine
D.  Aripiprazole
Correct answer = D. Aripiprazole is available in two different LAI formulations. The other agents listed do not
have LAI formulations. Risperidone, fluphenazine, haloperidol, olanzapine, and paliperidone are other
antipsychotics that are available in LAI formulations.
Which antipsychotic agent is most associated with the possibility of a hematological dyscrasia such as
agranulocytosis in a patient being treated for schizophrenia?
A.  Chlorpromazine
B.  Buspirone
C.  Lithium
D.  Clozapine
Correct answer = D. Clozapine is the only antipsychotic medication that has a black box warning and a risk of
agranulocytosis in approximately 1% of the patients treated. This requires regular monitoring of white blood cell
counts. Although other antipsychotics have case reports of blood dyscrasias, clozapine is considered to have the
highest risk.
Which antipsychotic agent has been most associated with significant QT interval prolongation and should be
used with caution in patients with preexisting arrhythmias or patients taking other drugs associated with QT
prolongation?
A.  Thioridazine
B.  Risperidone
C.  Asenapine
D.  Lurasidone
Correct answer = A. Of the antipsychotic drugs listed, thioridazine has the highest risk for causing QT interval
prolongation. Although this is a general warning for many antipsychotics, thioridazine has been issued a “black
box warning,” suggesting that it is associated with the greatest risk.
442
www.webofpharma.com



================================================================================
CH12: DRUGS FOR EPILEPSY
Pages 443-486 (PDF page numbers)
================================================================================

12
Drugs for Epilepsy
Jeannine M. Conway and Angela K. Birnbaum
443
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Overview
Approximately 10% of the population has at least one seizure in their lifetime. Globally, epilepsy is the fourth most
common neurologic disorder after migraine, cerebrovascular disease (stroke), and Alzheimer’s disease. Epilepsy is
not a single entity but an assortment of different seizure types and syndromes originating from several mechanisms
that have in common the sudden, excessive, and synchronous discharge of cerebral neurons. This abnormal
electrical activity may result in a variety of events, including loss of consciousness, abnormal movements, atypical
or odd behavior, and distorted perceptions that are of limited duration but recur if untreated. The site of origin of
abnormal neuronal firing determines the symptoms that occur. For example, if the motor cortex is involved, the
patient may experience abnormal movements or a generalized convulsion. Seizures originating in the parietal or
occipital lobe may include visual, auditory, and olfactory hallucinations. Medications are the most widely used
mode of treatment for patients with epilepsy. In general, seizures can be controlled with one medication in
approximately 75% of patients. Patients may require more than one medication in order to optimize seizure control,
and some patients may never obtain total seizure control. A summary of antiseizure medications is shown in Figure
12.1.
444
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 12.1 Summary of agents used in the treatment of epilepsy.
445
www.webofpharma.com

II.  Etiology of Seizures
Epilepsy can be due to an underlying genetic, structural, or metabolic cause or an unknown etiology. In most cases,
epilepsy has no identifiable cause. The neuronal discharge in epilepsy results from firing of a small population of
neurons in a specific area of the brain referred to as the “primary focus.” Focal areas that are functionally abnormal
may be triggered into activity by changes in physiologic factors, such as an alteration in blood gases, pH,
electrolytes, and blood glucose and changes in environmental factors, such as sleep deprivation, alcohol intake, and
stress. A number of causes, such as illicit drug use, tumor, head injury, hypoglycemia, meningeal infection, and the
rapid withdrawal of alcohol from an alcoholic, can precipitate seizures. In cases when the source of a seizure can be
determined and corrected, medication may not be necessary. For example, a seizure that is caused by a drug reaction
is not epilepsy and does not require chronic therapy. In other situations, antiseizure medications may be needed
when the primary cause of the seizures cannot be corrected. Though multiple specific epilepsy syndromes that
include symptoms other than seizures have been classified, a discussion of these syndromes is beyond the scope of
this chapter.
446
www.webofpharma.com

III.  Classification of Seizures
It is important to correctly classify seizures to determine appropriate treatment. Seizures have been categorized by
site of origin, etiology, electrophysiologic correlation, and clinical presentation. Nomenclature developed by the
International League Against Epilepsy is considered the standard classification for seizures and epilepsy syndromes
(Figure 12.2). Seizures have been classified into two broad groups: focal and generalized.
Figure 12.2 Classification of epilepsy.
447
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Focal
Focal seizures involve only a portion of one hemisphere of the brain. The symptoms of each seizure type depend on
the site of neuronal discharge and on the extent to which the electrical activity spreads to other neurons in the brain.
Focal seizures may progress to become bilateral tonic–clonic seizures. Patients may lose consciousness or
awareness. This seizure type may begin with a motor or nonmotor activity.
448
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Generalized
Generalized seizures may begin locally and then progress to include abnormal electrical discharges throughout both
hemispheres of the brain. Primary generalized seizures may be convulsive or nonconvulsive, and the patient usually
has an immediate loss of consciousness.
1.  Tonic–clonic
These seizures result in loss of consciousness, followed by tonic (continuous contraction) and clonic (rapid
contraction and relaxation) phases. The seizure may be followed by a period of confusion and exhaustion due to
depletion of glucose and energy stores.
2.  Absence
These seizures involve a brief, abrupt, and self-limiting loss of consciousness. The onset generally occurs in patients
at 3 to 5 years of age and lasts until puberty or beyond. The patient stares and exhibits rapid eye blinking, which
lasts for 3 to 5 seconds. An absence seizure has a very distinct three-per-second spike and wave discharge seen on
electroencephalogram.
3.  Myoclonic
These seizures consist of short episodes of muscle contractions that may recur for several minutes. They generally
occur after wakening and exhibit as brief jerks of the limbs. Myoclonic seizures occur at any age but usually begin
around puberty or early adulthood.
4.  Clonic
These seizures consist of short episodes of muscle contractions that may closely resemble myoclonic seizures.
Consciousness is more impaired with clonic seizures as compared to myoclonic.
5.  Tonic
These seizures involve increased tone in the extension muscles and are generally less than 60 seconds.
6.  Atonic
These seizures are also known as drop attacks and are characterized by a sudden loss of muscle tone.
449
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Mechanism of action of antiseizure medications
Drugs reduce seizures through mechanisms such as blocking voltage-gated channels (Na+ or Ca2+), enhancing
inhibitory γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic impulses and interfering with excitatory glutamate transmission. Some
antiseizure medications appear to have multiple targets within the central nervous system (CNS), whereas the
mechanism of action for some agents is poorly defined. Antiseizure medications suppress seizures but do not “cure”
or “prevent” epilepsy.
450
www.webofpharma.com

IV.  Drug Selection
Choice of drug treatment is based on the classification of the seizures, patient-specific variables (for example, age,
comorbid medical conditions, lifestyle, and personal preference), and characteristics of the drug (such as cost and
drug interactions). For example, focal-onset seizures are treated with a different set of medications than primary
generalized seizures, although the list of effective agents overlaps. The toxicity of the agent and characteristics of
the patient are major considerations in drug selection. In newly diagnosed patients, monotherapy is instituted with a
single agent until seizures are controlled or toxicity occurs (Figure 12.3). Compared with those receiving
combination therapy, patients receiving monotherapy exhibit better medication adherence and fewer side effects. If
seizures are not controlled with the first medication, monotherapy with an alternate medication or the addition of
medications should be considered (Figure 12.4). Failing that, other medical management (vagal nerve stimulation,
surgery, etc.) should be considered. Awareness of the antiseizure medications available and their mechanisms of
action, pharmacokinetics, potential for drug–drug interactions, and adverse effects is essential for successful
treatment of the patient.
451
www.webofpharma.com

452
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 12.3 Therapeutic strategies for managing newly diagnosed epilepsy.
Figure 12.4 Therapeutic indications for the antiseizure agents. Benzodiazepines =
diazepam and lorazepam.
453
www.webofpharma.com

V.  Antiseizure Medications
The Food and Drug Administration has approved many new antiseizure medications in the last few decades. Some
of these agents are thought to have potential advantages over older drugs in terms of pharmacokinetics, tolerability,
and reduced risk for drug–drug interactions. However, studies have failed to demonstrate that the newer drugs are
significantly more efficacious than are the older agents. Figure 12.5 summarizes pharmacokinetic properties of the
antiseizure medications, and Figure 12.6 shows common adverse effects. Suicidal behavior and suicidal ideation
have been identified as a risk with antiseizure medications. In addition, virtually, all antiseizure medications have
been associated with multiorgan hypersensitivity reactions, a rare idiosyncratic reaction characterized by rash, fever,
and systemic organ involvement.
Figure 12.5 Summary of the pharmacokinetics of antiseizure medications used as chronic
therapy.
454
www.webofpharma.com

455
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 12.6 Notable adverse effects of antiseizure medications.
456
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines bind to GABA inhibitory receptors to reduce the firing rate. Most benzodiazepines are reserved for
emergency or acute seizure treatment due to tolerance. However, clonazepam [kloe-NAY-ze-pam] and clobazam
[KLOE-ba-zam] may be prescribed as adjunctive therapy for particular types of seizures. Diazepam [dye-AZ-e-pam]
is also available for rectal administration to avoid or interrupt prolonged generalized tonic–clonic seizures or clusters
when oral administration is not possible.
457
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Brivaracetam
Brivaracetam [briv-a-RA-se-tam] is approved for treatment of focal-onset seizures in adults. It demonstrates high
and selective affinity for a synaptic vesicle protein (SV2A); however, the exact mechanism of antiseizure action is
unknown. The drug is well absorbed after oral administration and metabolized by both hydrolysis and CYP2C19
(minor). Comedication with strong CYP-inducing medications may lead to lower plasma concentrations.
Brivaracetam is a moderate inhibitor of epoxide hydrolase, resulting in increased levels of the active metabolite of
carbamazepine when the drugs are coadministered.
458
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Carbamazepine
Carbamazepine [kar-ba-MAZ-a-peen] blocks sodium channels, thereby possibly inhibiting the generation of
repetitive action potentials in the epileptic focus and preventing spread. Carbamazepine is effective for treatment of
focal seizures, generalized tonic–clonic seizures, trigeminal neuralgia, and bipolar disorder. It induces its own
metabolism, resulting in lower total carbamazepine blood concentrations at higher doses. Carbamazepine is an
inducer of the CYP1A2, CYP2C, CYP3A, and UDP glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzymes, which increases the
clearance of other drugs (Figure 12.7). Hyponatremia may be noted in some patients, especially the elderly, and may
necessitate a change in medication. Carbamazepine should not be prescribed for patients with absence seizures
because it may cause an increase in seizures.
459
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 12.7 CYP metabolism of the antiseizure medications.
460
www.webofpharma.com

461
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Eslicarbazepine
Eslicarbazepine [es-li-kar-BAZ-a-peen] acetate is a prodrug that is converted to the active metabolite
eslicarbazepine (S-licarbazepine) by hydrolysis. S-licarbazepine is the active metabolite of oxcarbazepine. It is a
voltage-gated sodium channel blocker and is approved for focal seizures in adults. Eslicarbazepine exhibits linear
pharmacokinetics and is eliminated via glucuronidation. The side effect profile includes dizziness, somnolence,
diplopia, and headache. Serious adverse reactions such as rash, psychiatric side effects, and hyponatremia occur
rarely.
462
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Ethosuximide
Ethosuximide [eth-oh-SUX-i-mide] reduces propagation of abnormal electrical activity in the brain, most likely by
inhibiting T-type calcium channels. It is most effective in treating absence seizures.
463
www.webofpharma.com

F.  Felbamate
Felbamate [FEL-ba-mate] has a broad spectrum of anticonvulsant action with multiple proposed mechanisms
including the blocking of voltage-dependent sodium channels, competing with the glycine-binding site on the N-
methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor, blocking of calcium channels, and potentiating GABA action. It is
an inhibitor of drugs metabolized by CYP2C19 and induces drugs metabolized by CYP3A4. It is reserved for use in
refractory epilepsies (particularly Lennox-Gastaut syndrome) because of the risk of aplastic anemia (about 1:4000)
and hepatic failure.
464
www.webofpharma.com

G.  Gabapentin
Gabapentin [GA-ba-pen-tin] is an analog of GABA. However, it does not act at GABA receptors, enhance GABA
actions or convert to GABA. Although gabapentin binds to the α2δ subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels, the
precise mechanism of action is not known. It is approved as adjunct therapy for focal seizures and treatment of
postherpetic neuralgia. Gabapentin exhibits nonlinear pharmacokinetics (see Chapter 1) due to its uptake by a
saturable transport system from the gut. Gabapentin does not bind to plasma proteins and is excreted unchanged
through the kidneys. Reduced dosing is required in renal disease. Gabapentin is well tolerated by the elderly
population with focal seizures due to its relatively mild adverse effects. It may also be a good choice for the older
patient because there are few drug interactions.
465
www.webofpharma.com

H.  Lacosamide
Lacosamide [la-KOE-sa-mide] affects voltage-gated sodium channels, resulting in stabilization of hyperexcitable
neuronal membranes and inhibition of repetitive neuronal firing. Lacosamide binds to collapsin response mediator
protein-2 (CRMP-2), a phosphoprotein involved in neuronal differentiation and control of axonal outgrowth. The
role of CRMP-2 binding in seizure control is unknown. Lacosamide is approved for adjunctive treatment of focal
seizures. The most common adverse events that limit treatment include dizziness, headache, and fatigue.
466
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Lamotrigine
Lamotrigine [la-MOE-tri-jeen] blocks sodium channels and high voltage–dependent calcium channels. Lamotrigine
is effective in a wide variety of seizure types, including focal, generalized, absence seizures, and Lennox-Gastaut
syndrome. It is also used to treat bipolar disorder. Lamotrigine is metabolized primarily to the 2-N-glucuronide
metabolite through the UGT1A4 pathway. As with other antiseizure medications, general inducers increase
lamotrigine clearance leading to lower lamotrigine concentrations, whereas divalproex results in a significant
decrease in lamotrigine clearance (higher lamotrigine concentrations). Lamotrigine dosages should be reduced when
adding valproate to therapy. Slow titration is necessary with lamotrigine (particularly when adding lamotrigine to a
regimen that includes valproate) due to risk of rash, which may progress to a serious, life-threatening reaction.
467
www.webofpharma.com

J.  Levetiracetam
Levetiracetam [lee-ve-tye-RA-se-tam] is approved for adjunct therapy of focal-onset, myoclonic, and primary
generalized tonic–clonic seizures in adults and children. It demonstrates high affinity for a synaptic vesicle protein
(SV2A). The drug is well absorbed after oral administration and is excreted in urine mostly unchanged, resulting in
few to no drug interactions. Levetiracetam can cause mood alterations that may require a dose reduction or a change
of medication.
468
www.webofpharma.com

K.  Oxcarbazepine
Oxcarbazepine [ox-kar-BAY-zeh-peen] is a prodrug that is rapidly reduced to the 10-monohydroxy (MHD)
metabolite responsible for its anticonvulsant activity. MHD blocks sodium channels and is thought to modulate
calcium channels. It is approved for use in adults and children with focal seizures. Oxcarbazepine is a less potent
inducer of CYP3A4 and UGT than is carbamazepine. The adverse effect of hyponatremia limits its use in the
elderly.
469
www.webofpharma.com

L.  Perampanel
Perampanel [per-AM-pa-nel] is a selective α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid antagonist
resulting in reduced excitatory activity. Perampanel has a long half-life enabling once-daily dosing. It is approved
for adjunctive treatment of focal and generalized tonic–clonic seizures. This medication has a warning for serious
psychiatric and behavioral reactions including aggression, hostility, irritability, anger, and homicidal ideation.
470
www.webofpharma.com

M.  Phenobarbital and primidone
The primary mechanism of action of phenobarbital [fee-noe-BAR-bih-tal] is enhancement of the inhibitory effects
of GABA-mediated neurons (see Chapter 9). Primidone is metabolized to phenobarbital (major) and
phenylethylmalonamide, both with anticonvulsant activity. Phenobarbital is used primarily in the treatment of status
epilepticus when other agents fail.
471
www.webofpharma.com

N.  Phenytoin and fosphenytoin
Phenytoin [FEN-i-toin] blocks voltage-gated sodium channels by selectively binding to the channel in the inactive
state and slowing its rate of recovery. It is effective for treatment of focal and generalized tonic–clonic seizures and
in the treatment of status epilepticus. Phenytoin induces CYP2C and CYP3A families and the UGT enzyme system.
Phenytoin exhibits saturable enzyme metabolism resulting in nonlinear pharmacokinetic properties (small increases
in the daily dose can produce large increases in plasma concentration, resulting in drug-induced toxicity; Figure
12.8). Depression of the CNS occurs particularly in the cerebellum and vestibular system, causing nystagmus and
ataxia. The elderly are highly susceptible to this effect. Gingival hyperplasia may cause the gums to grow over the
teeth (Figure 12.9). Long-term use may lead to development of peripheral neuropathies and osteoporosis. Although
phenytoin is advantageous due to its low cost, the actual cost of therapy may be higher, considering the potential for
serious toxicity and adverse effects.
Figure 12.8 Nonlinear effect of phenytoin dosage on the plasma concentration of the
drug.
472
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 12.9 Gingival hyperplasia in patient treated with phenytoin.
Fosphenytoin [FOS-phen-i-toin] is a prodrug that is rapidly converted to phenytoin in the blood within minutes.
Whereas fosphenytoin may be administered intramuscularly (IM), phenytoin sodium should never be given IM, as it
causes tissue damage and necrosis. Fosphenytoin is the drug of choice and standard of care for IV and IM
administration of phenytoin.
473
www.webofpharma.com

O.  Pregabalin
Pregabalin [pree-GA-ba-lin] binds to the α2δ site, an auxiliary subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels in the
CNS, inhibiting excitatory neurotransmitter release. The drug has proven effects on focal-onset seizures, diabetic
peripheral neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, and fibromyalgia. More than 90% of pregabalin is eliminated renally.
It has no significant effects on drug metabolism and few drug interactions. Dosage adjustments are needed in renal
dysfunction.
474
www.webofpharma.com

P.  Rufinamide
Rufinamide [roo-FIN-a-mide] acts at sodium channels. It is approved for the adjunctive treatment of seizures
associated with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome in children one year of age and older and in adults. Rufinamide is a weak
inhibitor of CYP2E1 and a weak inducer of CYP3A4 enzymes. Food increases absorption and peak serum
concentrations. Serum concentrations of rufinamide are affected by other antiseizure medications. Carbamazepine
and phenytoin can reduce and valproate can increase the serum concentrations of rufinamide. Adverse effects
include the potential for shortened QT intervals. Patients with familial short QT syndrome should not be treated with
rufinamide.
475
www.webofpharma.com

Q.  Tiagabine
Tiagabine [ty-AG-a-been] blocks GABA uptake into presynaptic neurons permitting more GABA to be available for
receptor binding and thereby enhancing inhibitory activity. Tiagabine is effective as adjunctive treatment in focal
seizures. In postmarketing surveillance, seizures have occurred in patients using tiagabine who did not have
epilepsy. Tiagabine should not be used for indications other than epilepsy.
476
www.webofpharma.com

R.  Topiramate
Topiramate [toe-PEER-a-mate] has multiple mechanisms of action. It blocks voltage-dependent sodium channels,
reduces high-voltage calcium currents (L type), is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, and may act at glutamate (NMDA)
sites. Topiramate is effective for use in focal and primary generalized epilepsy. It is also approved for prevention of
migraine. It mildly inhibits CYP2C19 and coadministration with phenytoin and carbamazepine may reduce serum
concentrations of topiramate. Adverse effects include somnolence, weight loss, and paresthesias. Renal stones,
glaucoma, oligohidrosis (decreased sweating), and hyperthermia have also been reported.
477
www.webofpharma.com

S.  Valproic acid and divalproex
Possible mechanisms of action include sodium channel blockade, blockade of GABA transaminase (GABA-T), and
action at the T-type calcium channels. These varied mechanisms provide a broad spectrum of activity against
seizures. It is effective for the treatment of focal and primary generalized epilepsies. Valproic acid [val-PRO-ik A-
sid] is available as a free acid. Divalproex [dye-val-PRO-ex] sodium is a combination of sodium valproate [val-
PROE-ate] and valproic acid that is converted to valproate ion in the gastrointestinal tract. It was developed to
improve gastrointestinal tolerance of valproic acid. All of the available salt forms are equivalent in efficacy
(valproic acid and sodium valproate). Commercial products are available in multiple-salt dosage forms and
extended-release formulations. Therefore, the risk for medication errors is high, and it is essential to be familiar with
all preparations. Valproate inhibits metabolism of the CYP2C9, UGT, and epoxide hydrolase systems (Figure 12.7).
Rare hepatotoxicity may cause a rise in liver enzymes, which should be monitored frequently. Use in children under
age 2 and women should be avoided if possible.
478
www.webofpharma.com

T.  Vigabatrin
Vigabatrin [vye-GA-ba-trin] acts as an irreversible inhibitor of GABA-T. GABA-T is the enzyme responsible for
metabolism of GABA. Vigabatrin is associated with visual field loss ranging from mild to severe in 30% or more of
patients. Vigabatrin is only available through physicians and pharmacies that participate in the REMS (risk
evaluation and mitigation strategies) program.
479
www.webofpharma.com

U.  Zonisamide
Zonisamide [zoe-NIS-a-mide] is a sulfonamide derivative that has a broad spectrum of action. The compound has
multiple effects, including blockade of both voltage-gated sodium channels and T-type calcium currents. It has a
limited amount of carbonic anhydrase activity. Zonisamide is approved for use in patients with focal epilepsy. It is
metabolized by the CYP3A4 isozyme and may, to a lesser extent, be affected by CYP3A5 and CYP2C19. In
addition to typical CNS adverse effects, zonisamide may cause kidney stones. Oligohidrosis has been reported, and
patients should be monitored for increased body temperature and decreased sweating. Zonisamide is contraindicated
in patients with sulfonamide or carbonic anhydrase inhibitor hypersensitivity.
480
www.webofpharma.com

VI.  Status Epilepticus
In status epilepticus, two or more seizures occur without recovery of full consciousness in between episodes. These
may be focal or generalized, convulsive or nonconvulsive. Status epilepticus is life threatening and requires
emergency treatment usually consisting of parenteral administration of a fast-acting medication such as a
benzodiazepine, followed by a slower- acting medication such as phenytoin, fosphenytoin, divalproex, or
levetiracetam.
481
www.webofpharma.com

VII.  Women’s Health and Epilepsy
Women of childbearing potential with epilepsy require assessment of their antiseizure medications in regard to
contraception and pregnancy planning. Several antiseizure medications increase the metabolism of hormonal
contraceptives, potentially rendering them ineffective. These include phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine,
topiramate, oxcarbazepine, rufinamide, and clobazam. These medications increase the metabolism of contraceptives
regardless of the delivery system used (for example, patch, ring, implants, and oral tablets). Pregnancy planning is
vital, as many antiseizure medications have the potential to affect fetal development and cause birth defects. All
women considering pregnancy should be on high doses (1 to 5 mg) of folic acid prior to conception. Divalproex and
barbiturates should be avoided. If possible, women already taking divalproex should be placed on other therapies
before pregnancy and counseled about the potential for birth defects, including cognitive (Figure 12.10) and
behavioral abnormalities and neural tube defects. The pharmacokinetics of antiseizure medications and the
frequency and severity of seizures may change during pregnancy. Regular monitoring by both an obstetrician and a
neurologist is important. All women with epilepsy should be encouraged to register with the Antiepileptic Drug
Pregnancy Registry. Figure 12.11 summarizes important characteristics of the antiseizure medications.
Figure 12.10 Cognitive function at 3 years of age after fetal exposure to doses of
antiepileptic drugs. The means (black squares) and 95% confidence intervals (horizontal
lines) are given for the children’s IQ as a function of the antiepileptic drugs.
482
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 12.11 Summary of antiseizure drugs. AMPA = α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-
isoxazolepropionic acid; CBC = complete blood count; GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid;
GABA-T = γ-aminobutyric acid transaminase; GI = gastrointestinal; SLE = systemic
lupus erythematosus.
483
www.webofpharma.com

12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
12.6
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
A 9-year-old boy is sent for neurologic evaluation because of episodes of apparent inattention. Over the past
year, the child has experienced episodes during which he develops a blank look on his face and his eyes
blink for 15 seconds. He immediately resumes his previous activity. Which best describes seizures in this
patient?
A.  Focal
B.  Tonic–clonic
C.  Absence
D.  Myoclonic
Correct answer = C. The patient is experiencing episodes of absence seizures where consciousness is impaired
briefly. Absence seizures generally begin in children aged 4 to 12 years. Diagnosis includes obtaining an
electroencephalogram that shows generalized 3-Hz waves.
A child is experiencing absence seizures that interrupt his ability to pay attention during school and
activities. Which therapy is most appropriate for this patient?
A.  Ethosuximide
B.  Carbamazepine
C.  Diazepam
D.  Watchful waiting
Correct answer = A. The patient has had many seizures that interrupt his ability to pay attention during school and
activities, so therapy is justified. Carbamazepine may make the seizures more frequent. Diazepam is not indicated
for absence seizures.
Which drug is most useful for the treatment of absence seizures?
A.  Topiramate
B.  Tiagabine
C.  Levetiracetam
D.  Lamotrigine
Correct answer = D. Of the drugs listed, lamotrigine has the best data for use in absence seizures and is the best
choice. Tiagabine is only used for focal seizures. Topiramate and levetiracetam may be options if lamotrigine
does not work.
A 25-year-old woman with generalized seizures is well controlled on valproate. She indicates that she is
interested in becoming pregnant in the next year. With respect to her antiseizure medication, which of the
following should be considered?
A.  Leave her on her current therapy.
B.  Consider switching to lamotrigine.
C.  Consider adding a second antiseizure medication.
D.  Decrease her valproate dose.
Correct answer = B. Valproate is a poor choice in women of childbearing age and should be avoided if possible.
A review of the medication history of this patient is warranted. If she has not tried any other antiseizure
medication, then consideration of another antiseizure medication may be beneficial. Studies show that valproate
taken during pregnancy can have a detrimental effect on cognitive abilities in children. However, treatment with
valproate may not be avoidable as it could be the only choice for some women. In these cases, the lowest
effective dose should be used.
A woman with generalized seizures is well controlled with lamotrigine. She becomes pregnant and begins to
have breakthrough seizures. What is most likely happening?
A.  Her epilepsy is getting worse.
B.  Lamotrigine concentrations are increasing.
C.  Lamotrigine concentrations are decreasing.
D.  Lamotrigine is no longer efficacious for this patient.
Correct answer = C. Pregnancy alters the pharmacokinetics of lamotrigine. As pregnancy progresses, women can
require increased dosages to maintain blood concentrations and seizure control.
A 42-year-old man undergoes a neurologic evaluation because of episodes of apparent confusion. Over the
past year, the man has experienced episodes during which he develops a blank look on his face and fails to
respond to questions. Moreover, it appears to take several minutes before the man recovers from the
episodes. Which best describes this type of seizure?
A.  Focal (aware)
484
www.webofpharma.com

12.7
12.8
12.9
12.10
B.  Focal (impaired awareness)
C.  Tonic–clonic
D.  Absence
Correct answer = B. The patient is experiencing episodes of focal seizures with impaired consciousness.
Typically, staring is accompanied by impaired consciousness and recall. If asked a question, the patient might
respond with an inappropriate or unintelligible answer. Automatic movements are associated with most focal
seizures and involve the mouth and face (lip smacking, chewing, tasting, and swallowing movements), upper
extremities (fumbling, picking, tapping, or clasping movements), and vocal apparatus (grunts or repetition of
words and phrases), as are complex acts (such as walking or mixing foods in a bowl).
A 52-year-old man has had several focal seizures with impaired consciousness over the last year. Which is
the most appropriate initial therapy for this patient?
A.  Ethosuximide
B.  Levetiracetam
C.  Diazepam
D.  Carbamazepine plus primidone
Correct answer = B. The patient has had many seizures, and the risks of not starting drug therapy would be
substantially greater than the risks of treating his seizures. Because the patient has impaired consciousness during
the seizure, he is at risk for injury during an attack. Monotherapy with primary agents is preferred for most
patients. The advantages of monotherapy include reduced frequency of adverse effects, absence of interactions
between antiepileptic drugs, lower cost, and improved compliance. Ethosuximide and diazepam are not indicated
for focal seizures.
A patient with focal seizures has been treated for 6 months with carbamazepine but, recently, has been
experiencing breakthrough seizures on a more frequent basis. You are considering adding a second drug to
the antiseizure regimen. Which of the following drugs is least likely to have a pharmacokinetic interaction
with carbamazepine?
A.  Topiramate
B.  Tiagabine
C.  Levetiracetam
D.  Lamotrigine
Correct answer = C. Of the drugs listed, all of which are approved as adjunct therapy for refractory focal seizures,
only levetiracetam does not affect the pharmacokinetics of other antiepileptic drugs, and other drugs do not
significantly alter its pharmacokinetics. However, any of the listed drugs could be added depending on the plan
and the patient characteristics. Treatment of epilepsy is complex, and diagnosis is based on history and may need
to be reevaluated when drug therapy fails or seizures increase.
Which is a first-line medication for generalized tonic–clonic seizures?
A.  Ethosuximide
B.  Felbamate
C.  Vigabatrin
D.  Topiramate
Correct answer = D. Topiramate is a broad-spectrum antiseizure medication that is indicated for primary
generalized tonic–clonic seizures. Ethosuximide should only be used for absence seizures. Felbamate is reserved
for refractory seizures due to the risk of aplastic anemia and liver failure. Vigabatrin is not indicated for
generalized seizures and is associated with visual field defects.
A 75-year-old woman had a stroke approximately 1 month ago. She is continuing to have small focal
seizures where she fails to respond appropriately while talking. Which is the most appropriate treatment for
this individual?
A.  Phenytoin
B.  Oxcarbazepine
C.  Levetiracetam
D.  Phenobarbital
Correct answer = C. Levetiracetam is renally cleared and prone to very few drug interactions. Elderly patients
usually have more comorbidities and take more medications than do younger patients. Oxcarbazepine may cause
hyponatremia, which is more symptomatic in the elderly. Phenytoin and phenobarbital have many drug
interactions and a side effect profile that may be especially troublesome in the elderly age group, including
dizziness that may lead to falls, cognitive issues, and bone health issues.
485
www.webofpharma.com

486
www.webofpharma.com



================================================================================
CH13: ANESTHETICS (FOCUS ON LOCAL ANESTHETICS)
Pages 487-541 (PDF page numbers)
================================================================================

13
Anesthetics
Brandon Lopez and Chris Giordano
487
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Overview
For patients undergoing surgical or medical procedures, different levels of sedation can provide important benefits
to facilitate procedural interventions. These levels of sedation range from anxiolysis to general anesthesia and can
create:
Sedation and reduced anxiety
Lack of awareness and amnesia
Skeletal muscle relaxation
Suppression of undesirable reflexes
Analgesia
Because no single agent provides all desired objectives, several categories of drugs are combined to produce the
optimum level of sedation required (Figure 13.1). Drugs are chosen to provide safe and efficient sedation based on
the type and duration of the procedure and patient characteristics, such as organ function, medical conditions, and
concurrent medications (Figure 13.2). Preoperative medications provide anxiolysis and analgesia and mitigate
unwanted side effects of the anesthetic or the procedure itself. Neuromuscular blockers enable endotracheal
intubation and muscle relaxation to facilitate surgery. Potent general anesthetic medications are delivered via
inhalation and/or intravenously. Except for nitrous oxide, inhaled anesthetics are volatile, halogenated hydrocarbons,
while intravenous (IV) anesthetics consist of several chemically unrelated drug classes commonly used to rapidly
induce and/or maintain a state of general anesthesia.
488
www.webofpharma.com

489
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 13.1 Summary of common drugs used for anesthesia. *Can cause general
anesthesia with higher doses. See Chapter 5 for summary of neuromuscular blocking
agents.
Figure 13.2 Overall considerations when delivering an anesthetic.
490
www.webofpharma.com

II.  Levels of Sedation
The levels of sedation occur in a dose-related continuum, which is variable and depends on individual patient
response to various drugs. These “artificial” levels of sedation start with light sedation (anxiolysis) and continue to
moderate sedation, then deep sedation, and finally a state of general anesthesia. The hallmarks of escalation from
one level to the next are recognized by changes in mentation, hemodynamic stability, and respiratory competency
(Figure 13.3). This escalation in levels is often very subtle and unpredictable; therefore, the sedation provider must
always be ready to manage the unanticipated next level of sedation.
Figure 13.3 Anesthetic levels of sedation.
491
www.webofpharma.com

III.  Stages of General Anesthesia
General anesthesia is a reversible state of central nervous system (CNS) depression, causing loss of response to and
perception of stimuli. The state of general anesthesia can be divided into three stages: induction, maintenance, and
recovery. Induction is the time from administration of a potent anesthetic to development of unconsciousness, while
maintenance is the sustained period of general anesthesia. Recovery starts with the discontinuation of the anesthetic
and continues until the return of consciousness and protective reflexes. Induction of anesthesia depends on how fast
effective concentrations of anesthetic reach the brain. Recovery is essentially the reverse of induction and depends
on how fast the anesthetic diffuses from the brain. The depth of general anesthesia is the degree to which the CNS is
depressed, as evident in electroencephalograms.
492
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Induction
General anesthesia in adults is normally induced with an IV agent like propofol, producing unconsciousness in 30 to
40 seconds. Often, an IV neuromuscular blocker such as rocuronium, vecuronium, or succinylcholine is
administered to facilitate endotracheal intubation by eliciting muscle relaxation. For children without IV access,
nonpungent volatile agents, such as sevoflurane, are administered via inhalation to induce general anesthesia.
493
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Maintenance of anesthesia
After administering the induction drug, vital signs and response to stimuli are vigilantly monitored to balance the
amount of drug continuously inhaled or infused to maintain general anesthesia. Maintenance is commonly provided
with volatile anesthetics, although total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) with drugs like propofol can be used to
maintain general anesthesia. Opioids such as fentanyl are used for analgesia along with inhalation agents, because
the latter alter consciousness but not perception of pain.
494
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Recovery
After cessation of the maintenance anesthetic drug, the patient is evaluated for return of consciousness. For most
anesthetic agents, redistribution from the site of action (rather than metabolism of the drug) underlies recovery.
Neuromuscular blocking drugs are typically reversed after completion of surgery, unless enough time has elapsed
for their metabolism. The patient is monitored to assure full recovery of all normal physiologic functions
(spontaneous respiration, blood pressure, heart rate, and all protective reflexes).
495
www.webofpharma.com

IV.  Inhalation Anesthetics
Inhaled gases are used primarily for maintenance of anesthesia after administration of an IV drug (Figure 13.4).
Depth of anesthesia can be rapidly altered by changing the inhaled gas concentration. Inhalational agents have steep
dose–response curves with very narrow therapeutic indices, so the difference in concentrations from eliciting general
anesthesia to cardiopulmonary collapse is small. No antagonists exist. To minimize waste, inhaled gases are
delivered in a recirculation system that contains absorbents to remove carbon dioxide and allow rebreathing of the
gas. Recently, there has been greater attention to the anthropogenic emissions of these potent greenhouse gases,
which are typically released from hospital rooftops after each procedure.
Figure 13.4 Volatile anesthetics delivered to the patient are absorbed via the lungs into
the systemic circulation causing dose-dependent CNS depression.
496
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Common features of inhalation anesthetics
Modern inhalation anesthetics are nonflammable, nonexplosive agents, which include nitrous oxide and volatile,
halogenated hydrocarbons. These agents decrease cerebrovascular resistance, resulting in increased brain perfusion.
They cause bronchodilation but also decrease both respiratory drive and hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction
(increased pulmonary vascular resistance in poorly oxygenated regions of the lungs, redirecting blood flow to better
oxygenated regions). Movement of these gases from the lungs to various body compartments depends upon their
solubility in blood and tissues, as well as on blood flow. The following factors play a role in induction and recovery:
497
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Potency
Potency is defined quantitatively as the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), which is the end-tidal
concentration of inhaled anesthetic needed to eliminate movement in 50% of patients exposed to a noxious stimulus.
MAC is the median effective dose (ED50) of the anesthetic, expressed as the percentage of gas in a mixture required
to achieve that effect. Numerically, MAC is small for potent anesthetics such as isoflurane and large for less potent
agents such as nitrous oxide. Thus, the inverse of MAC is an index of potency (Figure 13.5). Nitrous oxide alone
cannot produce general anesthesia because any admixture with a survivable oxygen percentage cannot reach its
MAC value. The more lipid soluble an anesthetic, the lower the concentration needed to produce anesthesia and,
therefore, the higher the potency. Factors that can increase MAC (make the patient more resistant) include
hyperthermia, drugs that increase CNS catecholamines, and chronic ethanol abuse. Factors that can decrease MAC
(make the patient more sensitive) include increased age, hypothermia, pregnancy, sepsis, acute intoxication,
concurrent IV anesthetics, and α2-adrenergic receptor agonists (clonidine and dexmedetomidine).
Figure 13.5 Minimal alveolar concentrations (MAC) for anesthetic gases are used to
compare pharmacologic effects of different agents (high MAC = low potency).
498
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Uptake and distribution of inhalation anesthetics
The principal objective of inhalation anesthesia is a constant and optimal brain partial pressure (Pbr) of inhaled
anesthetic (to create a partial pressure equilibrium between alveoli [Palv] and brain [Pbr]). Measuring the Palv is the
most practical and feasible way to ascertain the Pbr for the inhaled anesthetic concentration, but this necessitates
adequate time for the two compartments to reach equilibrium. The partial pressure of an anesthetic gas that
originates by pulmonary entry is the driving force moving the gas from the alveolar space into the bloodstream (Pa),
which transports the drug to the brain and other body compartments. Because gases move from one body
compartment to another according to partial pressure gradients, steady state is achieved when the partial pressure in
each of these compartments is equivalent to that in the inspired mixture. [Note: At equilibrium, Palv = Pa = Pbr.] The
time course for attaining this steady state is determined by the following factors:
1.  Alveolar wash-in
This refers to replacement of normal lung gases with the inspired anesthetic mixture. The time required for this
process is directly proportional to the functional residual capacity of the lung (volume of gas remaining in the lungs
at the end of a normal expiration) and inversely proportional to ventilatory rate. It is independent of the physical
properties of the gas. As the partial pressure builds within the lung, anesthetic gas transfer from the lung begins.
2.  Anesthetic uptake (removal to peripheral tissues other than the brain)
Uptake is the product of the gas solubility in the blood, cardiac output (CO), and gradient between alveolar and
blood anesthetic partial pressures.
a.  Solubility in blood
This is determined by a physical property of the anesthetic called the blood:gas partition coefficient (the ratio of the
concentration of anesthetic in the liquid [blood] phase to the concentration of anesthetic in the gas phase when the
anesthetic is in equilibrium between the two phases; Figure 13.6). For inhaled anesthetics, think of the blood as a
pharmacologically inactive reservoir. Drugs with low versus high blood solubility differ in their rate of induction of
anesthesia. When an anesthetic gas with low blood solubility such as nitrous oxide diffuses from the alveoli into the
circulation, little anesthetic dissolves in the blood. Therefore, equilibrium between the inspired anesthetic and
arterial blood occurs rapidly with relatively few additional molecules of anesthetic required to raise the arterial
anesthetic partial pressure. By contrast, anesthetic gases with high blood solubility, such as isoflurane, dissolve more
fully in the blood; therefore, greater amounts of gas and longer periods of time are required to raise blood partial
pressure. This results in longer periods for induction, recovery, and time to change in depth of anesthesia in response
to changes in the drug concentration. The solubility in blood is ranked as follows: isoflurane > sevoflurane > nitrous
oxide > desflurane.
499
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 13.6 Blood/gas partition coefficients for some inhalation anesthetics.
b.  Cardiac output
CO is inversely correlated with induction time for inhaled anesthetics. This counterintuitive phenomenon is
explained by the threshold of drug concentration required to alter neuronal activity and the time neurons are exposed
to the drug in the passing blood. During low CO, a longer period of time permits a larger concentration of gas to
dissolve in the slowly moving bloodstream. Furthermore, this large bolus of drug has longer contact time to diffuse
into neuronal tissue when it traverses the blood–brain barrier. Although a high CO will quickly transport the drug to
the brain, a lower concentration of the drug with a shorter exposure time slows down the rate of induction.
c.  Alveolar-to-venous partial pressure gradient
This gradient between the alveolar and returning venous gas partial pressure results from the tissue uptake from the
arterial delivery. The arterial circulation distributes the anesthetic to various tissues, and tissue uptake is dependent
on the tissue blood flow, blood-to-tissue partial pressure difference, and blood-to-tissue solubility coefficient. As
venous circulation returns to the lung blood with low or no dissolved anesthetic gas, this high gradient causes gas to
move from the alveoli into the blood. If a large alveolar-to-venous partial pressure gradient persists, the peripheral
tissue gas uptake must be high, and therefore, the induction time is longer. Over time, as the partial pressure of gas
in venous blood approximates the inspired mixture and subsequent alveolar concentration, no further uptake from
the lung occurs.
3.  Effect of different tissue types on anesthetic uptake
The time required for a tissue compartment to reach steady state with the partial pressure of the inspired anesthetic
gas is inversely proportional to the blood flow to that tissue (greater flow equals less time to reach equilibrium).
Time to steady state is directly proportional to the capacity of that tissue to store anesthetic (greater storage capacity
equals longer time to reach equilibrium). Furthermore, capacity is directly proportional to the volume of tissue and
the tissue:blood solubility coefficient of the gas. Four major tissue compartments determine the time course of
anesthetic uptake:
a.  Vessel-rich group (brain, heart, liver, kidney, and endocrine glands)
Highly perfused tissues rapidly attain steady state with the partial pressure of anesthetic in the blood.
b.  Skeletal muscles
500
www.webofpharma.com

These tissues are moderately perfused with a large storage capacity, which lengthens the time required to achieve
steady state.
c.  Fat
Fat is poorly perfused but has a very large storage capacity for the highly lipophilic volatile anesthetics. This poor
perfusion to a high-capacity compartment drastically prolongs the time required to achieve steady state.
d.  Vessel-poor group (bone, ligaments, and cartilage)
These are very poorly perfused and have a low capacity to store anesthetic gas. Therefore, these tissues have
minimal impact on the time course of anesthetic distribution in the body.
4.  Washout
When an inhalation anesthetic gas is removed from the inspired admixture, the body becomes the repository of
anesthetic gas to be circulated back to the alveolar compartment. The same factors that influence uptake and
equilibrium of the inspired anesthetic determine the time course of its exhalation from the body. Thus, nitrous oxide
exits the body faster than does isoflurane (Figure 13.7).
501
www.webofpharma.com

502
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 13.7 Changes in the alveolar blood concentrations of some inhalation anesthetics
over time.
503
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Mechanism of action
No specific receptor has been identified as the locus to create a state of general anesthesia. The fact that chemically
unrelated compounds produce unconsciousness argues against the existence of a single receptor, and it appears that a
variety of molecular mechanisms may contribute to the activity of anesthetics. At clinically effective concentrations,
general anesthetics increase the sensitivity of the γ-aminobutyric acid (GABAA) receptors to the inhibitory
neurotransmitter GABA. This increases chloride ion influx and hyperpolarization of neurons. Postsynaptic neuronal
excitability and, thus, CNS activity are diminished (Figure 13.8). Unlike other anesthetics, nitrous oxide and
ketamine do not have actions on GABAA receptors. Their effects are mediated via inhibition of N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors. [Note: The NMDA receptor is a glutamate receptor, which is the body’s main excitatory
neurotransmitter.] Receptors other than GABA that are affected by volatile anesthetics include the inhibitory glycine
receptors found in the spinal motor neurons. Additionally, inhalation anesthetics block excitatory postsynaptic
currents found on nicotinic receptors. However, the mechanisms by which anesthetics perform these modulatory
roles are not fully understood.
504
www.webofpharma.com

505
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 13.8 An example of modulation of a ligand-gated membrane channel modulated
by inhaled anesthetics. GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid; Cl− = chloride ion.
506
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Isoflurane
Isoflurane [eye-so-FLOOR-ane], like other halogenated gases, produces dose-dependent hypotension predominantly
from relaxation of systemic vasculature. Hypotension can be treated with a direct-acting vasoconstrictor, such as
phenylephrine (see Chapter 6). Because it undergoes little metabolism, isoflurane is considered nontoxic to the liver
and kidney. Its pungent odor stimulates respiratory reflexes (breath holding, salivation, coughing, laryngospasm), so
it is not used for inhalation induction. With a higher blood solubility than desflurane and sevoflurane, isoflurane
takes longer to reach equilibrium, making it less ideal for short procedures; however, its low cost makes it a good
option for longer surgeries.
507
www.webofpharma.com

F.  Desflurane
Desflurane [DES-floor-ane] provides very rapid onset and recovery due to low blood solubility. This makes it a
popular anesthetic for short procedures. It has a low volatility, which requires administration via a special heated
vaporizer. Like isoflurane, it decreases vascular resistance and perfuses all major tissues very well. Desflurane has
significant respiratory irritation like isoflurane so it should not be used for inhalation induction. Its degradation is
minimal and tissue toxicity is rare. Higher cost occasionally prohibits its use.
508
www.webofpharma.com

G.  Sevoflurane
Sevoflurane [see-voe-FLOOR-ane] has low pungency or respiratory irritation. This makes it useful for inhalation
induction, especially with pediatric patients who do not tolerate IV placement. It has a rapid onset and recovery due
to low blood solubility. Sevoflurane has low hepatotoxic potential, but compounds formed from reactions in the
anesthesia circuit (soda lime) may be nephrotoxic with very low fresh gas flow that allows longer chemical reaction
time.
509
www.webofpharma.com

H.  Nitrous oxide
Nitrous oxide [NYE-truss OX-ide] (“laughing gas”) is a nonirritating potent sedative that is unable to create a state
of general anesthesia. It is frequently used at concentrations of 30% to 50% in combination with oxygen to create
moderate sedation, particularly in dentistry. Nitrous oxide does not depress respiration, and maintains cardiovascular
hemodynamics as well as muscular strength. Nitrous oxide can be combined with other inhalational agents to
establish general anesthesia, which lowers the required concentration of the combined volatile agent. This gas
admixture further reduces many unwanted side effects of the other volatile agent that impact cardiovascular output
and cerebral blood flow. Nitrous oxide is poorly soluble in blood and other tissues, allowing it to move very rapidly
in and out of the body. This can be problematic in closed body compartments because nitrous oxide can increase the
volume (exacerbating a pneumothorax) or pressure (sinus or middle ear pressure); it replaces nitrogen in various air
spaces faster than the nitrogen leaves. Its speed of movement allows nitrous oxide to retard oxygen uptake during
recovery, thereby causing “diffusion hypoxia.” This can be overcome by delivering high concentrations of inspired
oxygen during recovery. Some characteristics of the inhalation anesthetics are summarized in Figure 13.9.
510
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 13.9 Characteristics of some inhalation anesthetics.
511
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Malignant hyperthermia
In a very small percentage of susceptible patients, exposure to halogenated hydrocarbon anesthetics (or
succinylcholine) may induce malignant hyperthermia (MH), a rare life-threatening condition. MH causes a drastic
and uncontrolled increase in skeletal muscle oxidative metabolism, overwhelming the body’s capacity to supply
oxygen, remove carbon dioxide, and regulate temperature, eventually leading to circulatory collapse and death if not
treated immediately. Strong evidence indicates that MH is due to an excitation–contraction coupling defect. Burn
victims and individuals with muscular dystrophy, myopathy, myotonia, and osteogenesis imperfecta are susceptible
to MH-like events and caution should be taken. Susceptibility to MH is often inherited as an autosomal dominant
disorder. Should a patient exhibit symptoms of MH, dantrolene is given as the anesthetic mixture is withdrawn, and
measures are taken to rapidly cool the patient. Dantrolene [DAN-troe-leen] blocks release of Ca2+ from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum of muscle cells, reducing heat production and relaxing muscle tone. It should be available
whenever triggering agents are administered. In addition, the patient must be monitored and supported for
respiratory, circulatory, and renal problems. Use of dantrolene and avoidance of triggering agents such as
halogenated anesthetics in susceptible individuals have markedly reduced mortality from MH. A more soluble
formulation of dantrolene has become commercially available that drastically reduces the constitution time needed
to make this drug in emergencies.
512
www.webofpharma.com

V.  Intravenous Anesthetics
IV anesthetics cause rapid induction of anesthesia often occurring in 1 minute or less. It is the most common way to
induce anesthesia before maintenance of anesthesia with an inhalation agent. IV anesthetics may be used as single
agents for short procedures or administered as infusions (TIVA) to help maintain anesthesia during longer surgeries.
In lower doses, they may be used solely for sedation.
513
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Induction
After entering the blood, a percentage of drug binds to plasma proteins, and the rest remains unbound or “free.” The
degree of protein binding depends upon the physical characteristics of the drug, such as the degree of ionization and
lipid solubility. The majority of CO flows to the brain, liver, and kidney (“vessel-rich organs”). Thus, a high
proportion of initial drug bolus is delivered to the cerebral circulation and then passes along a concentration gradient
from blood into the brain. The rate of this transfer is dependent on the arterial concentration of the unbound free
drug, the lipid solubility of the drug, and the degree of ionization. Unbound, lipid-soluble, nonionized molecules
cross into the brain most quickly. Like inhalational anesthetics, the exact mode of action of IV anesthetics is
unknown; however, GABA likely plays a large role.
514
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Recovery
Recovery from IV anesthetics is due to redistribution from the CNS. After initial flooding of the CNS and other
vessel-rich tissues with nonionized molecules, the drug diffuses into other tissues with less blood supply. With
secondary tissue uptake, predominantly skeletal muscle, plasma concentration of the drug falls. This allows the drug
to diffuse out of the CNS, down the resulting reverse concentration gradient. This initial redistribution of drug into
other tissues leads to the rapid recovery seen after a single IV dose of induction agent. Metabolism and plasma
clearance become important only following infusions and repeat doses of a drug. Adipose tissue makes little
contribution to the early redistribution of free drug following a bolus, due to its poor blood supply. However,
following repeat doses or infusions, equilibration with fat tissue forms a drug reservoir, often leading to delayed
recovery.
515
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Effect of reduced cardiac output on IV anesthetics
When CO is reduced (for example, in certain types of shock, the elderly, cardiac disease), the body compensates by
diverting more CO to the cerebral circulation. A greater proportion of the IV anesthetic enters the cerebral
circulation under these circumstances. Therefore, the dose of the drug must be reduced. Further, decreased CO
causes prolonged circulation time. As global CO is reduced, it takes a longer time for an induction drug to reach the
brain and exert its effects. The slow titration of a reduced dose of an IV anesthetic is key to a safe induction in
patients with reduced CO.
516
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Propofol
Propofol [PRO-puh-fol] is an IV sedative/hypnotic used for induction and/or maintenance of anesthesia. It is widely
used and has replaced thiopental as the first choice for induction of general anesthesia and sedation. Because
propofol is poorly water soluble, it is supplied as an emulsion containing soybean oil and egg phospholipid, giving it
a milklike appearance.
1.  Onset
Induction is smooth and occurs 30 to 40 seconds after administration. Plasma levels decline rapidly as a result of
redistribution, followed by a more prolonged period of hepatic metabolism and renal clearance. The initial
redistribution half-life is 2 to 4 minutes. The pharmacokinetics of propofol are not altered by moderate hepatic or
renal failure.
2.  Actions
Although propofol depresses the CNS, it occasionally contributes to excitatory phenomena, such as muscle
twitching, spontaneous movement, yawning, and hiccups. Transient pain at the injection site is common. Propofol
decreases blood pressure without significantly depressing the myocardium. It also reduces intracranial pressure,
mainly due to decreased cerebral blood flow and oxygen consumption. It has less of a depressant effect than volatile
anesthetics on CNS-evoked potentials, making it useful for surgeries in which spinal cord function is monitored. It
does not provide analgesia, so supplementation with narcotics is required. Propofol is commonly infused in lower
doses to provide sedation. The incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is very low secondary to its
antiemetic properties.
517
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Barbiturates
Thiopental [THYE-oh-PEN-tahl] is an ultra–short-acting barbiturate with high lipid solubility. It is a potent
anesthetic but a weak analgesic. Barbiturates require supplementary analgesic administration during anesthesia.
When given IV, agents such as thiopental and methohexital [meth-oh-HEX-uh-tall] quickly enter the CNS and
depress function, often in less than 1 minute. However, diffusion out of the brain can also occur very rapidly
because of redistribution to other tissues (Figure 13.10). These drugs may remain in the body for relatively long
periods, because only about 15% of a dose entering the circulation is metabolized by the liver per hour. Thus,
metabolism of thiopental is much slower than its redistribution. Barbiturates tend to decrease blood pressure, which
may cause a reflex tachycardia. They decrease intracranial pressure through reductions in cerebral blood flow and
oxygen consumption. Thiopental is no longer available in many countries, including the United States. Methohexital
is still commonly used for electroconvulsive therapy.
Figure 13.10 Redistribution of thiopental from the brain to muscle and adipose tissue.
518
www.webofpharma.com

F.  Benzodiazepines
The benzodiazepines are used in conjunction with anesthetics for sedation and amnesia. The most commonly used is
midazolam [meh-DAZ-o-lam]. Diazepam [dye-AZ-uh-pam] and lorazepam [lore-AZ-uh-pam] are alternatives. All
three facilitate amnesia while causing sedation, enhancing the inhibitory effects of various neurotransmitters,
particularly GABA. Minimal cardiovascular depressant effects are seen, but all are potential respiratory depressants
(especially when administered IV). They are metabolized by the liver with variable elimination half-lives, and
erythromycin may prolong effects of midazolam. Benzodiazepines can induce a temporary form of anterograde
amnesia in which the patient retains memory of past events, but new information is not transferred into long-term
memory. Therefore, important treatment information should be repeated to the patient after the effects of the drug
have worn off.
519
www.webofpharma.com

G.  Opioids
Because of their analgesic property, opioids are commonly combined with other anesthetics. The choice of opioid is
based primarily on the duration of action needed. The most commonly used opioids are fentanyl [FEN-ta-nil] and its
congeners, sufentanil [SOO-fen-ta-nil] and remifentanil [REMI-fen-ta-nil], because they induce analgesia more
rapidly than morphine. They may be administered intravenously, epidurally, or intrathecally (into the cerebrospinal
fluid). Opioids are not good amnestics, and they can all cause hypotension and respiratory depression, as well as
nausea and vomiting. Opioid effects can be antagonized by naloxone.
520
www.webofpharma.com

H.  Etomidate
Etomidate [ee-TOM-uh-date] is a hypnotic agent used to induce anesthesia, but it lacks analgesic activity. Its water
solubility is poor, so it is formulated in a propylene glycol solution. Induction is rapid, and the drug is short-acting.
Among its benefits are little to no effect on the heart and systemic vascular resistance. Etomidate is usually only
used for patients with cardiovascular dysfunction or patients who are acutely critically ill. It inhibits 11-β
hydroxylase involved in steroidogenesis, and adverse effects may include decreased plasma cortisol and aldosterone
levels. Etomidate should not be infused for an extended time, because prolonged suppression of these hormones is
dangerous. Injection site pain, involuntary skeletal muscle movements, and nausea and vomiting are common.
521
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Ketamine
Ketamine [KET-uh-meen], a short-acting anti-NMDA receptor anesthetic and analgesic, induces a dissociated state
in which the patient is unconscious (but may appear to be awake) with profound analgesia. Ketamine stimulates
central sympathetic outflow, causing stimulation of the heart with increased blood pressure and CO. It is also a
potent bronchodilator. Therefore, it is beneficial in patients with hypovolemic or cardiogenic shock as well as
asthmatics. Conversely, it is contraindicated in hypertensive or stroke patients. The drug is lipophilic and enters the
brain very quickly. Like the barbiturates, it redistributes to other organs and tissues. Ketamine has become popular
as an adjunct to reduce opioid consumption during surgery. Of note, it may induce hallucinations, particularly in
young adults, but pretreatment with benzodiazepines may help. Ketamine may be used illicitly, since it causes a
dreamlike state and hallucinations similar to phencyclidine (PCP).
522
www.webofpharma.com

J.  Dexmedetomidine
Dexmedetomidine [dex-med-eh-TOM-uh-deen] is a sedative used in intensive care settings and surgery. Like
clonidine, it is an α2 receptor agonist in certain parts of the brain. Dexmedetomidine has sedative, analgesic,
sympatholytic, and anxiolytic effects that blunt many cardiovascular responses. It reduces volatile anesthetic,
sedative, and analgesic requirements without causing significant respiratory depression. It has gained popularity for
its ability to blunt emergence delirium in the pediatric population. Some therapeutic advantages and disadvantages
of the anesthetic agents are summarized in Figure 13.11.
Figure 13.11 Therapeutic disadvantages and advantages of some anesthetic agents.
523
www.webofpharma.com

VI.  Neuromuscular Blockers
Neuromuscular blockers are crucial to the practice of anesthesia and used to facilitate endotracheal intubation and
provide muscle relaxation when needed for surgery. Their mechanism of action is via blockade of nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors on the skeletal muscle cell membrane. These agents include cisatracurium, mivacurium,
pancuronium, rocuronium, succinylcholine, and vecuronium (see Chapter 5).
524
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Sugammadex
Sugammadex [soo-GAM-ma-dex] is a selective relaxant-binding agent that terminates the action of both rocuronium
and vecuronium. Its three-dimensional structure traps the neuromuscular blocker in a 1:1 ratio, terminating its action
and making it water soluble. It is unique in that it produces rapid and effective reversal of both shallow and profound
neuromuscular blockade. Sugammadex is eliminated via the kidneys.
525
www.webofpharma.com

VII.  Local Anesthetics
Local anesthetics block nerve conduction of sensory impulses and in higher concentrations block motor impulses
from the periphery to the CNS. Sodium ion channels are blocked to prevent the transient increase in permeability of
the nerve membrane to Na+ that is required for an action potential (Figure 13.12). When propagation of action
potentials is prevented, sensation cannot be transmitted from the source of stimulation to the brain. Delivery
techniques include topical administration, infiltration, and perineural and neuraxial (spinal, epidural, or caudal)
blocks. Small, unmyelinated nerve fibers for pain, temperature, and autonomic activity are most sensitive.
Structurally, local anesthetics all include a lipophilic group joined by an amide or ester linkage to a carbon chain,
which, in turn, is joined to a hydrophilic group (Figure 13.13). The most widely used local anesthetics are
bupivacaine [byoo-PIV-uh-cane], lidocaine [LYE-doe-cane], mepivacaine [muh-PIV-uh-cane], ropivacaine [roe-
PIV-uh-cane], and tetracaine [TET-truh-cane].
Figure 13.12 Mechanism of local anesthetic action.
Figure 13.13 Representative structures of ester and amide anesthetics.
526
www.webofpharma.com

527
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Actions
Local anesthetics cause vasodilation, which leads to a rapid diffusion away from the site of action and short duration
when these drugs are administered alone. By adding the vasoconstrictor epinephrine, the rate of local anesthetic
absorption and diffusion is decreased. This minimizes systemic toxicity and increases the duration of action. Hepatic
function does not affect the duration of action of local anesthesia because that is determined by redistribution rather
than biotransformation. Some local anesthetics have other therapeutic uses (for example, lidocaine is an IV
antiarrhythmic).
528
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Onset, potency, and duration of action
The onset of action of local anesthetics is influenced by several factors including tissue pH, nerve morphology,
concentration, pKa, and lipid solubility of the drug. Of these, the pKa is most important. Local anesthetics with a
lower pKa have a quicker onset, since more drug exists in the unionized form at physiologic pH, thereby allowing
penetration of the nerve cell membrane. Once at the nerve membrane, the ionized form interacts with the protein
receptor of the Na+ channel to inhibit its function and achieve local anesthesia. The pH may drop in infected sites,
causing onset to be delayed or even prevented. Potency and duration of these agents depend mainly on lipid
solubility, with higher solubility correlating with increased potency and duration of action.
529
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Metabolism
Biotransformation of amides occurs primarily in the liver. Prilocaine [PRY-low-cane], a dental anesthetic, is also
metabolized in the plasma and kidney, and one of its metabolites may lead to methemoglobinemia. Esters are
biotransformed by plasma cholinesterase (pseudocholinesterase). Patients with pseudocholinesterase deficiency may
metabolize ester local anesthetics more slowly. At normal doses, this has little clinical effect. Reduced hepatic
function predisposes patients to toxic effects, but should not significantly increase the duration of action of local
anesthetics.
530
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Allergic reactions
Patient reports of allergic reactions to local anesthetics are fairly common, but often times, reported “allergies” are
actually side effects from the coadministered epinephrine. True allergy to an amide local anesthetic is exceedingly
rare, while the ester procaine is more allergenic and has largely been removed from the market. Allergy to one ester
rules out use of another ester, because the allergenic component is the metabolite para-aminobenzoic acid, produced
by all esters. By contrast, allergy to one amide does not rule out the use of another amide. A patient may be allergic
to other compounds in the local anesthetic, such as preservatives in multidose vials.
531
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Local anesthetic systemic toxicity
Toxic blood levels of a local anesthetic may be due to repeated injections or could result from a single inadvertent
IV injection. Each drug has a weight-based toxic threshold that should be calculated. This is especially important in
children, the elderly, and women in labor (who are more susceptible to local anesthetics). Aspiration before every
injection is imperative. The signs, symptoms, and timing of local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) are
unpredictable. One must consider the diagnosis in any patient with altered mental status, seizures, or cardiovascular
instability following injection of local anesthetic. Treatment for LAST may include seizure suppression, airway
management, and cardiopulmonary support. Administering a 20% lipid emulsion infusion (lipid rescue therapy) is a
valuable asset. Figure 13.14 summarizes pharmacologic properties of some local anesthetics.
Figure 13.14 Summary of pharmacologic properties of some local anesthetics. PABA =
para-aminobenzoic acid.
532
www.webofpharma.com

VIII.  Anesthetic Adjuncts
Adjuncts are a critical part of the practice of anesthesia and include drugs that affect gastrointestinal (GI) motility,
PONV, anxiety, and analgesia. Adjuncts are used in collaboration to help make the anesthetic experience safe and
pleasant.
533
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Gastrointestinal medications
H2-receptor antagonists (for example, ranitidine; see Chapter 40) and proton pump inhibitors (for example,
omeprazole; see Chapter 40) help to reduce gastric acidity in the event of an aspiration. Nonparticulate antacids
(sodium citrate/citric acid) are given occasionally to quickly increase the pH of stomach contents. These drugs are
used in the obstetric population going to surgery, along with other patients with reflux. Finally, a dopamine receptor
antagonist (metoclopramide) can be used as a prokinetic agent to speed gastric emptying and increase lower
esophageal sphincter tone.
534
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Medications for PONV
PONV can be a significant problem during and after surgery both for the clinician and the patient. Risk factors for
PONV include female gender, nonsmoker, use of volatile and nitrous anesthetics, duration of surgery, and
postoperative narcotic use. 5-HT3 receptor antagonists (for example, ondansetron; see Chapter 40) are commonly
used to prevent PONV and are usually administered toward the end of surgery. Caution is advised in patients with
long QT intervals on electrocardiogram (ECG). An anticholinergic and antihistamine (promethazine) can also be
used; however, sedation, delirium, and confusion can complicate the postoperative period, especially in the elderly.
Glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone can be used to reduce PONV. The mechanism is unclear, but because of a
longer onset, these agents are usually given at the start of surgery. The neurokinin-1 antagonist aprepitant has also
been shown to reduce PONV. Lastly, transdermal scopolamine is given preoperatively to patients with multiple risk
factors or a history of PONV. Caution is advised because it can produce central anticholinergic effects.
535
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Anxiety medications
Anxiety is a common part of the surgical experience. Benzodiazepines (midazolam, diazepam), α2 agonists
(clonidine, dexmedetomidine), and H1-receptor antagonists (diphenhydramine) can be used to alleviate anxiety.
Benzodiazepines also elicit anterograde amnesia, which can help promote a more pleasant surgical experience.
536
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Analgesia
While opioids are a mainstay in anesthesia for pain control, multimodal analgesia is becoming more common due to
the long-term risks of opioid consumption in surgical patients. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ketorolac,
celecoxib; see Chapter 38) are common adjuncts to opioids. Caution should be used in patients with coagulopathies,
and in those with a history of peptic ulcer or platelet aggregation abnormalities. Acetaminophen can be used both PO
and IV, but caution is advised in impaired hepatic function. Analogs of GABA (gabapentin, pregabalin; see Chapter
12) are becoming more common as pretreatment to reduce opioid consumption both during and after surgery. They
also have multiple uses in neuropathic pain and addiction medicine. The NMDA antagonist ketamine is used to
reduce overall opioid consumption both intra- and postoperatively. Actions of anesthesia adjunct drugs are shown in
Figure 13.15.
537
www.webofpharma.com

538
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 13.15 Actions of anesthesia adjunct drugs.
539
www.webofpharma.com

13.1
13.2
13.3
13.4
13.5
13.6
13.7
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
Regarding levels of sedation, which one applies to loss of perception and sensation to painful stimuli?
A.  Anxiolysis
B.  General anesthesia
C.  Moderate sedation
D.  Deep sedation
Correct answer = B. Anxiolysis is a state of relaxation, but consciousness remains. General anesthesia is a total
loss of perception and sensation to stimuli. Moderate sedation maintains mentation with adequate airway and
respiratory competency. Deep sedation has some response to stimuli, but respirations may be inadequate.
Which of the following decreases minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)?
A.  Hyperthermia
B.  Cocaine intoxication
C.  Pregnancy
D.  Chronic ethanol abuse
Correct answer = C. Pregnancy is the only choice that decreases minimum alveolar concentration. All the other
options increase MAC.
Which of the following determines the speed of recovery from intravenous anesthetics used for induction?
A.  Liver metabolism of the drug
B.  Protein binding of the drug
C.  Ionization of the drug
D.  Redistribution of the drug from sites in the CNS
Correct answer = D. Following initial flooding of the CNS with nonionized molecules, the drug diffuses into
other tissues. With secondary tissue uptake, the plasma concentration falls, allowing the drug to diffuse out of the
CNS. This initial redistribution of drug into other tissues leads to the rapid recovery seen after a single dose of an
IV induction drug. Protein binding, ionization, and lipid solubility affect the rate of transfer.
Which one of the following is a potent intravenous anesthetic and analgesic?
A.  Propofol
B.  Midazolam
C.  Ketamine
D.  Fentanyl
Correct answer = C. Ketamine is unique in its blockage of NMDA receptors, yielding both potent anesthetic and
analgesic properties. Propofol is a potent anesthetic but a weak analgesic. Benzodiazepines such as midazolam
have little analgesic effect, but can be a potent anesthetic at high doses. Fentanyl is a potent analgesic.
Which local anesthetic is metabolized by plasma cholinesterase?
A.  Tetracaine
B.  Bupivacaine
C.  Lidocaine
D.  Ropivacaine
Correct answer = A. Tetracaine is the only ester type local anesthetic of the choices. The other choices are amide-
type local anesthetics, which are metabolized by biotransformation in the liver. Remember that esters usually
have one “i” in the spelling, where amides typically have two “i”’s.
A 23-year-old patient with a history of severe postoperative nausea and vomiting is coming in for plastic
surgery. Which anesthetic drug would be best to use for maintenance in this situation?
A.  Isoflurane
B.  Sevoflurane
C.  Nitrous oxide
D.  Propofol
Correct answer = D. A propofol infusion (TIVA) anesthetic would be best for this patient with a history of
postoperative nausea and vomiting. Propofol is the only anesthetic listed with antiemetic properties. Both
fluorinated hydrocarbons (isoflurane and sevoflurane) and nitrous oxide are linked to nausea and vomiting during
surgery.
A 61-year-old patient with an acute myocardial infarction has severely reduced cardiac output. He has to
540
www.webofpharma.com

13.8
13.9
13.10
undergo emergent coronary artery bypass surgery. Which of the following would you expect in this patient?
A.  Faster induction time with IV anesthetics
B.  Need for increased dosage of IV anesthetics
C.  Faster induction time with inhaled anesthetics
D.  Enhanced removal of inhaled anesthetics to peripheral tissues
Correct answer = C. For inhaled anesthetics during low CO, a longer period of time permits a larger concentration
of gas to dissolve in the slowly moving bloodstream. Furthermore, this large bolus of drug has longer contact time
to diffuse into neuronal tissue when it traverses the blood–brain barrier, yielding a faster induction time. The dose
of an IV drug must be reduced (not increased). In addition, with reduced cardiac output, it takes a longer time for
an IV induction drug to reach the brain, resulting in a slower induction time.
A 70-year-old patient in the intensive care unit needs sedation due to prolonged endotracheal intubation.
Which of the following medications should be avoided for sedation in this patient?
A.  Fentanyl
B.  Etomidate
C.  Propofol
D.  Dexmedetomidine
Correct answer = B. Adverse effects of etomidate include decreased plasma cortisol and aldosterone levels by
inhibiting the 11-β hydroxylase enzyme. Etomidate should not be infused for an extended time, because
prolonged suppression of these hormones is dangerous. All of the other choices could be used for sedation in the
ICU setting.
A 35-year-old man presents with appendicitis and requires a surgical intervention. He has a family history of
malignant hyperthermia. Which anesthetic agent is most appropriate to use in this patient?
A.  Isoflurane
B.  Propofol
C.  Succinylcholine
D.  Sevoflurane
Correct answer = B. Propofol is the only medication listed that is safe in patients susceptible to malignant
hyperthermia. All fluorinated hydrocarbons (isoflurane, sevoflurane, desflurane) as well as succinylcholine are
contraindicated and considered triggering agents. Flushing of the anesthesia machine, removal of vaporizers, use
of special filters, and availability of dantrolene are highly advised.
A 32-year-old woman presents for a right distal radius fracture. She requests regional anesthesia to help with
her pain postoperatively. She reports that as a child, she had an allergic reaction to Novocain (procaine) at
the dentist’s office. Which local anesthetic is appropriate for use in this patient?
A.  Chloroprocaine
B.  Benzocaine
C.  Ropivacaine
D.  Tetracaine
Correct answer = C. Procaine is an ester local anesthetic. Since this patient has an allergy to procaine, other ester
anesthetics (chloroprocaine, tetracaine, benzocaine) should not be used. Benzocaine is mostly used as a topical
product for temporary relief of dental or oral pain. Ropivacaine is an amide local anesthetic commonly used in
regional anesthesia to facilitate peripheral nerve blockade.
541
www.webofpharma.com



================================================================================
CH14: OPIOIDS
Pages 542-579 (PDF page numbers)
================================================================================

14
Opioids
Robin Moorman Li
542
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Overview
Management of pain is one of clinical medicine’s greatest challenges. Pain is defined as an unpleasant sensation that
can be either acute or chronic and is a consequence of complex neurochemical processes in the peripheral and
central nervous systems (CNS). It is subjective, and the clinician must rely on the patient’s perception and
description of pain. Alleviation of pain depends on the specific type of pain (nociceptive or neuropathic pain). For
example, with mild to moderate arthritic pain (nociceptive pain), nonopioid analgesics such as nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; see Chapter 38) are often effective. Neuropathic pain responds best to
anticonvulsants, tricyclic antidepressants, or serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors. However, for severe acute
pain or chronic malignant or nonmalignant pain, opioids can be considered as part of the treatment plan in select
patients (Figure 14.1). Opioids are natural, semisynthetic, or synthetic compounds that produce morphine-like
effects (Figure 14.2). These agents are divided into chemical classes based on their chemical structure (Figure 14.3).
All opioids act by binding to specific opioid receptors in the CNS to produce effects that mimic the action of
endogenous peptide neurotransmitters (for example, endorphins, enkephalins, and dynorphins). Although the opioids
have a broad range of effects, their primary use is to relieve intense pain that results from surgery, injury, or chronic
disease. Unfortunately, widespread availability of opioids has led to abuse of agents with euphoric properties.
Antagonists that reverse the actions of opioids are also clinically important for use in cases of overdose (Figure
14.1).
543
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 14.1 Summary of opioid analgesics and antagonists with common trade names. *
= Contains acetaminophen.
544
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 14.2 Origin of opioids: natural, semisynthetic, or synthetic.
545
www.webofpharma.com

546
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 14.3 Pharmacological classes of opioids and actions on opioid receptors.
547
www.webofpharma.com

II.  Opioid Receptors
The major effects of the opioids are mediated by three main receptor families, commonly designated as μ (mu,
MOR), κ (kappa, KOR), and δ (delta, DOR). Each receptor family exhibits a different specificity for the drug(s) it
binds. The analgesic properties of the opioids are primarily mediated by the mu receptors that modulate responses to
thermal, mechanical, and chemical nociception. The κ receptors in the dorsal horn also contribute to analgesia by
modulating the response to chemical and thermal nociception. The enkephalins interact more selectively with δ
receptors in the periphery. All three opioid receptors are members of the G protein–coupled receptor family and
inhibit adenylyl cyclase. They are also associated with ion channels, increasing postsynaptic K+ efflux
(hyperpolarization) or reducing presynaptic Ca2+ influx, thus impeding neuronal firing and transmitter release in the
spinal dorsal horn (Figure 14.4).
548
www.webofpharma.com

549
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 14.4 Mechanism of action of μ opioid receptor agonists in the spinal cord.
550
www.webofpharma.com

III.  Opioid Agonists
Morphine [MOR-feen] is the prototypical strong μ receptor agonist. Codeine [KOE-deen] is inherently less potent
and the prototype of the weak μ opioid agonists. Currently available opioids have many differences, such as receptor
affinity, pharmacokinetic profiles, available routes of administration, and adverse effect profiles. Some opioids are
also available in abuse deterrent formulations. Comparing other available opioids to morphine is helpful in
identifying the unique differences to guide the selection of a safe and effective pain management regimen (Figure
14.5).
Figure 14.5 Summary of clinically relevant properties for selected opioids.
551
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Morphine
1.  Mechanism of action
Morphine and other opioids exert analgesic effects by interacting stereospecifically with opioid receptors on the
membranes of neuronal cells in the CNS and other anatomic structures, such as the smooth muscles of the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract and the urinary bladder. Morphine is somewhat selective to the μ opioid receptor but has
some affinity for the κ and δ receptors. Morphine also inhibits the release of many excitatory transmitters from nerve
terminals carrying nociceptive (painful) stimuli. Some therapeutic uses of morphine and other opioids are listed in
Figure 14.6.
Figure 14.6 Selected clinical uses of opioids.
2.  Actions
a.  Analgesia
Morphine and other opioids relieve pain by raising the pain threshold at the spinal cord level and by altering the
brain’s perception of pain. The maximum analgesic efficacy for representative opioid agonists is shown in Figure
14.7.
552
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 14.7 A comparison of opioid agonist efficacy.
b.  Euphoria
Morphine produces a powerful sense of contentment and well-being. Euphoria may be caused by disinhibition of the
dopamine-containing neurons of the ventral tegmental area.
c.  Respiration
Morphine causes respiratory depression by reduction of the responsiveness of medullary respiratory center neurons
to carbon dioxide. This can occur with ordinary doses of morphine in patients who are opioid naïve and can be
accentuated as the dose is increased, until ultimately respiration ceases. Respiratory depression is the most common
cause of death in acute opioid overdoses. Tolerance to this effect develops with repeated dosing, which allows for
the safer use of morphine for the treatment of pain when the dose is correctly titrated.
d.  Depression of cough reflex
Both morphine and codeine have antitussive properties. In general, cough suppression does not correlate closely
with analgesic and respiratory depressant properties of opioid drugs. The receptors involved in the antitussive action
appear to be different from those involved in analgesia.
e.  Miosis
The pinpoint pupil (Figure 14.8) characteristic of morphine use results from stimulation of μ and κ receptors. There
is little tolerance to this effect. [Note: This is important diagnostically, because many other causes of coma and
respiratory depression produce dilation of the pupil.]
553
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 14.8 Characteristic pinpoint pupil associated with morphine use.
f.  Emesis
Morphine directly stimulates the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the area postrema that causes vomiting.
g.  GI tract
Morphine relieves diarrhea by decreasing the motility and increasing the tone of the intestinal circular smooth
muscle. Morphine also increases the tone of the anal sphincter. Morphine and other opioids produce constipation,
with little tolerance developing. Morphine can also increase biliary tract pressure due to contraction of the
gallbladder and constriction of the biliary sphincter.
h.  Cardiovascular
Morphine has no major effects on blood pressure or heart rate at lower dosages, but hypotension and bradycardia
may occur at higher doses. Because of respiratory depression and carbon dioxide retention, cerebral vessels dilate
and increase cerebrospinal fluid pressure. Morphine is usually contraindicated in individuals with head trauma or
severe brain injury.
i.  Histamine release
Morphine releases histamine from mast cells causing urticaria, sweating, and vasodilation. Because it can cause
bronchoconstriction, morphine should be used with caution in patients with asthma.
j.  Hormonal actions
Prolonged use of morphine may lead to opioid-induced androgen deficiency due to suppression of the
hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis (HPA). This results in decreased production of sex hormones, especially
testosterone, resulting in many clinical symptoms (Figure 14.9).
554
www.webofpharma.com

555
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 14.9 Clinical symptoms associated with opioid-induced androgen deficiency
(OPIAD).
k.  Labor
Morphine may prolong the second stage of labor by transiently decreasing the strength, duration, and frequency of
uterine contractions.
3.  Pharmacokinetics
a.  Administration
Morphine has a linear pharmacokinetic profile; however, absorption of morphine after oral administration is slow
and erratic. Extended-release oral preparations provide more consistent plasma levels. Because significant first-pass
metabolism of morphine occurs in the liver, subcutaneous and intravenous (IV) injections produce the most reliable
response.
b.  Distribution
Morphine rapidly enters all body tissues, including the fetuses of pregnant women. It should not be used for
analgesia during labor. Infants born to addicted mothers show physical dependence on opioids and exhibit
withdrawal symptoms if opioids are not administered. Only a small percentage of morphine crosses the blood–brain
barrier, because morphine is the least lipophilic of the common opioids. By contrast, the more lipid-soluble opioids,
such as fentanyl and methadone, readily penetrate the CNS.
c.  Fate
Morphine is conjugated with glucuronic acid in the liver to two active metabolites (morphine-6-glucuronide [M6G]
and morphine-3-glucuronide [M3G]), which are renally excreted. M6G is a very potent analgesic. M3G does not
have analgesic activity but is believed to cause neuroexcitatory effects. The duration of action of morphine is 4 to 5
hours when administered systemically to opioid-naïve individuals but considerably longer when injected epidurally
because the low lipophilicity prevents redistribution from the epidural space.
4.  Adverse effects
Many adverse effects are common across the entire opioid class (Figure 14.10). With most mu agonists, severe
respiratory depression can occur and may result in death from acute opioid overdose. Respiratory drive may be
suppressed in patients with respiratory disorders such as obstructive sleep apnea, emphysema, or cor pulmonale, so
close monitoring is necessary when using opioids. Opioid-induced constipation (OIC) is a common adverse effect.
Initial management includes a nonprescription stimulant laxative such as senna. Peripherally acting μ-opioid
receptor antagonists such as methylnaltrexone, naloxegol, and naldemedine are prescription drugs available for the
treatment of OIC. [Note: Lubiprostone is a chloride channel activator that is indicated for OIC and irritable bowel
syndrome; see Chapter 40.] Morphine should be used with caution in patients with liver disease and renal
dysfunction.
556
www.webofpharma.com

557
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 14.10 Adverse effects commonly observed in individuals treated with opioids.
5.  Tolerance and physical dependence
Repeated use produces tolerance to the respiratory depressant, analgesic, euphoric, emetic, and sedative effects of
morphine. Tolerance usually does not develop to miosis (constriction of the pupils) or constipation. Physical and
psychological dependence can occur with morphine and other agonists. Withdrawal produces a series of autonomic,
motor, and psychological responses that can be severe, although it is rare that withdrawal effects cause death.
6.  Drug interactions
Drug interactions with morphine are possible. The depressant actions of morphine are enhanced by coadministration
with CNS depressant medications such as phenothiazines, monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), and
benzodiazepines. Guidelines for opioid prescribing urge clinicians to avoid simultaneous prescribing of opioids and
benzodiazepines. A black box warning also has been included on the labeling of both opioids and benzodiazepines
to alert prescribers of this dangerous combination.
558
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Codeine
Codeine [KOE-deen] is a naturally occurring opioid and a weak analgesic compared to morphine. It is used for mild
to moderate pain. The analgesic actions of codeine are derived from its conversion to morphine by the CYP2D6
enzyme (see Chapter 1). CYP2D6 activity varies among patients, and ultrarapid metabolizers may experience higher
levels of morphine, leading to possible overdose and toxicity. Life-threatening respiratory depression and death have
been reported in children who received codeine, mostly following tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy. Codeine is
commonly used in combination with acetaminophen for management of pain. The drug exhibits good antitussive
activity at doses that do not cause analgesia. Dextromethorphan [dex-troe-meth-OR-fan] is a synthetic cough
depressant that has relatively no analgesic action and much lower potential for abuse in usual antitussive doses. It is
preferred over codeine in most situations where cough suppression is needed.
559
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Oxycodone and oxymorphone
Oxymorphone [ox-ee-MOR-fone] and oxycodone [ok-see-KOE-done] are orally active, semisynthetic analogs of
morphine and codeine, respectively. Oxymorphone given parenterally is approximately ten times more potent than
morphine, but when administered orally, the potency drops to about three times that of morphine. Oxymorphone is
available in both immediate-release and extended-release oral formulations. This agent has no clinically relevant
drug interactions associated with the CYP450 enzyme system. Oxycodone is approximately two times more potent
than morphine and is available in an immediate-release formulation, alone or in combination with acetaminophen,
aspirin, or ibuprofen. An extended-release formulation is also available. Oxycodone is mainly metabolized via the
CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 enzymes.
560
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Hydromorphone and hydrocodone
Hydromorphone [hye-droe-MORE-fone] and hydrocodone [hye-droe-KOE-done] are orally active, semisynthetic
analogs of morphine and codeine, respectively. Oral hydromorphone is approximately 4 to 7 times more potent than
oral morphine. It is preferred over morphine in patients with renal dysfunction due to less accumulation of active
metabolites. Hydrocodone is the methyl ether derivative of hydromorphone, but is a weaker analgesic than
hydromorphone, with oral analgesic efficacy comparable to that of morphine. This agent is often combined with
acetaminophen or ibuprofen to treat moderate to severe pain. It is also used as an antitussive. Hydrocodone is
metabolized in the liver to several metabolites, one of which is hydromorphone via the actions of CYP2D6.
561
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Fentanyl
Fentanyl [FEN-ta-nil] is a synthetic opioid chemically related to meperidine. Fentanyl has 100-fold the analgesic
potency of morphine and is used for anesthesia and acute pain management. The drug is highly lipophilic and has a
rapid onset and short duration of action (15 to 30 minutes). It is usually administered IV, epidurally, or intrathecally.
Fentanyl is combined with local anesthetics to provide epidural analgesia for labor and postoperative pain. IV
fentanyl is used in anesthesia for its analgesic and sedative effects. Many fast-acting transmucosal and nasal fentanyl
products are available for cancer-related breakthrough pain in opioid-tolerant patients. The transdermal patch creates
a reservoir of the drug in the skin and has a delayed onset of at least 12 hours and a prolonged offset. The patch is
used for management of chronic severe pain. It is contraindicated in opioid-naïve patients and should not be used in
management of acute or postoperative pain. Fentanyl is metabolized to inactive metabolites by CYP3A4, and drugs
that inhibit this isoenzyme can potentiate the effect of fentanyl.
562
www.webofpharma.com

F.  Sufentanil, alfentanil, remifentanil, and carfentanil
Sufentanil [soo-FEN-ta-nil], alfentanil [al-FEN-ta-nil], remifentanil [rem-ih-FEN-ta-nil], and carfentanil [car-FEN-
ta-nil] are synthetic opioid agonists related to fentanyl. These agents differ in potency and metabolic disposition.
Sufentanil and carfentanil are even more potent than fentanyl, whereas the other two are less potent and shorter
acting. Sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil are mainly used for their analgesic and sedative properties during
surgical procedures requiring anesthesia. Carfentanil is about 100 times more potent than fentanyl. The drug is not
used in clinical practice; however, it is of toxicological interest as it is used to lace heroin and has contributed to
several opioid-related deaths.
563
www.webofpharma.com

G.  Methadone
Methadone [METH-a-done] is a synthetic, orally effective opioid that has variable equianalgesic potency compared
to that of morphine, and the conversion between the two products is not linear. Methadone is a μ agonist, an
antagonist of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, and a norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
Therefore, it is useful in the treatment of both nociceptive and neuropathic pain. Methadone may also be used for
opioid withdrawal and maintenance therapy in the setting of prescription opioid and heroin abuse. The withdrawal
syndrome with methadone is milder but more protracted (days to weeks) than that with other opioids. Methadone
induces less euphoria and has a longer duration of action than morphine. Unlike morphine, methadone is well
absorbed after oral administration. Methadone is also constipating, but less so than morphine.
Understanding the pharmacokinetics of methadone is important to ensure proper use. After oral administration,
methadone is biotransformed in the liver and excreted almost exclusively in the feces. Methadone is very lipophilic,
rapidly distributed throughout the body, and released slowly during redistribution and elimination. This translates
into a long half-life ranging from 12 to 40 hours, although it may extend up to 150 hours. Despite the extended half-
life, the actual duration of analgesia ranges from 4 to 8 hours. Attainment of steady state can vary dramatically,
ranging from 35 hours to 2 weeks, so dosage adjustments should occur only every 5 to 7 days. Upon repeated
dosing, methadone can accumulate due to the long terminal half-life, leading to toxicity. Overdose is possible when
prescribers are unaware of the long half-life, the incomplete cross-tolerance between methadone and other opioids,
and the titration guidelines to avoid toxic accumulation. The metabolism is variable due to involvement of multiple
CYP450 isoenzymes, some of which are affected by known genetic polymorphisms. As such, methadone is
susceptible to many drug–drug interactions.
Methadone can produce physical dependence like that of morphine, but it has less neurotoxicity than morphine
due to lack of active metabolites. Methadone can prolong the QTc interval and cause torsades de pointes, possibly by
interacting with cardiac potassium channels. Baseline and routine ECG monitoring is recommended.
564
www.webofpharma.com

H.  Meperidine
Meperidine [me-PER-i-deen] is a lower-potency synthetic opioid structurally unrelated to morphine. It is used for
acute pain and acts primarily as a κ agonist, with some μ agonist activity. Meperidine is very lipophilic and has
anticholinergic effects, resulting in an increased incidence of delirium compared with other opioids. Meperidine has
an active metabolite (normeperidine), which is potentially neurotoxic. Normeperidine is renally excreted, and in
patients with renal insufficiency, accumulation of the metabolite may lead to delirium, hyperreflexia, myoclonus,
and seizures. Due to the short duration of action and the potential for toxicity, meperidine should only be used for
short-term (≤48 hours) management of pain. Meperidine should not be used in elderly patients or those with renal
insufficiency, hepatic insufficiency, preexisting respiratory compromise, or concomitant or recent administration of
MAOIs. Serotonin syndrome has been reported in patients receiving both meperidine and selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
565
www.webofpharma.com

IV.  Partial Agonists and Mixed Agonist–Antagonists
Partial agonists bind to the opioid receptor, but they have less intrinsic activity than full agonists (see Chapter 2).
There is a ceiling to the pharmacologic effects of these agents. Drugs that stimulate one receptor but block another
are termed mixed agonist–antagonists. The effects of these drugs depend on previous exposure to opioids. In
individuals who are opioid-naïve, mixed agonist–antagonists show agonist activity and are used to relieve pain. In
the presence of a full agonist, the agonist–antagonist drugs may precipitate opioid withdrawal symptoms.
566
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine [byoo-pre-NOR-feen] acts as a potent partial agonist at the μ receptor and an antagonist at the κ
receptors. Buprenorphine is very lipophilic and has a longer duration of action due to its high affinity for the opioid
receptors when compared to morphine. Due to high affinity for the mu receptor, buprenorphine can displace full μ
agonists, leading to withdrawal symptoms in an opioid-dependent patient. Because of the partial μ agonist activity,
buprenorphine provides a “ceiling effect,” causing less euphoric effects and a lower abuse potential than that of full
agonists. Additionally, the risk of opioid-induced respiratory depression may be lower when compared with full
agonists, except when combined with CNS depressants such as benzodiazepines. Buprenorphine is available in
sublingual, transmucosal, buccal, parenteral, subdermal, and transdermal formulations. The drug is approved for
moderate to severe pain. Certain formulations (for example, sublingual and subdermal) are approved for use in
medication-assisted treatment of opioid addiction due to its ability to provide prolonged suppression of opioid
withdrawal, the ability to block other μ agonists, and less frequent dosing requirements. In contrast to methadone,
which is available only at specialized clinics when used for opioid detoxification or maintenance, buprenorphine is
approved for office-based treatment of opioid dependence. It has been shown to have shorter and less severe
withdrawal symptoms compared to methadone (Figure 14.11). Adverse effects include respiratory depression that
cannot easily be reversed by naloxone and decreased (or, rarely, increased) blood pressure, nausea, and dizziness.
Additionally, buprenorphine has been associated with prolongation of the QTc interval. Although the clinical
significance of this effect is controversial, current labeling for some buprenorphine products includes dosing
restrictions due to the concern of QTc prolongation. Risk factors to evaluate when considering buprenorphine
include cardiovascular factors and concurrent drugs that may prolong.
Figure 14.11 Severity of opioid withdrawal symptoms after abrupt withdrawal of
equivalent doses of heroin, buprenorphine, and methadone.
567
www.webofpharma.com

568
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Pentazocine
Pentazocine [pen-TAZ-oh-seen] acts as an agonist on κ receptors and is a weak antagonist or partial agonist at μ
receptors. It can be administered either orally or parenterally. Pentazocine produces less euphoria compared to
morphine, but in higher doses, respiratory depression, increased blood pressure, tachycardia, and hallucinations can
occur. For these reasons, pentazocine is rarely used for management of pain. Despite its antagonist action,
pentazocine does not antagonize the respiratory depression of morphine, but it can precipitate withdrawal effects in a
morphine user. Pentazocine should be used with caution in patients with angina or coronary artery disease, since it
can increase blood pressure.
569
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Nalbuphine and butorphanol
Nalbuphine [NAL-byoo-feen] and butorphanol [byoo-TOR-fa-nole] are mixed opioid agonist–antagonists. Like
pentazocine, they play a limited role in the treatment of chronic pain. Butorphanol is available in a nasal spray that
has been used for severe headaches, but it has been associated with abuse. Both products are available in an
injectable formulation. Their propensity to cause psychotomimetic effects is less than that of pentazocine. In contrast
to pentazocine and butorphanol, nalbuphine does not affect the heart or increase blood pressure. A benefit of all
three medications is that they exhibit a ceiling effect for respiratory depression.
570
www.webofpharma.com

V.  Other Analgesics
571
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Tapentadol
Tapentadol [ta-PEN-ta-dol], a centrally acting analgesic, is an agonist at the μ opioid receptor and an inhibitor of
norepinephrine reuptake. It is used to manage moderate to severe acute and chronic pain, including neuropathic pain
associated with diabetic peripheral neuropathy. Tapentadol is mainly metabolized to inactive metabolites via
glucuronidation, and it does not inhibit or induce the CYP450 enzyme system. Because tapentadol does not produce
active metabolites, dosing adjustment is not necessary in mild to moderate renal impairment. Tapentadol should be
avoided in patients who have received MAOIs within the past 14 days. It is available in an immediate-release and
extended-release formulation.
572
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Tramadol
Tramadol [TRA-ma-dole] is a centrally acting analgesic that binds to the μ opioid receptor. It undergoes extensive
metabolism via CYP2D6, leading to an active metabolite, which has a much higher affinity for the mu receptor than
the parent compound. In addition, it weakly inhibits reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin. It is used to manage
moderate to severe pain. Of note, tramadol has less respiratory-depressant activity compared to morphine.
Administration of naloxone can only partially reverse tramadol toxicity and has been associated with an increased
risk of seizures. Anaphylactoid reactions have been reported. Overdose or drug–drug interactions with SSRIs,
MAOIs, and tricyclic antidepressants can lead to toxicity manifested by CNS excitation and seizures. Tramadol
should be used with caution in patients with a history of seizures. As with other agents that bind the μ opioid
receptor, tramadol has been associated with misuse and abuse.
573
www.webofpharma.com

VI.  Antagonists
The opioid antagonists bind with high affinity to opioid receptors, but they fail to activate the receptor-mediated
response. Administration of opioid antagonists produces no profound effects in individuals not taking opioids. In
opioid-dependent patients, antagonists rapidly reverse the effect of agonists, such as morphine or any full μ agonist,
and precipitate the symptoms of opioid withdrawal. Figure 14.12 summarizes some signs and symptoms of opioid
withdrawal.
Figure 14.12 Opiate withdrawal syndrome. GI = gastrointestinal.
574
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Naloxone
Naloxone [nal-OX-own] is a competitive antagonist at μ, κ, and δ receptors, with a 10-fold higher affinity for mu
than for kappa receptors. It rapidly displaces all receptor-bound opioid molecules and, therefore, can reverse the
effects of morphine overdose, such as respiratory depression and coma within 1 to 2 minutes of IV administration.
Naloxone can also be administered intramuscularly, subcutaneously, and intranasally, with a slightly longer onset of
2 to 5 minutes; however, little to no clinical effect is seen with oral naloxone due to extensive first-pass metabolism.
Since naloxone has a half-life of 30 to 81 minutes, a patient who has been treated for an overdose and recovered
may lapse back into respiratory depression, depending on the opioid ingested and dosage form of that opioid. [Note:
Much higher doses and continuous administration of naloxone are needed to reverse the effects of buprenorphine
due to its high affinity for the mu receptor.]
Naloxone is available in an autoinjector and a nasal inhaler for community distribution for treatment of opioid
overdose involving heroin or prescription opioids. It is imperative that prescribers counsel the patient and family
members regarding the availability of these products, proper instructions for use, and the importance of calling
emergency services in the case of overdose.
575
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Naltrexone
Naltrexone [nal-TREX-own] has actions similar to those of naloxone, but it has a longer duration of action and can
be given orally. For example, a single oral dose of naltrexone blocks the effect of injected heroin for up to 24 hours,
and the intramuscular formulation blocks the effect for 30 days. Naltrexone in combination with clonidine (and,
sometimes, with buprenorphine) is used for rapid opioid detoxification. Naltrexone has been reported to cause
hepatotoxicity and monitoring of hepatic function is recommended.
576
www.webofpharma.com

14.1
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
Which of the agents listed is a phenanthrene opioid that exhibits a full and immediate response to treatment
with naloxone in the case of overdose?
A.  Meperidine
B.  Morphine
C.  Buprenorphine
D.  Fentanyl
Correct answer = B. A morphine overdose can be effectively treated with naloxone, and morphine is a
phenanthrene. Naloxone antagonizes the opioid by displacing it from the receptor, but there are cases in which
naloxone is not effective. Meperidine is a phenylpiperidine, not a phenanthrene, and the active metabolite,
normeperidine, is not reversible by naloxone. The effects of buprenorphine are only partially reversible by
naloxone. In most cases of buprenorphine overdose, the dose of naloxone needs to be high and continuous due to
the higher binding affinity to the mu receptor. Naloxone is effective for fentanyl overdoses; however, fentanyl is a
phenylpiperidine, and not a phenanthrene.
A 76-year-old female with renal insufficiency has severe pain secondary to a compression fracture in the
lumbar spine. She reports that the pain has been uncontrolled with tramadol, and it is decided to start
treatment with an opioid. Which is the best opioid for this patient?
A.  Meperidine
B.  Fentanyl transdermal patch
C.  Hydrocodone/acetaminophen
D.  Morphine
Correct answer = C. Hydrocodone/acetaminophen is the best choice. It is very important to use a low dose and
monitor closely for proper pain control and adverse effects. Meperidine should not be used for chronic pain, nor
should it be used in a patient with renal insufficiency. The transdermal patch is not a good option, since her pain
is considered acute and she is opioid naïve. Morphine is not the best choice due to the active metabolites that can
accumulate in renal insufficiency.
Which statement about buprenorphine is correct?
A.  Buprenorphine has a much higher incidence of opioid-induced respiratory depression compared to other μ
agonists.
B.  Buprenorphine has many dosage formulations, and all formulations can be prescribed for the treatment of pain or
opioid dependence.
C.  Buprenorphine has a lower number of drug–drug interactions compared to methadone.
D.  Buprenorphine is a full μ agonist, an antagonist of the NMDA receptor, and a norepinephrine and serotonin
reuptake inhibitor.
Correct answer = C. Buprenorphine is metabolized by the CYP3A4 system, so there are concerns about drug
interactions; however, compared to methadone, which is metabolized by numerous CYP450 enzymes, the drug
interaction concern for buprenorphine is much lower. Buprenorphine has a lower incidence of opioid-induced
respiratory depression compared to the μ agonists due to the ceiling effect created by the partial μ agonist activity.
Buprenorphine is available in many different dosage formulations, but these formulations are indicated for either
pain management or medication-assisted treatment of opioid dependence, not both. Option D describes the
mechanism of action of methadone. Buprenorphine is a potent partial μ agonist and a κ antagonist.
A 56-year-old patient has suffered with painful diabetic neuropathy and severe chronic back pain with
radiculopathy secondary to spinal stenosis for many years. This patient has failed to receive relief from his
neuropathic pain with first-line agents such as tricyclics, SNRIs, or anticonvulsants. Based on the mechanism
of action, which opioid could be considered in this patient to treat both nociceptive and neuropathic pain?
A.  Meperidine
B.  Oxymorphone
C.  Morphine
D.  Tapentadol
Correct answer = D. Tapentadol has a unique mechanism of action in comparison with the other choices given.
Tapentadol has a dual mechanism of action (μ agonist and norepinephrine reuptake inhibition), which has been
shown to effectively treat neuropathic pain associated with diabetic peripheral neuropathy. All other μ agonists
could help manage neuropathic pain, but in some situations, higher doses of opioids are needed to achieve
efficacy.
Which of the following statements regarding methadone is correct?
A.  Methadone is an excellent choice for analgesia in most patients because there are limited drug–drug interactions.
B.  The equianalgesic potency of methadone is similar to that of morphine.
C.  The duration of analgesia for methadone is much shorter than the elimination half-life.
577
www.webofpharma.com

14.6
14.7
14.8
14.9
14.10
D.  The active metabolites of methadone accumulate in patients with renal dysfunction.
Correct Answer = C. The duration of analgesia is much shorter than the elimination half-life, leading to dangers
of accumulation and increased potential for respiratory depression and death. The equianalgesic potency of
methadone is extremely variable based on many factors, and only providers familiar with methadone should
prescribe this agent. The drug interactions associated with methadone are numerous due to the multiple liver
enzymes that metabolize the drug. Methadone does not have active metabolites, which makes it a treatment
option in patients with renal dysfunction.
AN is a 57-year-old man who has been treated with oxycodone for chronic nonmalignant pain for over 2
years. He now reports increased pain in the afternoon while at work. Which of the following is a short-acting
opioid and is the best choice for this patient’s breakthrough pain?
A.  Methadone
B.  Fentanyl
C.  Hydrocodone
D.  Nalbuphine
Correct answer = C. Hydrocodone is a commonly used short-acting agent that is commercially available in
combination with either acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Methadone should not routinely be used for breakthrough
pain due to the unique pharmacokinetics and should be reserved for practitioners who have experience with this
agent and understand the variables associated with this drug. Fentanyl is available in formulations for treatment of
breakthrough pain for cancer treatment. It is not appropriate to use fentanyl in this type of chronic pain setting.
Nalbuphine is a mixed agonist/antagonist analgesic that could precipitate withdrawal in patients who are currently
taking a full μ agonist such as oxycodone.
A 64-year-old man is preparing for a total knee replacement. He is taking many medications that are
metabolized by the CYP450 enzyme system and is worried about drug interactions with the pain medication
that will be used following surgery. Which of the following opioids would have the lowest chance of drug
interactions in this patient?
A.  Methadone
B.  Tapentadol
C.  Tramadol
D.  Oxycodone
Correct answer = B. Tapentadol is metabolized via glucuronidation and has not been shown to have any clinically
relevant drug interactions associated with the CYP450 enzyme family. All other opioids listed are metabolized by
one or more CYP450 enzymes and increase the risk of drug interactions.
Which of the following statements regarding adverse effects of opioid therapy is correct?
A.  The risk of respiratory depression is highest during an initial opioid initiation or following a dose increase.
B.  Opioid-induced constipation is only seen with the initiation of opioid therapy.
C.  The incidence of nausea and sedation increases with long-term use of opioid therapy.
D.  Decreased testosterone levels are commonly seen with short-term use of opioid therapy.
Correct answer = A. The risk of respiratory depression is highest when the opioid is first initiated or a dosage is
raised (or sometimes a drug–drug interaction leads to higher opioid levels). Opioid-induced constipation can
occur at any time during the therapy, and a patient does not develop a tolerance to this side effect. Side effects
such as nausea and sedation commonly decrease after repeated dosing due to development of tolerance to these
adverse effects. Chronic opioid exposure has been linked to decreased testosterone levels in males.
KM is a 64-year-old man who has been hospitalized following a car accident in which he sustained a broken
leg and broken arm. He has been converted to oral morphine in anticipation of discharge from the hospital.
Upon discharge, which medication should he receive along with the morphine?
A.  Diphenhydramine
B.  Methylphenidate
C.  Senna
D.  Docusate sodium
Correct answer = C. A bowel regimen should be prescribed with the initiation of the opioid since constipation is
very common and can occur at any time, and tolerance to this adverse effect does not occur. Senna is a stimulant
that is available over-the-counter. Docusate sodium is a stool softener that is ineffective in opioid-induced
constipation when used as a single agent. Combination products that include both docusate and senna are
commonly used and can be effective, mainly due to the actions of senna. Diphenhydramine can be used for
urticaria that might occur with the initiation of an opioid, and methylphenidate has been used for opioid-induced
sedation in certain situations, but these issues are not reported in this case.
AN is a 67-year-old man who has been treated with oxycodone for chronic nonmalignant pain with no
changes in the dosing regimen for over 2 years. His pain has been fairly well controlled, and he remains
active, reports satisfaction with his pain regimen, and denies any side effects. He has been recently diagnosed
578
www.webofpharma.com

with COPD and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Which of the following options is the best treatment
recommendation for him at this time?
A.  Taper off all opioids due to increased risk of opioid-induced respiratory depression.
B.  Prescribe naloxone nasal spray to have at home in case he experiences an opioid overdose.
C.  Prescribe oral naloxone tablets to have at home in case he experiences an opioid overdose.
D.  No action is needed at this time. His pain is well controlled, and he is reporting no side effects.
Correct answer = B. Because this patient has just been diagnosed with COPD and OSA, it is clear his risk for
opioid-induced respiratory depression is greater. Since the pain is controlled and no side effects are reported,
tapering off the opioids at this time is not the best answer. Because of the first-pass effect, naloxone is not
clinically effective for management of an overdose when given orally. Therefore, the nasal spray is the best
choice. Offering the at-home naloxone nasal spray, along with proper education, might be lifesaving if an
overdose occurs. Providing proper education to the patient and caregivers on the importance of having the
naloxone nasal spray at home and of calling emergency services is critical in case of an overdose situation.
579
www.webofpharma.com



================================================================================
CH15: CNS STIMULANTS
Pages 580-598 (PDF page numbers)
================================================================================

15
CNS Stimulants
Jose A. Rey
580
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Overview
Psychomotor stimulants and hallucinogens are two groups of drugs that act primarily to stimulate the central
nervous system (CNS). The psychomotor stimulants cause excitement and euphoria, decrease feelings of fatigue,
and increase motor activity. The hallucinogens produce profound changes in thought patterns and mood, with little
effect on the brainstem and spinal cord. As a group, the CNS stimulants have diverse clinical uses and are also
potential drugs of abuse, as are the CNS depressants (Chapter 9) and the opioids (Chapter 14). Figure 15.1
summarizes the CNS stimulants.
Figure 15.1 Summary of central nervous system (CNS) stimulants.
581
www.webofpharma.com

II.  Psychomotor Stimulants
582
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Methylxanthines
The methylxanthines include theophylline [thee-OFF-i-lin], which is found in tea; theobromine [thee-oh-BROE-
meen], which is found in cocoa; and caffeine [kaf-EEN]. Caffeine, the most widely consumed stimulant in the world,
is found in highest concentration in certain coffee products (for example, espresso), but it is also present in tea, cola
drinks, energy drinks, chocolate candy, and cocoa.
1.  Mechanism of action
Several mechanisms have been proposed for the actions of methylxanthines, including translocation of extracellular
calcium, increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate and cyclic guanosine monophosphate caused by inhibition of
phosphodiesterase, and blockade of adenosine receptors.
2.  Actions
a.  CNS
The caffeine contained in one to two cups of coffee (100 to 200 mg) causes a decrease in fatigue and increased
mental alertness as a result of stimulating the cortex and other areas of the brain. Consumption of 1.5 g of caffeine
(12 to 15 cups of coffee) produces anxiety and tremors. The spinal cord is stimulated only by very high doses (2 to 5
g) of caffeine. Tolerance can rapidly develop to the stimulating properties of caffeine, and withdrawal consists of
feelings of fatigue and sedation.
b.  Cardiovascular system
A high dose of caffeine has positive inotropic and chronotropic effects on the heart. [Note: Increased contractility
can be harmful to patients with angina pectoris. In others, an accelerated heart rate can trigger premature ventricular
contractions.]
c.  Diuretic action
Caffeine has a mild diuretic action that increases urinary output of sodium, chloride, and potassium.
d.  Gastric mucosa
Because methylxanthines stimulate secretion of gastric acid, individuals with peptic ulcers should avoid foods and
beverages containing methylxanthines.
3.  Therapeutic uses
Caffeine and its derivatives relax the smooth muscles of the bronchioles. Theophylline has been largely replaced by
other agents, such as β2 agonists and corticosteroids, for the treatment of asthma (see Chapter 39). Caffeine is also
used in combination with the analgesics acetaminophen and aspirin for the management of headaches in both
prescription and over-the-counter products.
4.  Pharmacokinetics
The methylxanthines are well absorbed orally. Caffeine distributes throughout the body, including the brain. These
drugs cross the placenta to the fetus and are secreted into the breast milk. All methylxanthines are metabolized in the
liver, generally by the CYP1A2 pathway, and the metabolites are excreted in the urine.
5.  Adverse effects
Moderate doses of caffeine cause insomnia, anxiety, and agitation. A high dosage is required for toxicity, which is
manifested by emesis and convulsions. The lethal dose is 10 g of caffeine (about 100 cups of coffee), which induces
cardiac arrhythmias. Lethargy, irritability, and headache occur in users who routinely consume more than 600 mg of
caffeine per day (roughly six cups of coffee per day) and then suddenly stop.
583
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Nicotine
Nicotine [NIK-o-teen] is the active ingredient in tobacco. Although this drug is not currently used therapeutically
(except in smoking cessation therapy), nicotine remains important because it is second only to caffeine as the most
widely used CNS stimulant, and it is second only to alcohol as the most abused drug. In combination with the tars
and carbon monoxide found in cigarette smoke, nicotine represents a serious risk factor for lung and cardiovascular
disease, and other illnesses.
1.  Mechanism of action
In low doses, nicotine causes ganglionic stimulation by depolarization. At high doses, nicotine causes ganglionic
blockade. Nicotine receptors exist at a number of sites in the CNS, which participate in the stimulant attributes of the
drug.
2.  Actions
a.  CNS
Nicotine is highly lipid soluble and readily crosses the blood–brain barrier. Cigarette smoking or administration of
low doses of nicotine produces some degree of euphoria and arousal, as well as relaxation. It improves attention,
learning, problem solving, and reaction time. High doses of nicotine result in central respiratory paralysis and severe
hypotension caused by medullary paralysis (Figure 15.2). Nicotine is also an appetite suppressant.
Figure 15.2 Actions of nicotine on the CNS.
b.  Peripheral effects
The peripheral effects of nicotine are complex. Stimulation of sympathetic ganglia as well as of the adrenal medulla
increases blood pressure and heart rate. Thus, use of tobacco is particularly harmful in hypertensive patients. Many
patients with peripheral vascular disease experience an exacerbation of symptoms with smoking. In addition,
nicotine-induced vasoconstriction can decrease coronary blood flow, adversely affecting a patient with angina.
Stimulation of parasympathetic ganglia also increases motor activity of the bowel. At higher doses, blood pressure
falls and activity ceases in both the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and bladder musculature as a result of a nicotine-
induced block of parasympathetic ganglia.
3.  Pharmacokinetics
Because nicotine is highly lipid soluble, absorption readily occurs via the oral mucosa, lungs, GI mucosa, and skin.
Nicotine crosses the placental membrane and is secreted in the breast milk. By inhaling tobacco smoke, the average
smoker takes in 1 to 2 mg of nicotine per cigarette. The acute lethal dose is 60 mg. More than 90% of the nicotine
inhaled in smoke is absorbed. Clearance of nicotine involves metabolism in the lung and the liver and urinary
584
www.webofpharma.com

excretion. Tolerance to the toxic effects of nicotine develops rapidly, often within days.
4.  Adverse effects
The CNS effects of nicotine include irritability and tremors. Nicotine may also cause intestinal cramps, diarrhea, and
increased heart rate and blood pressure. In addition, cigarette smoking increases the rate of metabolism for a number
of drugs.
5.  Withdrawal syndrome
As with the other drugs in this class, nicotine is an addictive substance, and physical dependence develops rapidly
and can be severe (Figure 15.3). Withdrawal is characterized by irritability, anxiety, restlessness, difficulty
concentrating, headaches, and insomnia. Appetite is affected, and GI upset often occurs. The transdermal patch and
chewing gum containing nicotine have been shown to reduce nicotine withdrawal symptoms and to help smokers
stop smoking. For example, the blood concentration of nicotine obtained from nicotine chewing gum is typically
about one-half the peak level observed with smoking (Figure 15.4). Other forms of nicotine replacement used for
smoking cessation include the inhaler, nasal spray, and lozenges. Bupropion, an antidepressant (Chapter 10), can
reduce the craving for cigarettes, assist in smoking cessation, and attenuate symptoms of withdrawal.
585
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 15.3 Nicotine has potential for addiction and withdrawal.
586
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 15.4 Blood concentrations of nicotine in individuals who smoked cigarettes,
chewed nicotine gum, or received nicotine by transdermal patch.
587
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Varenicline
Varenicline [ver-EN-ih-kleen] is a partial agonist at neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the CNS. Because
varenicline is only a partial agonist at these receptors, it produces less euphoric effects than nicotine (nicotine is a
full agonist). Thus, it is useful as an adjunct in the management of smoking cessation in patients with nicotine
withdrawal symptoms. Patients taking varenicline should be monitored for suicidal thoughts, vivid nightmares, and
mood changes.
588
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Cocaine
Cocaine [koe-KANE] is a widely available and highly addictive drug. Because of its abuse potential, cocaine is
classified as a Schedule II drug by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency. The primary mechanism of action
underlying the effects of cocaine is blockade of reuptake of the monoamines (norepinephrine, serotonin, and
dopamine) into the presynaptic terminals. This potentiates and prolongs the CNS and peripheral actions of these
monoamines. In particular, the prolongation of dopaminergic effects in the brain’s pleasure system (limbic system)
produces the intense euphoria that cocaine initially causes. Chronic intake of cocaine depletes dopamine. This
depletion triggers craving for cocaine (Figure 15.5). A full description of cocaine and its effects is provided in
Chapter 45.
Figure 15.5 Cocaine and amphetamine have potential for addiction.
589
www.webofpharma.com

E.  Amphetamine
Amphetamine [am-FET-a-meen] is a sympathetic amine that shows neurologic and clinical effects similar to those of
cocaine. Dextroamphetamine [dex-troe-am-FET-a-meen] is the major member of this class of compounds.
Methamphetamine [meth-am-FET-a-meen] (also known as “speed”) is a derivative of amphetamine available for
prescription use. 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (also known as MDMA, or ecstasy) is a synthetic derivative
of methamphetamine with both stimulant and hallucinogenic properties (see Chapter 45).
1.  Mechanism of action
As with cocaine, the effects of amphetamine on the CNS and peripheral nervous system are indirect. That is, both
depend upon an elevation of the level of catecholamine neurotransmitters in synaptic spaces. Amphetamine,
however, achieves this effect by releasing intracellular stores of catecholamines (Figure 15.6). Because
amphetamine also inhibits monoamine oxidase (MAO) and is a weak reuptake transport inhibitor, high levels of
catecholamines are present in synaptic spaces. Despite different mechanisms of action, the behavioral effects of
amphetamine and its derivatives are similar to those of cocaine.
590
www.webofpharma.com

591
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 15.6 Mechanism of action of amphetamine.
2.  Actions
a.  CNS
The major behavioral effects of amphetamine result from a combination of its dopamine and norepinephrine
release–enhancing properties. Amphetamine stimulates the entire cerebrospinal axis, cortex, brainstem, and medulla.
This leads to increased alertness, decreased fatigue, depressed appetite, and insomnia. The CNS stimulant effects of
amphetamine and its derivatives have led to their use in the treatment of hyperactivity in children, narcolepsy, and
obesity. At high doses, psychosis and convulsions may occur.
b.  Sympathetic nervous system
In addition to marked action on the CNS, amphetamine acts on the adrenergic system, indirectly stimulating the
receptors through norepinephrine release.
3.  Therapeutic uses
Factors that limit the therapeutic usefulness of amphetamine include psychological and physiologic dependence.
a.  Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Some children are hyperkinetic and lack the ability to be involved in any activity for longer than a few minutes.
Dextroamphetamine, methamphetamine, the mixed amphetamine salts, and methylphenidate [meth-ill-FEN-ih-date]
help improve attention span and alleviate many of the behavioral problems associated with this syndrome, in
addition to reducing hyperkinesia. Lisdexamfetamine [lis-dex-am-FET-a-meen] is a prodrug that is converted to L-
lysine and the active component dextroamphetamine through the hydrolytic actions of red blood cells. Atomoxetine
[AT-oh-MOX-ih-teen] is a nonstimulant drug approved for ADHD in children and adults. Unlike methylphenidate,
which blocks dopamine reuptake more than norepinephrine reuptake, atomoxetine is more selective for inhibition of
norepinephrine reuptake. Therefore, it is not considered habit forming and is not a controlled substance.
b.  Narcolepsy
Narcolepsy is a relatively rare sleep disorder that is characterized by uncontrollable bouts of sleepiness during the
day. The sleepiness can be treated with drugs, such as the mixed amphetamine salts or methylphenidate. Modafinil
[moe-DA-fi-nil] and its R-enantiomer derivative, armodafinil [ar-moe-DA-fi-nil], are considered first-line agents for
the treatment of narcolepsy. Modafinil promotes wakefulness, but it produces less psychoactive and euphoric effects
and fewer alterations in mood, perception, thinking, and feelings typical of other CNS stimulants. The mechanism of
action remains unclear but may involve the adrenergic and dopaminergic systems. Modafinil is well distributed
throughout the body and undergoes elimination via hepatic metabolism and excretion in the urine. Headaches,
nausea, and nervousness are the primary adverse effects. Modafinil and armodafinil may have some potential for
abuse and physical dependence, and both are classified as controlled substances.
c.  Appetite suppression
Phentermine [FEN-ter-meen] and diethylpropion [dye-eth-ill-PROE-pee-on] are sympathomimetic amines that are
related structurally to amphetamine. These agents are used for appetite suppressant effects in the management of
obesity (see Chapter 37).
4.  Pharmacokinetics
Amphetamine is completely absorbed from the GI tract, metabolized by the liver, and excreted in the urine. [Note:
Administration of urinary alkalinizing agents such as sodium bicarbonate increase the nonionized species of the
drug and enhance the reabsorption of dextroamphetamine from the renal tubules into the bloodstream.]
Amphetamine abusers often administer the drug by IV injection and/or by smoking. The euphoria caused by
amphetamine lasts 4 to 6 hours, or four- to eightfold longer than the effects of cocaine.
5.  Adverse effects
The amphetamines may cause addiction, leading to dependence, tolerance, and drug-seeking behavior. In addition,
they have the following undesirable effects:
a.  CNS effects
Adverse effects of amphetamine usage include insomnia, irritability, weakness, dizziness, tremor, and hyperactive
reflexes (Figure 15.7). Amphetamine can also cause confusion, delirium, panic states, and suicidal tendencies,
especially in mentally ill patients. [Note: Benzodiazepines, such as lorazepam, are often used in the management of
agitation and CNS stimulation secondary to amphetamine overdose.] Chronic amphetamine use produces a state of
“amphetamine psychosis” that resembles the psychotic episodes associated with schizophrenia. Whereas long-term
amphetamine use is associated with psychological and physical dependence, tolerance to its effects may occur
within a few weeks. The anorectic effect of amphetamine is due to action in the lateral hypothalamic feeding center.
592
www.webofpharma.com

593
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 15.7 Adverse effects of amphetamines and methylphenidate.
b.  Cardiovascular effects
In addition to CNS effects, amphetamine may cause palpitations, cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, anginal pain,
and circulatory collapse. Headache, chills, and excessive sweating may also occur.
c.  Gastrointestinal effects
Amphetamine acts on the GI system, causing anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea.
d.  Contraindications
Patients with hypertension, cardiovascular disease, hyperthyroidism, glaucoma, or a history of drug abuse or those
taking MAO inhibitors should not be treated with amphetamine.
594
www.webofpharma.com

F.  Methylphenidate
Methylphenidate has CNS stimulant properties similar to those of amphetamine and is often used in the treatment of
ADHD. Methylphenidate has abuse potential and is a Schedule II controlled substance. The pharmacologically
active isomer, dexmethylphenidate, is also a Schedule II drug used for the treatment of ADHD.
1.  Mechanism of action
Children with ADHD may produce weak dopamine signals, which suggest that once-interesting activities provide
fewer rewards to these children. Methylphenidate is a dopamine and norepinephrine transport inhibitor and may act
by increasing both dopamine and norepinephrine in the synaptic cleft.
2.  Therapeutic uses
Methylphenidate is used in the treatment of ADHD. It is also effective in the treatment of narcolepsy. Unlike
methylphenidate, dexmethylphenidate is not indicated in the treatment of narcolepsy.
3.  Pharmacokinetics
Both methylphenidate and dexmethylphenidate are readily absorbed after oral administration. Methylphenidate is
available in extended-release oral formulations and as a transdermal patch for once-daily application. The
deesterified product, ritalinic acid, is excreted in urine.
4.  Adverse effects
GI adverse effects are the most common and include abdominal pain and nausea. Other reactions include anorexia,
insomnia, nervousness, and fever. In patients with epilepsy, methylphenidate may increase seizure frequency. The
drug is contraindicated in patients with glaucoma. Methylphenidate can inhibit the metabolism of warfarin,
phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone, and the tricyclic antidepressants.
595
www.webofpharma.com

III.  Hallucinogens
A few drugs have, as their primary action, the ability to induce altered perceptual states reminiscent of dreams.
Many of these altered states are accompanied by visions of bright, colorful changes in the environment and by a
plasticity of constantly changing shapes and color. The individual under the influence of these drugs is incapable of
normal decision-making because the drug interferes with rational thought. These compounds are known as
hallucinogens, and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and tetrahydrocannabinol (from marijuana) are examples of
agents in this class. These agents are discussed in detail in Chapter 45.
596
www.webofpharma.com

15.1
15.2
15.3
15.4
15.5
15.6
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
A young male was brought to the emergency room by the police due to severe agitation. Psychiatric
examination revealed that he had injected dextroamphetamine several times in the past few days. The last use
was 10 hours prior. He was given an intramuscular drug that sedated him, and he fell asleep. Which drug was
most likely used to counter this patient’s symptoms of dextroamphetamine withdrawal?
A.  Trazodone
B.  Lorazepam
C.  Cocaine
D.  Hydroxyzine
Correct answer = B. The anxiolytic properties of benzodiazepines, such as lorazepam, make them the drugs of
choice in treating the anxiety and agitation of amphetamine or cocaine abuse. Lorazepam also has hypnotic
properties. Trazodone has hypnotic properties, but its anxiolytic properties are inferior to those of the
benzodiazepines. Hydroxyzine, an antihistamine, is effective as a hypnotic, and it is sometimes used to deal with
anxiety, especially if emesis is a problem but it is rarely used in the emergency situation when rapid anxiolytic
and antiseizure treatment is warranted.
A 10-year-old boy is sent to a pediatric neurologist for an evaluation due to poor performance and inability
to pay attention in school. He has also been fighting with other children. He is given a diagnosis of ADHD
with impulsivity and irritability. Which is most appropriate for management of the ADHD?
A.  Clonidine
B.  Mirtazapine
C.  Dextroamphetamine
D.  Haloperidol
Correct answer = C. Dextroamphetamine is the only stimulant medication in the list that is approved for ADHD.
Symptoms like fighting may improve with haloperidol, and hyperactivity may improve with clonidine, but these
agents would not improve the patient’s academic performance and the underlying problems.
A 10-year-old boy with ADHD has symptoms that are controlled with an oral psychostimulant. However, he
and his family wish to avoid having to give a second dose of medication at school. They prefer an alternative
treatment that can be administered in the morning and last the entire day. Which treatment option is best?
A.  Mixed amphetamine salts in immediate-release oral tablet formulation
B.  Methylphenidate in a transdermal delivery system
C.  Nicotine in a chewing gum formulation for buccal absorption
D.  Methylphenidate in immediate-release pills
Correct answer = B. Methylphenidate is also a psychostimulant, and the transdermal (patch) formulation is
designed for once-daily use to avoid midday dosing. Immediate-release formulations require dosing at least twice
daily.
Which of the following agents for ADHD is a controlled substance (Schedule II)?
A.  Clonidine
B.  Atomoxetine
C.  Lisdexamfetamine
D.  Desipramine
Correct answer = C. Lisdexamfetamine is the only controlled substance on the list and is schedule II. The other
agents may assist in the management of ADHD but are not controlled substances.
Amphetamines may be used in patients with which of the following conditions?
A.  Cardiovascular disease
B.  Hypertension
C.  Hyperthyroidism
D.  Obesity
Correct answer = D. The use of amphetamines in the management of obesity should be closely monitored.
Amphetamine analogs such as phentermine are approved for obesity. The other conditions are contraindications
when considering the use of amphetamines.
Which of the following agents is considered a first-line treatment for narcolepsy?
A.  Galantamine
B.  Atomoxetine
C.  Temazepam
D.  Modafinil
597
www.webofpharma.com

15.7
15.8
15.9
15.10
Correct answer = D. Modafinil is the only drug listed that is approved for narcolepsy. Temazepam is indicated for
insomnia, galantamine for Alzheimer’s disease, and atomoxetine for ADHD.
Which of the following is a common adverse effect of amphetamines?
A.  Bradycardia
B.  Somnolence
C.  Constipation
D.  Hypertension
Correct answer = D. Hypertension is a possible adverse effect that warrants caution, especially in individuals with
risk factors for increased blood pressure. Amphetamines cause tachycardia (not bradycardia), insomnia (not
somnolence), and diarrhea (not constipation).
Which of the following CNS stimulants occurs naturally and can be found in certain candies?
A.  Amphetamine
B.  Modafinil
C.  Caffeine
D.  Atomoxetine
Correct answer = C. Caffeine is a naturally occurring substance found in cocoa, chocolate, and many forms of tea.
Overuse of cola beverages and other caffeine-containing products may cause adverse effects, including anxiety
and insomnia, and even increase the risk for seizures.
A 35-year-old man is interested in quitting smoking. In previous quit attempts, he has tried nicotine gum, the
nicotine patch, and the “cold turkey” method. He has been unsuccessful in each of these attempts and
resumed smoking within 4 to 6 weeks. Which may be useful to assist in his attempt to quit smoking?
A.  Varenicline
B.  Dextroamphetamine
C.  Lorazepam
D.  Methylphenidate
Correct answer = A. Varenicline is approved as an adjunctive treatment option for the management of nicotine
dependence. It is believed to attenuate the withdrawal symptoms of smoking cessation, though monitoring is
needed for changes in psychiatric status, including suicidal ideation. The use of dextroamphetamine, lorazepam,
and methylphenidate bring the risk of addiction to another substance with abuse potential.
Which of the following agents carries the lowest risk for addiction?
A.  Armodafinil
B.  Lisdexamfetamine
C.  Dexmethylphenidate
D.  Varenicline
Correct answer = D. Varenicline is the only agent listed that is not a controlled substance. All of the other agents
are considered to have a risk for addiction and/or dependence.
598
www.webofpharma.com



================================================================================
CH45: DRUGS OF ABUSE
Pages 1759-1786 (PDF page numbers)
================================================================================

45
Drugs of Abuse
Carol Motycka and Joseph Spillane
1759
www.webofpharma.com

I.  Overview
A boy inhales paint fumes to momentarily escape his surroundings of poverty; a new gang member smokes crack
with his friends to feel like he belongs; a curious girl swallows a “Molly” to see what it is like; a prescription drug
abuser injects fentanyl-laced heroin to substitute for the pain pills that are more difficult to obtain; and a lonely
widower drinks another shot of bourbon to help remember the past and forget the present. In each of these cases,
chemicals are being used for nontherapeutic effects on the body or mind. Excessive use or misuse of drugs or
ethanol (commonly known as alcohol) for intoxicating or mind-altering effects is considered substance misuse, and
those who misuse substances are considered to have a substance use disorder. Figure 45.1 provides a list of
commonly abused substances.
Figure 45.1 Summary of commonly abused substances.
Substance use disorders occur in many forms and their effects have been witnessed throughout the history of the
world. The lure of addictive substances continues to impact people today. In 2015, approximately 10.1% of the
population in the United States were current users of some form of illicit substance (Figure 45.2), while 6.2% were
considered to have an alcohol use disorder, and 4.7% misused prescription medications. Abused substances have
become progressively more potent, and their routes of administration have become increasingly effective, resulting
in greater risks of addiction (Figure 45.3) and toxicity. Some examples of the methods, mechanisms, and clinical
manifestations of toxicity of commonly abused substances are discussed in this chapter.
1760
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 45.2 Past-month illicit drug use among persons aged 12 or older. Illicit drugs
include marijuana/hashish, cocaine (including crack), heroin, hallucinogens, inhalants, or
prescription type psychotherapeutics used nonmedically.
1761
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 45.3 Relative potential for physical dependence of commonly abused substances.
1762
www.webofpharma.com

II.  Sympathomimetics
Sympathomimetics are stimulants that mimic the sympathetic nervous system, producing “fight-or-flight” responses.
Sympathomimetics usually produce a relative increase of adrenergic neurotransmitters at the site of action (Figure
45.4), thereby causing effects such as tachycardia, hypertension, hyperthermia, and tachypnea. These agents come
from natural sources, such as plants, or are synthesized in legitimate or clandestine laboratories. Aside from the
stimulant effect, many of these agents have a remarkable ability to produce pleasure. Consequently, their addictive
potential and monetary value on the illicit market offer a huge profit motive.
Figure 45.4 Mechanism of action of cocaine.
1763
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Cocaine
Cocaine is derived from the coca shrub (Erythroxylum coca) that grows in the foothills of the Andes Mountains in
South America. It causes central nervous system (CNS) stimulation by inhibiting the reuptake of norepinephrine into
the adrenergic neuron, thus increasing the availability of catecholamines at the synapse. The profound ability of
cocaine to stimulate the pleasure center of the human brain is thought to result from inhibition of reuptake of
dopamine and serotonin. Cocaine has minimal bioavailability when taken by the oral route. Instead, the cocaine
hydrochloride powder is snorted, or solubilized and injected. The cocaine powder cannot be effectively smoked, as
it is destroyed upon heating. However, crack cocaine, an alkaloidal form, can be smoked. Smoking is an extremely
effective route of administration, as the lungs are richly perfused with blood and carry the drug within seconds to its
site of action, the brain. This causes an intense euphoria or “rush” that is followed rapidly by an intense dysphoria or
“crash.” It is this immediate positive reinforcement, followed rapidly by the negative reinforcement that makes the
drug, particularly in this form, so addictive. Like most drugs of abuse, street cocaine powder and crack are usually
adulterated to increase the bulk, mimic the action, and thereby increase the profitability.
The clinical manifestations of cocaine toxicity are a function of its stimulant effects. Common reasons for
cocaine users to present to the emergency department include psychiatric complaints (depression precipitated by
cocaine dysphoria, agitation/paranoia), convulsions, hyperthermia, and chest pain. Hyperthermia is caused by
cocaine-induced CNS stimulation that increases heat production and vasoconstrictive effects of cocaine that
minimize the ability to dissipate heat. Cocaine-related chest pain can be chest muscle pain or cardiac in nature, as
cocaine causes vasoconstriction of coronary arteries and accelerates the atherosclerotic process. Commonly, cocaine
is consumed with ethanol, which creates a secondary metabolite cocaethylene. The metabolite is cardiotoxic and
further contributes to cardiac issues related to cocaine consumption. Cocaine chest pain can also be related to
pulmonary damage caused by inhalation of this heated impure substance. Cocaine convulsions are a natural
extension of the CNS stimulant effect (Figure 45.5). Cocaine toxicity is treated by calming and cooling the patient.
Benzodiazepines, such as lorazepam, help to calm the agitated patient and can both treat and prevent convulsions. In
addition, the calming effect helps cool the patient and manage hyperthermia. This is an important therapeutic effect,
as hyperthermia is one of the major causes of cocaine fatalities. The remainder of cocaine toxicity is treated with
short-acting antihypertensives, anticonvulsants, and symptomatic supportive care.
1764
www.webofpharma.com

1765
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 45.5 Major effects of cocaine use.
1766
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Amphetamines
Amphetamines such as methamphetamine are sympathomimetics with clinical effects very similar to those of
cocaine. Amphetamines act by enhancing the release of biogenic amines from the storage sites in the nerve
terminals. In many cases, these effects may last longer and are associated with more stimulation and less euphoria
when compared to cocaine. Treatment of amphetamine toxicity is similar to that of cocaine toxicity. Therapeutic
uses of amphetamines are presented in Chapter 15.
1767
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Methylenedioxymethamphetamine
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), commonly known as ecstasy or molly, is a hallucinogenic
amphetamine with profound serotonin-releasing effects (Figure 45.6). However, like most illicit substances, MDMA
is often substituted or adulterated with other drugs such as methylone. The chemical structure of methylone differs
from MDMA by one carbonyl group (Figure 45.7), but the drug is more profitable to dealers and does not produce
the same euphoric effect. Because of its unique serotonin properties, MDMA is sometimes referred to as an
“empathogen,” and tactile stimulation is particularly pleasurable to users. Many users describe a sense of well-being
and social interactivity, and sexual offenders have also taken advantage of this property of the drug. Like many
amphetamines, MDMA can cause bruxism (teeth grinding) and trismus (jaw clenching), which explain the baby
pacifiers and lollipops that have been popularized among “ravers.” Among the most disturbing properties of MDMA
abuse is its propensity to cause profound hyperthermia, altered mental status, and serotonin syndrome.
Benzodiazepines help to calm and cool the patient, and life-threatening hyperthermia has been treated with
neuromuscular blockers and endotracheal intubation to control excessive movement and heat generation.
Cyproheptadine is a serotonin antagonist that has been used to treat serotonin syndrome; however, one of its
practical limitations is that it is only available in an oral formulation.
1768
www.webofpharma.com

1769
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 45.6 Proposed mechanism of action of methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA).
Figure 45.7 Comparison of the structures of methylenedioxymethamphetamine and
methylone.
1770
www.webofpharma.com

D.  Synthetic cathinones
Cathinone is the psychoactive component in the evergreen shrub Khat (Catha edulis) native to East Africa and the
Arabian Peninsula. Synthetic cathinones, also known as “bath salts,” have become increasingly popular. These
products are packaged and labeled as “bath salts” or “pond water cleaner” to circumvent detection, prosecution, and
enforcement. Many of these packages read “not for human consumption,” although they are sold with an unstated
understanding by the seller and buyer that they produce intoxication. Synthetic cathinones are not easily detected in
urine toxicology screens.
Methcathinone, butylone, methylenedioxypyrovalerone, and naphyrone are just a few examples of synthetic
cathinones. These drugs increase the release and inhibit the reuptake of catecholamines (norepinephrine,
epinephrine, and dopamine) in a manner very similar to cocaine and amphetamines. A rapid onset of amphetamine-
like stimulation with psychotomimetic effects of variable duration is common with synthetic cathinones. Bath salts
are generally snorted or ingested, but they may also be injected. Treatment is similar to the emergent treatment of
amphetamines and cocaine.
1771
www.webofpharma.com

III.  Hallucinogens
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), marijuana, and synthetic cannabinoids are substances that fall into this category.
1772
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Lysergic acid diethylamide
LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide, is perhaps the most commonly recognized drug in the hallucinogen class. LSD was
first created from ergot in 1938 by Dr. Albert Hoffman. LSD produces its psychedelic effects through serving as a
potent partial agonist at 5-HT2A receptors. Aside from the very colorful hallucinations, the drug is also responsible
for mood alterations, sleep disturbances, and anxiety. Repeated use rapidly produces tolerance through down-
regulation of serotonin receptors.
Although physical adverse effects are typically minimal, LSD may cause mydriasis, tachycardia, increased blood
pressure and body temperature, dizziness, decreased appetite, and sweating. Perhaps, the most troubling side effects
are the loss of judgment and impaired reasoning associated with use of LSD. This can sometimes be an exaggerated
effect with extreme panic, which is known by individuals as a “bad trip,” and may lead to trauma. Recently, a group
of synthetic serotonin agonists collectively known as “N-Bomb” have been substituted for LSD. Like LSD, these
agents are used in liquid form or with blotter paper and have resulted in hypertension, convulsions, and accidental
traumatic injury and death.
1773
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Marijuana
Cannabis is a plant that has been used by humans for over 10,000 years. Centuries-old Chinese documents describe
the use of cannabis for clothing production, food, and as an agent to communicate with spirits. Today, marijuana is
the most frequently used illicit drug, and the illicit drug that new users are most likely to try (Figure 45.8). Those
numbers are expected to grow as liberalization of marijuana laws continue throughout the United States. Certain
cannabis plants can be used for making rope or clothing; however, the species Cannabis sativa is the plant most
often used for its psychoactive properties. The main psychoactive alkaloid contained in marijuana is Δ9-
tetrahydrocannabinol [tet-ra-HY-dro-can-NAB-i-nol] (THC). Growing techniques have evolved over the past 50
years, and THC concentrations found in the plant have increased as much as 20-fold during that time period.
Figure 45.8 First specific drug associated with initiation of illicit drug use among past-
year illicit drug initiates aged 12 or older.
Specific receptors in the brain, cannabinoid or CB1 receptors, were discovered in the late 1980s and found to be
reactive to THC. When CB1 receptors are activated by marijuana, effects include physical relaxation, hyperphagia
(increased appetite), increased heart rate, decreased muscle coordination, conjunctivitis, and minor pain control
(Figure 45.9). Depending on the social situation, THC can produce euphoria, followed by drowsiness and relaxation.
Although hallucinations are typically not as robust as those observed with use of LSD, marijuana is often used for
the mild hallucinogenic effects that it produces. Marijuana stimulates the amygdala, causing the user to have a sense
of novelty to anything the user encounters through an enhancement of sensory activity. For this same reason, heavy
users have a down-regulation in their CB1 receptors, leaving them with a feeling of boredom when not taking the
drug. The effects of marijuana on γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the hippocampus diminish the capacity for short-
term memory in users, and this effect seems to be more pronounced in adolescents. In addition to adversely affecting
1774
www.webofpharma.com

short-term memory and mental activity, THC decreases muscle strength and impairs highly skilled motor activity,
such as that required to drive a car. The effects of THC appear immediately after smoking marijuana, but maximum
effects take about 20 minutes. By 3 hours, the effects largely disappear.
1775
www.webofpharma.com

1776
www.webofpharma.com

Figure 45.9 Effects of tetrahydrocannabinol.
In chronic marijuana users, tolerance develops rapidly, 9% of all users and 17% of adolescent users will develop
dependence, and withdrawal has been observed. Marijuana may be found in the body up to 3 months after last usage
in heavy chronic users. For this reason, withdrawal occurs much later in individuals who previously used marijuana
heavily. Withdrawal may include cravings, insomnia, depression, pain, and irritability.
Although not well studied for medicinal use, marijuana has been used as an adjuvant in the treatment of
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV), cachexia secondary to cancer and AIDS, epilepsy, chronic
pain, multiple sclerosis, glaucoma, and anxiety. Synthetic THC medications are available as prescription products
and include dronabinol [droe-NAB-i-nol] and nabilone [NA-bi-lone]. These medications are used for the prevention
of CINV. Nabiximols, a medication created from the extract of the Cannabis sativa plant, is an oromucosal spray
available in several countries throughout the world for the treatment of spasticity in multiple sclerosis.
1777
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Synthetic cannabinoids
Synthetic cannabinoids are sprayed onto plant material in a process known as dusting. These first-generation
products such as “Spice” and “K2” are then smoked to produce intoxication. Since the molecular structure of
synthetic cannabinoids is much different from the cannabinoids found in marijuana plants, users do not test positive
for THC with traditional drug tests. Sympathomimetic effects may also be seen in users, including tachycardia and
hypertension. The greatest danger with use of these agents includes extreme hallucinations and psychotic reactions.
More recent formulations of synthetic cannabinoids and their contaminants have caused convulsions, acute kidney
injury, and deaths.
1778
www.webofpharma.com

IV.  Ethanol
Ethanol (or alcohol) is a clear colorless hydroxylated hydrocarbon that is the product of fermentation of fruits,
grains, or vegetables. Ethanol consumption is a major cause of deadly automobile accidents, drownings, and fatal
falls, and is a related factor in many hospital admissions. Ethanol is the most commonly abused substance in modern
society, with the prevalence of alcohol use disorder as high as 12.6% of the population in some regions of the world.
Alcoholism decreases life expectancy by 10 to 15 years and impacts one in three families. It is thought that ethanol
exerts its desired and toxic effects through several mechanisms, including enhanced effects of the inhibitory
neurotransmitter GABA, increased release of endogenous opioids, and altered levels of serotonin and dopamine.
Ethanol is a selective CNS depressant at low doses, resulting in decreased inhibitions and the characteristic
loquaciousness or drunken behavior. At high doses, it is a general CNS depressant, which can result in coma and
respiratory depression.
Drinking ethanol traditionally has been the most common route of administration, although recently the
inhalation of aerosolized ethanol has gained popularity. Ethanol is absorbed from the stomach and duodenum, and
food slows and decreases absorption. Peak ethanol levels are generally achieved in 20 minutes to 1 hour of
ingestion. There is a greater subjective feeling of intoxication while levels are ascending (absorption), as compared
to when levels are descending. Ethanol is metabolized by alcohol dehydrogenase to acetaldehyde and then by
aldehyde dehydrogenase to acetate in the liver (Figure 45.10). It is metabolized by zero-order elimination at
approximately 15 to 40 mg/dL/h. Because there is a constant blood-to-breath ratio of 2100:1, a breath sample can be
used to determine blood alcohol levels. Medical management of acute ethanol toxicity includes symptomatic
supportive care and thiamine and folate administration. Patients with extremely high alcohol levels can be dialyzed,
although that is rarely necessary, and could precipitate withdrawal in an alcoholic.
Figure 45.10 The pathway of ethanol metabolism. ADH = alcohol dehydrogenase;
ALDH = acetaldehyde dehydrogenase.
Chronic ethanol abuse can cause profound hepatic, cardiovascular, pulmonary, hematologic, endocrine, metabolic,
and CNS damage (Figure 45.11). Sudden cessation of ethanol ingestion in a heavy drinker can precipitate
withdrawal manifested by tachycardia, sweating, tremor, anxiety, agitation, hallucinations, and convulsions. Alcohol
withdrawal is a life-threatening situation that should be medically managed with symptomatic/supportive care,
1779
www.webofpharma.com

benzodiazepines, and long-term addiction treatment. The following are drugs used in the treatment of alcohol
dependence:
Figure 45.11 The effects of chronic alcohol abuse.
1780
www.webofpharma.com

A.  Disulfiram
Disulfiram [dye-SUL-fi-ram] blocks the oxidation of acetaldehyde to acetic acid by inhibiting aldehyde
dehydrogenase (Figure 45.12). This results in the accumulation of acetaldehyde in the blood, causing flushing,
tachycardia, hyperventilation, and nausea. Disulfiram has found some use in patients seriously desiring to stop
alcohol ingestion. A conditioned avoidance response is induced so that the patient abstains from alcohol to prevent
the unpleasant effects of disulfiram-induced acetaldehyde accumulation.
Figure 45.12 The effect of disulfiram on the metabolism of ethanol.
1781
www.webofpharma.com

B.  Naltrexone
Naltrexone [nal-TREX-own] is a competitive and relatively long-acting opioid antagonist that helps decrease
cravings for alcohol. It should be used in conjunction with supportive psychotherapy. Naltrexone is better tolerated
than disulfiram and does not produce the aversive reaction that disulfiram does.
1782
www.webofpharma.com

C.  Acamprosate
Acamprosate [a-kam-PROE-sate] is an agent used in alcohol dependence treatment programs and is thought to
decrease cravings through its regulatory effects on N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-mediated glutamatergic
excitation. This agent should also be used in conjunction with supportive psychotherapy.
1783
www.webofpharma.com

V.  Prescription Drug Abuse
This chapter has discussed many of the illicit substances that are abused by individuals. It is important to also
mention that parts of the world, including the United States and portions of Europe, are currently experiencing an
epidemic of prescription drug abuse. Some commonly abused prescription drugs include opioids and
benzodiazepines. In the United States, between 1997 and 2007, there was a 600% increase in the prescribing of
opioids, and by 2010, enough opioid prescription pain relievers were sold in the United States to medicate every
American adult with 5 mg of hydrocodone every 4 hours for 1 month. An increased emphasis on treating pain as the
“fifth vital sign,” coupled with an exaggerated belief in the beneficial capacity of these medications and a
minimization of their inherent toxicity among the lay public and health professionals, was among the many possible
explanations for the epidemic. Recent efforts have been made to decrease the misuse of prescription opioids, which
has resulted in an increased use of heroin, often adulterated with fentanyl and extremely potent fentanyl derivatives
such as carfentanil. Reversal of fentanyl and its derivatives is much more difficult than reversal of opioids such as
morphine. This has contributed to a dramatic increase in death rates, with over 33,000 overdose deaths in the United
States alone in 2015 (Figure 45.13). Medications for the treatment of opioid toxicity and dependence are reviewed in
Chapter 14.
Figure 45.13 Overdose deaths involving opioids in the United States between 2000 and
2015.
1784
www.webofpharma.com

45.1
45.2
45.3
45.4
45.5
Study Questions
Choose the ONE best answer.
A 15-year-old asthmatic patient has been told that marijuana may help his anxiety. Which adverse effect has
been associated with marijuana and may be a reason for this patient to avoid use of marijuana?
A.  Short-term memory loss
B.  Hyperthermia
C.  Hepatitis
D.  Hyponatremia
Correct answer = A. Short-term memory loss is observed with marijuana use and is more pronounced in
adolescents. Hyperthermia, hepatitis, and hyponatremia have not been associated with marijuana use.
A 21-year-old college student is curious about the effects of LSD. She asks what type of risks may be
involved with using the drug for the first time. Which is a correct response to her question?
A.  Exaggerated hallucinations
B.  Cardiomyopathy
C.  Hyperphagia
D.  Bronchitis
Correct answer = A. Exaggerated hallucinations, sometimes known as “bad trips,” may occur, even in first-time
users. These hallucinations can lead to extreme panic, which has caused individuals to react in a manner very
uncharacteristic of their typical behavior.
A 58-year-old man is brought into the emergency department following an automobile accident. His blood
alcohol level on admission is 280 mg/dL. He has been treated in the past for seizures related to alcohol
abuse, and he confirms that he has been drinking heavily over the past month since losing his job. What
treatment should be given to this patient if he begins to go into withdrawal while hospitalized?
A.  Acamprosate
B.  Lorazepam
C.  Naltrexone
D.  Disulfiram
Correct answer = B. Should this patient go into alcohol withdrawal, he will likely also have seizures associated
with it, given his past history. Benzodiazepines are used to treat seizures associated with alcohol withdrawal.
Acamprosate, naltrexone, and disulfiram may be considered at a later time to treat the dependence, but would not
be useful in the acute withdrawal setting.
A 35-year-old man has been abusing cocaine and is agitated, tachycardic, hypertensive, and hyperthermic.
Which statement is correct regarding treatment in this situation?
A.  This patient should undergo gastric lavage; that is, he should have his stomach pumped immediately.
B.  Atropine should be administered to reverse the CNS depression that can occur with cocaine toxicity.
C.  Benzodiazepines should be administered to calm the patient and decrease heart rate, blood pressure, and body
temperature.
D.  Phenobarbital should be the first choice as an anticonvulsant.
Correct answer = C. Benzodiazepines such as lorazepam have anxiolytic properties and can calm a cocaine-toxic
patient, thereby decreasing heart rate and blood pressure. As the patient becomes less agitated, he/she decreases
movement and the body temperature drops. In addition, the use of benzodiazepines decreases the chance of the
patient experiencing a convulsion and would be the first choice to treat cocaine-induced convulsions.
A 22-year-old man with a history of substance abuse arrives in the emergency department hypertensive,
hyperthermic, and tachycardic. He also presents with an altered mental status and hyperreflexia. Which
substance is most likely causing these symptoms?
A.  LSD
B.  Bath salts
C.  Heroin
D.  Marijuana
Correct answer = B: “Bath salts” often contain synthetic cathinones and are labeled, marketed, and sold as
something “not for human consumption” to avoid law enforcement and prosecution. In addition, they are usually
not detected on urine toxicology screening so often evaluation of symptoms are used to distinguish the substance
taken. These products can cause an amphetamine-like sympathomimetic toxidrome, as well as serotonin
syndrome, which would be treated with symptomatic/supportive care and possibly a serotonin antagonist such as
cyproheptadine. LSD and marijuana would produce mostly psychological symptoms such as hallucinations and
paranoia, and opioids would produce depressive symptoms such as respiratory depression, hyperthermia, and
stupor.
1785
www.webofpharma.com

45.6
45.7
45.8
45.9
45.10
THC is a psychoactive alkaloid found in:
A.  N-bomb
B.  K2
C.  LSD
D.  Marijuana
Correct answer = D. THC is the main psychoactive alkaloid contained in marijuana. N-bomb is a synthetic
hallucinogen derived from mescaline. K2, also known as Spice or synthetic cannabis, is dried plant material,
which has been sprayed with synthetic chemicals that cause psychoactive effects. K2 does not contain THC. LSD
is also a psychoactive drug but contains lysergic acid diethylamine.
Which drug has clinical effects similar to those of cocaine?
A.  LSD
B.  Marijuana
C.  Methamphetamine
D.  Ethanol
Correct answer = C. Cocaine and methamphetamine have similar stimulant effects such as alertness, anxiety,
tachycardia, hypertension, and hyperthermia. This can lead to arrhythmias, stroke, or myocardial infarction. LSD
and marijuana cause primarily psychoactive effects such as hallucinations and paranoia, but have negligible to
minimal stimulant effects. Ethanol is a depressant, which often will produce the opposite effects of stimulants
including relaxation, drowsiness, and in high doses hypothermia.
Which drug leads to the formation of a cardiotoxic metabolite when administered with cocaine?
A.  Lorazepam
B.  Marijuana
C.  Ethanol
D.  Khat
Correct answer = C. Cocaine combined with ethanol forms cocaethylene, which may lead to aggressive and
impulsive behaviors as well as the potential for sudden myocardial infarction.
Which agent is often found as an adulterant in heroin and has led to an increase in overdose deaths?
A.  Spice
B.  Fentanyl
C.  Marijuana
D.  Cathinones
Correct answer = B. Fentanyl and its multitude of derivatives are often found in samples of heroin. Fentanyl
derivatives are often many times more potent than heroin or fentanyl, which has led to an alarming number of
overdoses in recent years.
Death secondary to MDMA use has occurred secondary to which adverse effect?
A.  Respiratory depression
B.  Acute kidney injury
C.  CNS depression
D.  Hyperthermia
Correct answer = D. MDMA, or Ecstasy, is a stimulant with similar properties to cocaine. The stimulant effects
may include hyperthermia, hypertension, and tachycardia.
1786
www.webofpharma.com
